Effort to Save a Company
A group of former employees at Supercomputer Systems Inc. said on Saturday that they were trying to raise $20 million to $30 million to save the company.
Supercomputer Systems, based in Eau Claire, Wis., closed operations last Monday after it lost financing from I.B.M..


Pianist Cancels at Carnegie
The pianist Andrei Gavrilov has canceled his appearance at Carnegie Hall with the Atlanta Symphony Orchestra on Thursday at 8 P.M. because of a death in his family.
Barry Douglas will be the soloist, playing the scheduled program: Tchaikovsky's First Piano Concerto and Beethoven's "Eroica" Symphony.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Trail of Killer Is Growing Colder In Chicago Suburb Where 7 Died
Three weeks after seven people were found shot to death in two coolers at a fast-food restaurant, the police in this Chicago suburb have made no arrests and named no suspects.
And as time passes, it is less likely that they will, some criminologists and law-enforcement officials say.
That possibility is preying on residents and business owners who would like to get on with their lives in this normally quiet middle-class suburb of 39,000 people.


Bridge
A freakish hand with a seven-card suit and a four-card suit often presents a bidding problem.
Conventional wisdom suggests that one should select the seven-card suit as trump and spurn the possibility of playing in the four-card suit.
The reasoning, in general sound, is that losing control is unlikely playing in the seven-card suit but likely in the four-card suit.
But every case must be considered on its merits.
On the diagramed deal, consider whether you would prefer to play in diamonds, with a 7-1 fit, or spades with a 4-4 fit.


1 Messier Out, 1 Messier Up
The Rangers don't know if Mark Messier's injured wrist will be recovered enough for him to play against the Islanders at Nassau Coliseum tonight.
But they are sure to dress the best available Messier because they called up Joby Messier, a distant cousin of Mark Messier, from their Binghamton farm club yesterday.
Joby Messier is a defensive-oriented defenseman and will play tonight, said Ron Smith, the Rangers' interim coach.
"He's a solid, hard-working, tough player and he really keeps his nose to the grindstone," the coach said.


Japanese Stocks Gain
Stocks rose today, as buying by public pension and insurance funds offset profit-taking that had been restraining the market.
At the close of trading, the Nikkei index of 225 stocks was up 109.86 points, or 0.65 percent, to 17,133.64.
On Friday, the Nikkei fell 39.63 points, or 0.23 percent.


Art Bauman, 53, Choreographer; Began Dance Theater Workshop
Art Bauman, a dancer and choreographer who helped to found the Dance Theater Workshop, died on Wednesday at Tisch Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 53 and lived in Manhattan.
He died of AIDS, said William Singer, his companion.


Ads Down, Los Angeles Times Again Cuts Staff
Under pressure to cut costs amid a severe advertising slump, The Los Angeles Times is carrying out a voluntary buyout program, its second in 18 months.
The program will trim the staff by 9 percent, but also strip The Times, the nation's largest metropolitan daily newspaper, of some of its most respected reporters.
The paper, flagship of the Times Mirror Company, announced on Thursday that 668 of its 7,500 employees had accepted the buyout, which is considered generous.
It provides as much as two years' salary and 18 months of medical benefits for employees and their dependents.


INSIDE
Koreans Block Nuclear Visit
Stirring concern that it is still seeking to develop nuclear arms, North Korea has rebuffed a request by the International Atomic Energy Agency to inspect two sites.
Page A9.
The Right Girds for Battle
Emboldened by the furor over President Clinton's proposal to lift the ban on homosexuals in the military, the Christian right is organizing for other battles.
Page A14 Clues in Campaign Cash
New York City's mayoral election is months away, but the millions the candidates have raised say much about them and their strategies for winning.
Page B1.
Israel Arrests 3 Americans
Israel detained three Americans, saying it suspected them of links to a militant group whose leaders have been a focus of deportations.
Page A2.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10 FLIGHT OF CAPITAL FROM RUSSIA
From nickel to guns, oil to cash, Russia has become a paradise for people looking for ways to profit from its considerable natural wealth.
With ill-defined borders, easily evaded taxes and rampant inflation, many state industries and new entrepreneurs are taking the money and running.
A1


A One-Two Punch Knocks Out the Bills
After Troy Aikman threw two touchdown passes to Michael Irvin today, he passed him his Most Valuable Player trophy.
"Promise I won't drop it," Irvin said.


Truman's Legacy to Clinton
Isn't it paradoxical that on the day President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore attended the funeral service for Thurgood Marshall, Mr.
Clinton found himself in the situation Harry S. Truman occupied in 1948 in the months leading up to his executive order integrating the military?
I grew up in the integrated Army.
One day, schools, housing -- the Army itself -- were segregated; the next day they weren't.
Six years would pass before Thurgood Marshall successfully argued Brown v.
Board of Education before the Supreme Court.
Ten more years would be wasted before Congress found the courage to pass the Civil Rights Act of 1964.


Dokes Goes Out Early, But Not to Buy Bagels
At 1 o'clock yesterday morning, Michael Dokes stepped out the front door of his midtown hotel, jogged up to 96th Street, then turned down Fifth Avenue and ran alone through the heart of Manhattan.
The streets were quiet, the air was cold and no one seemed to notice the dark figure moving along the city's sidewalks.
As the first challenger to Riddick Bowe's heavyweight title, Dokes is aware of his underdog status and the lack of attention he has received since the fight was made some two months ago.
This is Bowe's homecoming, not his.


Rifle Gunfire Wounds a 2-Year-Old Girl on a Street in the Bronx
Janil Urbino, 2 years old, was safe in her father's arms when the stray bullet hit her in the right side.
Her father, Luis Urbino, a factory worker, was walking out of his aunt's home in the Bronx with his wife and their two other children Saturday night when he saw a man on the sidewalk about 100 feet away turn and aim a rifle.
He heard the shot, he said, and knew his daughter had been hit because he felt her go limp.


Iran Could Gain Ex-Soviet Land; Tajiks Arrest Activist
To the Editor:
"Tajik Ex-Communists Prosecute Opposition" (news article, Jan. 10), on the crackdown on opposition groups in the new states of the former Soviet Union, incorrectly identifies the Uzbek human rights leader arrested in Kyrgyzstan on Dec. 8.
He was not Abdurakhim Pulatov, co-chairman of the opposition movement Birlik, but his brother, Abdumanob Pulatov.
Abdumanob chairs the Uzbek Human Rights Society.
He was not simply arrested by Uzbek security forces, but abducted from the capital of Kyrgyzstan, where he met with President Askar Akaev.


Stalled Tobacco Suit Is Revived by Ruling
After winning a five-year battle to remove a Federal judge from sitting on their cases, cigarette companies defending against smokers' lawsuits found scant reason last week to cheer a ruling by the judge's successor.
The ruling by Judge Alfred J. Lechner Jr. of Federal District Court in Newark breathed new life into a stalled lawsuit contending that cigarette makers knowingly marketed unsafe products and conspired to conceal the dangers of smoking.


Bulls' Paxson to Miss A Month After Surgery
Chicago Bulls starting point guard JOHN PAXSON will undergo arthroscopic surgery on his left knee Thursday, which is expected to keep him out of action for at least a month.
The Bulls sent Paxson home to Chicago before the team's game against Denver on Saturday, which the Nuggets won, 109-102.
Paxson's knee problems worsened Thursday when he banged it during the Bulls' loss at Houston.


Not Exactly a Dream Come True
It was not the kind of Super Bowl experience that Bills quarterback Jim Kelly expected.
He thought he would be standing in the winner's locker room.
Perhaps even accepting the Most Valuable Player award.
Maybe in a perfect world and in a perfect game.
Instead, Kelly spent the entire second half standing on the sideline on crutches because a sprained knee in the first half had knocked him out of the game.


Shultz Memoirs Say Bush Knew Of the Arms-for-Hostages Affair
In a new book, former Secretary of State George P. Shultz disputes assertions by George Bush that Mr.
Bush had only vague knowledge of the arms-for-hostages arrangement in the mid-1980's.
Mr.
Shultz contends that he argued the issue directly with Mr.
Bush, who was then Vice President, and was "astonished" on one occasion when Mr.
Bush said he had no knowledge of the deal.


With All the Fun That Comes Before, Why Let the Game Begin?
Whether it's the Inauguration Ball or football, the Hollywood crowd is omnipresent.
The Dallas Cowboys, fresh off their bus a week ago, were being handed room keys and minibar keys when actor Gene Hackman begged quarterback Troy Aikman to peer his way.
"Wish I had paper for an autograph," Hackman was heard to say.
In midweek, Michael Jackson held a standing-room-only news conference simply to promote his halftime show.
And then today, a real cowboy, the country singer, Garth Brooks, serenaded the 100,000 Rose Bowl fans in elegant sunshine until the other Cowboys ran out to play the Buffalo Bills in Super Bowl XXVII.


Ireland Devalues Its Pound
Ireland this weekend gave up its fierce battle to maintain the strength of its currency, handing another big victory to speculators and leaving Europe's battered monetary system facing another test of its ability to survive.
The devaluation of the Irish pound, announced late on Saturday in Brussels after an emergency meeting of European Community monetary officials, brought to 5 the number of major European currencies -- there are 10 altogether -- that have been devalued or taken out of the Exchange Rate Mechanism since September.


Local Loan Funds Also Help the Poor
To the Editor:
"A Lending Plan for the Distressed" (Business Day, Jan. 18) reports the Clinton Administration is drafting legislation to create a community development bank network, and that existing community development banks and credit unions could apply for aid under the legislation.
"But the purpose of the legislation," you add, "is to expand the supply of credit, so the selection criteria would favor new institutions."


CHRONICLE
The parents of the jazz trumpeter ARTURO SANDOVAL fled Cuba and arrived safely in Florida after their first escape boat sank.
A speedboat picked up the elder Sandoval, also named ARTURO , and his wife, CIRA , after the fishing boat they left Cuba in on Saturday began taking on water.
The Sandovals, both in their 60's, were taken to Key West, Fla.


Clemens to Be Honored
The former Texas Longhorns pitcher ROGER CLEMENS will become the first baseball alumnus to have his jersey number retired by the school.
Clemens, who wore No. 21 for Texas in 1982 and 1983, is a three-time American League Cy Young Award winner with the Boston Red Sox. (AP)


Question Box
All-Stars in N.H.L.
Q.
Years ago, the National Hockey League All-Star Game pitted the winner of the previous season's Stanley Cup against a team of all-stars selected from the rest of the clubs in the league.
When did this arrangement end and which defending championship team had the best record in the series?


Tokyo Journal; Shedding Teens (and Jeans), They're Now of Age
To celebrate Coming-of-Age Day, one of Japan's most colorful annual rituals, Chie Karube and her friends knew that to observe ancient tradition a few modern techniques would help.
So first they extracted the equivalent of several thousand dollars from their parents to buy brilliant kimonos befitting 20-year-olds about to declare their legal, if not their financial, independence.
Then they arranged for 7 A.M. appointments at beauty salons, which every year mark the January tradition by hiring elderly Japanese women skilled in the painfully slow art of kimono dressing, something lost on a generation raised in jeans.


A Media King With Much to Prove
For someone who has just lost more than $640 million, Jean-Luc Lagardere looks singularly sprightly.
The eyes of the ebullient chairman of Matra-Hachette still twinkle, and he remains a man with a ready smile.
But Mr.
Lagardere, a flamboyant businessman, has changed after making a disastrous attempt to take Hachette into the television business.
In place of the fast-talking entrepreneur of a few years ago who was busy buying magazines in the United States and planning a worldwide media empire, a quieter man now fiddles occasionally with worry beads on his desk, and says:


Dance in Review
Lance Gries St. Mark's Church


Game May Be Blowout, but the Show Must Go On
If you want expert soothsaying, don't ask NBC's Super Bowl team.
With the Dallas Cowboys' 52-17 destruction of the Buffalo Bills as crucial hindsight, let us recall the NBC crew's predictions:
Will McDonough picked Buffalo, 16-10; O. J. Simpson, Buffalo, 30-24; Todd Christensen, Buffalo, 28-24, and Cris Collinsworth, Buffalo, 27-24.
Only part-timer Mike Ditka saw the light with his prognostication: Dallas, 24-10.


Iraq Ordered to Name Its Weapons Suppliers
The head of the United Nations nuclear inspection team here said today that Baghdad must turn over a complete list of foreign suppliers for its nuclear program before the Security Council would lift or ease sanctions on Iraq.
"We cannot declare our satisfaction until we are completely satisfied on the procurement issue," said Maurizio Zifferero as he was about to leave Baghdad after a weeklong mission here.


U.S. Cable Unspools Its Wires Across the Globe
MTV is planning to expand its music video empire to Latin America in October, at which point the only continent where the American cable channel is not seen will be Antarctica.
The channel's ambitious international expansion, which began in 1987 with MTV Europe and MTV Australia, is part of a growing trend among cable channel owners, many of whom think the American market has grown about as much as it can.


Rangers Are on the Expressway to Desperation
When the season began with the optimism of October, Ranger fans wondered whether their team would not only be the best in the Patrick Division, but also the best in the Wales Conference, the best in the National Hockey League and maybe even the best team in the world.
But as the 84-game schedule moves toward next weekend's All-Star Game in Montreal, many of those fans must be wondering whether the Rangers can even be the best team in the metropolitan New York area.


Surprising Governor Keeps State Guessing
In 1988, when Gov.
William Donald Schaefer was in his second year on the job, a member of the Maryland House of Delegates took the floor one day to offer a brief prayer.
"Good Lord," he pleaded, "help us to understand our Governor."


Disclosures on Analyst's Stockholdings
A Raymond James &amp; Associates analyst who liquidated his holdings in a stock while telling investors to buy owned far more shares than the 27,500 previously disclosed.
Raymond James had previously admitted that Bert Boksen, a "salesman-analyst" at the firm who touted Cascade International to clients in 1990 and 1991, sold his entire holdings of Cascade stock in the months before the shares collapsed in the fall of 1991.
Shares of the women's clothing and cosmetics retailer plunged from a high of $12 each that August to the $2-to-$3 range in November.


Iran Could Gain Ex-Soviet Land
To the Editor:
Re "Afghanistan, Always Riven, Is Breaking Into Ethnic Parts" (front page, Jan. 17): While you mention Iran's intention to assert its influence in a fragmented Afghanistan, as one who studied Afghanistan closely at Columbia University, I would add that Iran may be able to assert its influence not only in Afghanistan, but also across that country toward the former Soviet republic of Tajikistan.


Revlon Expected to Replace No. 2 Executive
Revlon Inc., the cosmetics giant that is the cornerstone of the billionaire investor Ronald O. Perelman's financial domain, is expected to announce today that Michael M. Hammond, its second in command, will step aside.
George Fellows, a senior executive at the Colgate-Palmolive Company and a former Revlon executive, will be named his successor, company insiders and former Revlon executives said.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.


Fund-Raising Efforts Reveal Mayoral Candidates' Strategies
The angry sound bites of the New York City mayoral election are months away, but for more than a year a quiet campaign has been busily afoot: the race for millions of dollars to make it all possible.
The candidates' cash says much about them and their strategies for winning.
Mayor David N. Dinkins, though scarred by three tumultuous years in City Hall, is also flush with the powers of incumbency, and it shows in his most recent fund-raising reports, released last month.


The C.I.A.: Time for an Overhaul
In R. James Woolsey, the Central Intelligence Agency will have a Director who did not rise through its ranks.
As a consumer, not a producer, of intelligence assessments, he knows their flaws.
He also has an outsider's skepticism of covert operations.
May he act on those sound instincts to reshape an agency mired in history's amber.
Mr.
Woolsey has three main tasks.
The first is to slim down a bloated cold war bureaucracy and budget while reorienting intelligence-gathering toward a host of smaller and murkier dangers.


New York's Poor Trying Alternative to Medicaid
On an icy winter morning at the Livingston Income Support Center in Brooklyn, a handful of men and women sat in a back corner of the office listening quietly as city workers explained a new requirement for those seeking public assistance.
"Do you have a satisfactory ongoing relationship with a doctor?" one worker asked Hyacinth Maryshaw, 36.
"No," Ms.
Maryshaw answered.


Review/Pop; Shaking Off the Vestiges Of Rock's Family Dialect
Rock is supposed to resist musical and cultural entrenchment; the only rule rock musicians are bound to follow is the one that says, blast all rules to shreds.
But traditions build themselves, inevitably, through formal repetition and paternal influence.
Today's bands bear traces of the Stones, Led Zeppelin or the Clash, because those groups created the family language.
To escape their parents, today's rockers have to run a very long way from home.
Or they can redecorate the old haunts in colors meant to disturb and dislocate their esthetic elders.
Two groups who played at Irving Plaza on Wednesday night took this approach.
The evening's headliner, Ween, wrings the neck of rock's power-tripping machismo by playing arena anthems without the arena or even a full band.
The pseudonymous duo of Dean and Gene Ween writes memorable pop tunes and play and sings them with verve and skill.
But with nothing but a bank of tapes supporting Dean's lone guitar and Gene's metal-playboy vocals, the group's mock pomposity constantly collapses back upon itself.


Maybe It's the 4th Time That's a Charm
Frank Reich, the Bills' backup quarterback, could already see Buffalo Coach Marv Levy spinning his way around the team's third Super Bowl loss.
"I know the next time that we meet as a team, Marv is going to say that sure we lost three straight Super Bowls and that's something that no other team has ever done," Reich said.
"But he's going to say that that puts us in a unique situation. We now have a chance to do something that no other team has ever done -- go to a fourth straight Super Bowl and win one after losing three straight."


Ads Down, Los Angeles Times Again Cuts Staff
Under pressure to cut costs amid a severe advertising slump, The Los Angeles Times is carrying out a voluntary buyout program, its second in 18 months.
The program will trim the staff by 9 percent, but also strip The Times, the nation's largest metropolitan daily newspaper, of some of its most respected reporters.
The paper, flagship of the Times Mirror Company, announced on Thursday that 668 of its 7,500 employees had accepted the buyout, which is considered generous.
It provides as much as two years' salary and 18 months of medical benefits for employees and their dependents.


QUOTATION OF THE DAY
There are more cultural conservatives than cultural liberals, and their ability to mobilize should not be underestimated.
You've got 300,000 to 400,000 churches out there, and there's nothing like that on the left.
PROF.
JOHN GREEN -- of the University of Akron.  [ A14:4. ]


Clarence L. Holte, 85, Collector Of Materials on Blacks' Heritage
Clarence LeRoy Holte, who assembled what was thought to be the largest private collection of books on black history and culture, died on Friday in Oakland, Calif.
Mr.
Holte was 85 and lived in Oakland.
He died of heart failure, said his daughter, Dr. Helen Holte-Fields.


Sports of The Times; Turnover Prophets Of Doom and Boom
WITHOUT a crystal ball or tarot cards, the Super Bowl XXVII coaches defined the difference in last night's game two days before that difference developed.
"There's only one ball," Marv Levy, the Buffalo Bills' doomsayer, had said on Friday when asked what the key to the game would be.
"We got to keep it and they got to try to take it away."


A Reception Line for the President


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:


Review/Theater; A Surrealist's Eye Among the Ruins
The Talking Band has a long history of treating topical subjects in imaginatively oblique ways.
And "The Blue Sky Is a Curse," a trilogy of surreal music-theater pieces whose title was inspired by a Magritte painting, is typical of the whimsical approach taken by the venerable experimental ensemble.
Its three related vignettes, all set in Los Angeles during the 1992 riots, evoke personal alienation against a canvas of violent social upheaval.
In Paul Zimet's three-character play "Baron Bones," an agoraphobic poet (Tom Nelis) and his Eastern European girlfriend (Terry McCarthy) exchange opposite views of Los Angeles.
When she leaves, he is visited by a potion-peddling black shaman (William Badgett), who takes him on a mental journey into the heart of the riots.


Croatia's Chief Vows 'Liberation' Of More Land in Serbian Enclave
President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia today completed a quick tour of territory wrested from Serbians over the last week, and he used the occasion to promise the "liberation" of more land deep inside the Serbian enclave in this country.
In speeches ringing with nationalistic phrases, he declared that "every drop of Croat blood is precious" but that the nation must be prepared for sacrifices to win back more land.


Ron Kostelnik, Tackle For Packers, Dies at 53
Ron Kostelnik, a former Green Bay Packers defensive tackle, died Friday night as he suffered a heart attack and lost control of his car on Interstate 75 in Kentucky, authorities here said.
He was 53.
An autopsy performed Saturday showed that Mr.
Kostelnik died of the heart attack, said Scott County Coroner Marvin S. Yocum.


Two Surveys Show Split On Clinton's Performance
Two new polls indicate that Americans are deeply divided over President Clinton's job performance so far, and are almost evenly split over the first major issue his Administration has tackled, the ban on homosexuals in the armed forces.
A poll conducted by the Gallup Organization for Newsweek magazine showed that although 51 percent of those surveyed approved of Mr.
Clinton's job performance 32 percent disapproved.
It is the highest disapproval rating for any new President since such surveys were begun in the 1950's.


Greenspan the Politician
Alan Greenspan, the habitually cautious chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, appeared to have read the election returns when he gave a surprisingly strong endorsement last week to President Clinton's plans to stimulate the economy.
In suggesting that the President's stimulus package was not too large and his longer-term deficit reduction plan not too small, Mr.
Greenspan seemed to signal an era of camaraderie with the new President.
This should make life easier for Mr.
Clinton by reducing the chances of interest rate increases and for Mr.
Greenspan by reducing the criticism he faces.
The harmony might also head off Congressional efforts to exert more control over the Fed.


Kotite View: Smith Threw a Block Party
Along with 120 million other Americans, Rich Kotite watched the Dallas Cowboys' systematic, opportunistic trouncing of the Buffalo Bills in Super Bowl XXVII last night.
"It's amazing," he said, sounding like a fan and not the head coach of the Philadelphia Eagles.
"Buffalo is a good team, but they were just dismantled because of the pressure."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
A remarkable week in American corporate history ended with an about-face by American Express's chairman, who resigned just days after winning a board room battle.
The turmoil at American Express, along with significant shifts at I.B.M., Westinghouse and Sears, signaled a shift in which shareholders are gaining more leverage over executives.  [ Page A1. ]  As Harvey Golub assumes the chief executive's job today at Amerian Express, he inherits several critical cases from James D. Robinson 3d.  [ D1. ]
Revlon's No. 2 executive is expected to step down.
Insiders say Michael Hammond will be succeeded by George Fellows, a senior executive at Colgate-Palmolive.  [ D1. ]


Market Place; Hospitality Franchise is a hot stock in a tepid lodging industry.
IN the issue's first day of trading in December, the six million common shares of Hospitality Franchise Systems rose $2.75 from the initial public offering price of $16.
And the company, the worldwide franchiser of Days Inn and Howard Johnson and the franchiser of Ramada in the United States, shows no signs of cooling off.
The stock closed Friday at $24 on the New York Stock Exchange, up 37.5 cents.
Michael G. Mueller, the lodging industry analyst for Montgomery Securities in San Francisco, said he expected continued high performance.


American Express: Try, Try Again
For the second time in a week, the American Express board meets today to choose a chairman.
The leading candidate, Richard M. Furlaud, is poised to join the growing ranks of chairmen who are not also chief executives -- the better to oversee their companies' activities.
In an interview last night, Mr.
Furlaud stressed that the next American Express chairman should exercise oversight while entrusting direct management to the new chief executive, Harvey Golub.
"The nonexecutive chairman is not the boss," said Mr.
Furlaud, a former president of Bristol-Myers Squibb.
"He or she should not be involved in running the business." Revolt by Major Shareholders
On the recommendation of Mr.
Furlaud, who leads the board's nominating committee, the board decided last Monday to promote Mr.
Golub, then the company's president, but keep James D. Robinson 3d as chairman.
The board also gave Mr.
Robinson command of the Shearson Lehman Brothers brokerage subsidiary.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
Treasury financings this week are confined to the bill market, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of three-month and six-month bills, followed on Thursday by an auction of one-year bills.
Market traders said that by late in the day Friday the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was at 2.89 percent, and the rate on a six-month bill was 3.03 percent; the rate on the one-year issue was at 3.2 percent.


Dance in Review
New York City Ballet 'Afternoon of a Faun' New York State Theater


Choice Is Notre Dame
Quarterback RON POWLUS of Berwick, Pa., a virtually unanimous choice as the national high school football player of the year, ended speculation by announcing that he will attend Notre Dame.
The 6-foot-4-inch, 210-pound Powlus, who holds most of Pennsylvania's career passing records with more than 7,500 yards, chose Notre Dame over the University of Pittsburgh.


Petrovic's Perpetual Motion Has Heads Spinning
We now turn your attention from the mass hysteria known as the Super Bowl to one of the National Basketball Association's most amazing players: Nets guard Drazen Petrovic.
Quite simply, he is perhaps the best outside shooter in the league.


CHRONICLE
PRINCE ANDREW stopped by WALTER ANNENBERG 's place in Rancho Mirage, Calif., for a few days.
"This is just a private visit," Mr.
Annenberg, the billionaire publisher, told The Associated Press.


Doctor of the Dying Treads With Care
To the Editor:
In "Must They Tinker With the Dying?" (Op-Ed, Jan. 16), Nancy M. Lederman clearly illustrates the plight of the family trying to serve as advocate for the patient during medical crises.
The wishes of patients, be they in the form of verbal or written desires, advanced directives or proxy designations, are too often ignored in the quest to keep the person alive.


Cowboys' Defense Pours On Pressure
The Dallas Cowboys' no-name defense took no prisoners today.
While this young unit had no Pro Bowl players, little playoff experience and a coordinator who was leaving for better things, it also had a fierce belief in itself.
So it overwhelmed the Buffalo Bills in Super Bowl XXVII, 52-17, with stunning performances by Ken Norton Jr., Jimmie Jones, Thomas Everett, Leon Lett and almost anyone else you can think of.


Low Australia Inflation
Australia has achieved the lowest inflation rate in the developed world, according to figures released last week.
Australia's consumer price index rose five-tenths of 1 percent in the final quarter of 1992, for an annual inflation rate of three-tenths of 1 percent.


Runner's Baby Ill
The Cuban track star ANA QUIROT was recovering well from severe burns, but her prematurely delivered daughter developed severe neurological problems over the weekend, the news agency Prensa Latina said.
Quirot, seven months pregnant, was hospitalized Jan. 22 with third-degree burns suffered in what news reports from Cuba said was a household accident.
Prensa Latin said that two days later, Quirot delivered by Caesarean section a baby girl named JAVIANNA FIDELIA.
The baby was placed in an incubator-respirator but was taken off it later in the week.


Books of The Times; Middle-Class Rage: Like in History, Only Different
Boiling Point Republicans, Democrats and the Decline of Middle-Class Prosperity By Kevin Phillips Illustrated. 307 pages.
Random House. $23.


Staten Island Packs One-Two Punch
IF AT FIRST you don't secede try, try again.
That could become the motto of Staten Island, whose voters may wield an ironic double wallop next November: In the very same election, they may choose the next mayor for the rest of New York City and then decide to form a separate city themselves.


Alexandra of Yugoslavia Is Dead; Queen Without a Throne Was 71
Queen Alexandra of Yugoslavia, the widow of Peter II, whose reign as the last King of Yugoslavia was ended in 1941 by invading German troops, died Saturday at her home outside London.
She was 71.
The Queen had been "very ill" with cancer for several years, said her daughter-in-law, Crown Princess Katherine.


Doubts Arise On Finances Of Prospect In Post Sale
To his fans, Steven Hoffenberg is a successful entrepreneur willing to use his muscle and money to rescue the faltering New York Post.
To his critics, he is a combative loner who pushes the rules of business to the limits.
One thing that no one so far has challenged is that Mr.
Hoffenberg is an exceedingly wealthy man.


Sony and Time Warner Put $20 Million Into Cable Radio
The music publishing divisions of Sony and Time Warner, as well as Time Warner Cable, have invested a total of about $20 million in Digital Cable Radio of Hatboro, Pa., a fledgling radio service transmitted through local cable television systems.
The move signals that the two entertainment industry giants have resolved their doubts about an issue raised by the new format, for which listeners pay a monthly subscription fee.


Dance in Review
Little Angels Children's Folk Ballet Carnegie Hall


Gay Issue Mobilizes Conservatives Against Clinton
Emboldened by the furor over President Clinton's proposal to allow homosexuals in the military, conservative and evangelical Christian groups are furiously organizing, raising money and looking ahead to the battles to come against the first Democratic President in 12 years.
"It's a bonanza for building organizations and raising money; the fund-raising letters are already in the mail," said John Green, a professor at the University of Akron who is an expert on the Christian right.
"I've been talking to several of these people, and they all say that they could not have scripted Bill Clinton's first weeks any better."


Doomed in Dome: Pirates Fall to Orangemen
If upset is still a definitive word in the Big East, where everything goes this season, then Syracuse indeed upset Seton Hall today, 76-67, before a roaring crowd of 28,033 in the Carrier Dome.
The result kept St.
John's (6-2) alone in first place after a 72-59 victory over Connecticut on Saturday night at Madison Square Garden.


Japan Bank Is Expected To Cut Rate
With Government officials acknowledging that the steepness of the current recession has taken them by surprise, the Bank of Japan is reportedly about to cut the official discount rate to its lowest level since 1989.
The bank has made no official comment, but every major Japanese newspaper carried articles this weekend quoting unidentifed Government officials as saying that the rate reduction was imminent.


Springfield Calling
After BILL ELLIOTT of Mid-America Nazarene made college basketball history with his 432d career 3-pointer, his biggest worry was keeping his sneakers.
The Basketball Hall of Fame in Springfield, Mass., wants them, along with the uniform he was wearing and the game ball from Mid-America's 76-74 loss to Baker on Saturday night in Olathe, Kan.


Dance in Review
Errol Grimes Merce Cunningham Studio


Equality Is Replacing Quality in Today's Big East
For all the talk about the poor performance outside the conference by the members of the Big East, competition within it has never been more ferocious.
Some call it parity.
Others say that everyone has dropped to the same level of mediocrity.
In any event, the competition is even, free flowing and, yes, exciting.


Abroad at Home; Not a Rose Garden
After the election, Republicans charged that the press was biased against George Bush.
A conservative think tank produced a solemn report to the same effect.
Well, ladies and gentlemen, look at the press now and think again.
Reporters and commentators are savaging Bill Clinton.
They are doing what comes naturally to a free press: criticizing those in authority.


Essay; The Great Reshuffle
They're rioting in Africa, as the old song goes; throughout that continent, warring tribes are ripping apart the once-secure borders of nationhood.
The specter of national separation is haunting Europe, too: Dissolution worked out peacefully in the former Soviet empire, but breaking-up is proceeding with ancient savagery in the former Yugoslavia.


Chiat/Day and Riney In New York Shifts
Chiat/Day will replace Dick Sittig, who has served as creative director of the New York office for almost two years.
Mr.
Sittig, 34, will return to the agency's Venice, Calif., headquarters in May as a senior vice president and associate creative director.
Though his departure follows the loss of important accounts like American Express, Mr.
Sittig attributed it to a "life style decision" related to his approaching wedding.


XXVII Marks the Spot: Dallas Is Back on Top
The Dallas Cowboys turned a close game into a rout so quickly, so decisively, so painfully for the Buffalo Bills in Super Bowl XXVII today that all the Bills could do was sing a familiar refrain: Wait till next year.
The Cowboys certainly won't have to.
In achieving a 52-17 victory before 98,374 fans at the Rose Bowl, they made a mockery of the Buffalo no-huddle offense, the Buffalo no-tackle defense, the Buffalo no-hold-on-to-the-football performance that marked this spectacle of what was supposed to be a close game between two talented teams.


Dublin Upbraids Its Partners in Currency System
The Irish Government criticized its larger, richer European Community partners today for not helping it avoid the 10 percent currency devaluation announced Saturday night in Brussels.
The devaluation was a political embarassment for the new coalition Government of Prime Minister Albert Reynolds, who held on to his position on Jan. 12 with the help of 33 parliamentary votes from his former enemies, the Labor Party.


Lett, Carried Away, Fumbles His Moment of Glory
The game was over, and Leon Lett had his prize in sight, so he reached out confidently and this time he made sure.
The Dallas Cowboys' defensive lineman grasped the Super Bowl trophy with two hands and said, "I won't drop this one."
A half-hour earlier, Lett had fumbled his chance for Super Bowl glory when he did some premature celebrating after picking up a Frank Reich fumble at the Dallas 35-yard line and rumbling toward the end zone.
A 6-foot-6-inch, 287-pound tackle, Lett is certainly no speedster, but he didn't have to be.
The entire right side of the field was clear for him, and he was ahead of everyone else, galomphing toward what would be his first touchdown "since I was 10 years old playing pee-wee football."


Rebbe, but Not the Messiah, As Lubavitchers Compromise
An event billed as the Grand Rabbi of Lubavitch's coronation as the King Messiah turned into a frenzy of singing and dancing last night in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, as thousands of ecstatic followers pleaded with the Rebbe to reveal himself in all his messianic glory.
But the 90-year-old rabbi, Menachem Mendel Schneerson, who appeared before the crowd for eight minutes in a wheelchair, did not accept the messianic mantle.
He is partly paralyzed and unable to speak following a stroke a year ago, but his official spokesman, Rabbi Yehudah Krinsky, said that the Rebbe "is acknowledging nothing."


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected during the week beginning today:
Carr Realty Corp., Washington, 6.25 million common shares. Merrill Lynch.


Patents
TINKERING with the intricacies of musical acoustics, William R. Epping obtained a patent last week for the first blues harmonica that can play complete chromatic scales -- the equivalent of several octaves of both white and black keys on a piano.
A musician and a professional harmonica technician at the American headquarters in Ashley, Va., of the German concern Hohner Harmonicas, Mr.
Epping said he invented the instrument to overcome the traditional limitations of a blues harmonica in playing flat and sharp notes and in gliding smoothly up and down the scale.


Deadly Injustice
The Supreme Court's latest mangling of death penalty issues is part of its campaign to speed up and multiply executions in the United States.
That may be the will of the people in some states, but the Court's unprincipled reasoning in three cases last week would make a hangman blush.
One case involved Gary Graham, convicted of murder at age 17 and sentenced to death by a Texas court.
His lawyers argued that the Texas death statute gave the jury no room to take Mr.
Graham's youth into consideration and, perhaps, impose a lesser sentence of life imprisonment.


Investors Now Expect Inflation to Remain Low
Inflation is down.
That is documented in Government statistics.
But what was not so sure until last week's bond rally is that investors and traders -- long known for their skepticism -- are actually beginning to believe that inflation will stay low for some time.
Some analysts and investors are citing that growing confidence about the inflationary outlook to explain the surprising rally that has dropped the interest rate on the 30-year bond to its lowest level in six and a half years.
The yield on the 30-year bond ended Friday at 7.19 percent.


Byrd Says I'll Walk By Myself
Jets defensive end Dennis Byrd, partly paralyzed after breaking his neck during a game Nov. 29, said today that he is going to try to walk by himself, without the aid of a walker, crutches or a therapist, in the next 10 days.
Appearing with his wife, Angela, on NBC's Super Bowl pre-game show, Byrd said that his chances for walking again are very good.


World Economies


Elinor Stecker, Mano Orel
Elinor Horwitz Stecker, a senior editor of Popular Photography magazine in New York, was married yesterday to Emmanuel Orel, a photographer in Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y.
Rabbi H. Leonard Poller performed the ceremony at Courtland Gardens, a senior citizens' residence in Stamford, Conn., where her mother is a resident.
Mrs.
Orel, an author of books on photography, graduated from the University of Michigan and received a master's degree in speech pathology from the University of Pittsburgh.
She is the daughter of Selma S. Horwitz of Stamford and the late Thomas A. Horwitz.
The bride's first husband died, as did the first wife of the bridegroom.


Pasadena Turns Into Playground For the Cowboys
In the end, the burdens were more than the Buffalo Bills could bear.
There was the weight of failure in the previous two Super Bowls and the weight of expectations for Super Bowl XXVII yesterday.
And if that wasn't enough, the Dallas Cowboys quickly brought their own pressure to bear, forcing nine Buffalo turnovers as they humiliated the Bills, 52-17.


'96 Offering By Telekom
The head of Germany's state-owned telecommunications giant, Deutsche Bundespost Telekom, said last week that he wanted to offer shares in the company in 1996.
Deutsche Telekom would raise up to 30 billion marks, about $19 billion, by selling just under half of the company.
The executive, Helmut Ricke, said Telekom had to be transformed into a joint stock company before the privatization could be carried out.
Such a change of the German telecommunications group requires a revision of the country's Constitution, and this could be achieved only with the support of the Social Democratic opposition, which has expressed reservations about privatization.


North Korea Rebuffs Nuclear Inspectors, Reviving U.S. Nervousness
In a move that has increased concern that North Korea is secretly continuing an effort to develop nuclear weapons, North Korea has rebuffed a request by the International Atomic Energy Agency to visit two sites that Western intelligence agencies say are linked to the program.
There are also new intelligence reports that North Korea has probably produced more plutonium than it has acknowledged, Western diplomats say.


Review/Television; Reuther, The Big 3 And Days Of Sit-Ins
The gritty pictures from the 1930's, the union tunes and the reminiscences of United Automobile Workers old-timers bring back the organizing battles of what became America's biggest industrial union.
But the hero of tonight's hourlong documentary, "Sit Down and Fight: Walter Reuther and the Rise of the Auto Worker's Union," remains a distant figure.
The sit-downs and sit-ins that Reuther improvised became powerful weapons in the workers' Depression-era assaults on their industry's big three, General Motors, Chrysler and Ford.
As tonight's narrator says, "By doing nothing they achieved everything."


A Tradition of Giving to the Neediest
Elsa W. Koestler began in the 1920's.
Hope Cobb started in the 1930's.
Babette S. Goldman sent her first check in the 40's, and Robert S. Sandler first mailed his in the 50's.
Longtime contributors like these form the backbone of the campaigns run by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
Letters enclosed with their checks tell how proud they are to have kept up their tradition of giving.
Many say they learned about the Neediest Cases from parents and teachers, and that they hope their children and grandchildren will follow their example.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Publishing; Where literary lightning hits, book houses often hope for a second strike.
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE" by Rush Limbaugh, the conservative and popular radio and television talk-show host, has astonished the publishing world by breaking records for sales of hard-cover nonfiction at the two largest bookstore chains.
The book has topped The New York Times best-seller list for weeks and the publisher, Pocket Books, boasts of more than two million copies in print.


Review/Pop; 60's New Orleans Sound Updated by 90's Energy
In the mid-1970's the Meters, who were on the road opening for the Rolling Stones, would come back to their hometown, New Orleans, and put on extraordinary and prophetic shows, merging hard rock, funk and New Orleans parade rhythms.
Their albums, on Warner Brothers, didn't even hint at the ferocity of the music or its sense of expansion.
It was so intense that minutes seemed like hours, hours seemed like days, and by the end of now-legendary shows everybody, musicians and audience alike, would wander exhausted out into the early-morning darkness.
The band fell apart a few years later, metamorphosing partly into the softer, better-natured and better-known Neville Brothers, and when most of its members regrouped a few years ago, the music didn't quite work.
The improvisations were listless, the rhythms slack.
But over the last year things have changed, and if the band doesn't have the volcanic power of youth it used to, it has regained its precision, the feral tautness that made the music distinct.


Israel Holding 3 U.S. Arabs It Links to Militant Group
In the continuing crisis over the 400 Palestinians deported to Lebanon, the Israeli Government today debated actions to stave off sanctions threatened by the Security Council, and announced the arrest of three Arab-Americans it suspects of involvement in the group that was the main target of the expulsions.
The Cabinet of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin announced no decisions, but a sense of urgency arose when Mr.
Rabin took the unusual step of interrupting the regular weekly session to meet with the United States Ambassador to Israel, William C. Harrop to discuss the deportations and the arrests announced today, a senior official said.
Israel suspects two of the Arab-Americans of trying to reorganize the militant Islamic group known as Hamas after the detention and expulsion of its reputed leaders.


For Buffalo's Fans, a Third Winter of Discontent
The city that gets no respect just slipped another notch.
"I feel cheated," Alvin Williams, 23 years old, said as he leaned against a railing at the Buffalo Convention Center with the last seconds of Super Bowl XXVII ticking down.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  AN EXPERIMENT IN HEALTH CARE
On a winter morning at the Livingston Income Support Center in Brooklyn, a handful of men and women sat listening as city workers explained a new requirement for public assistance.
Though they had gone to reapply for welfare, they became the latest participant in New York City's first foray into mandatory managed care -- the initial phase of one of the most ambitious entries in a growing national movement that seeks to provide better health care for the poor and, ultimately, to contain costs.
A1.
A HOSTAGE'S LIFE AND DEATH
In the tales of sudden death in New York City, there are always the facts: the strange circumstances of the final encounter, the grim details of weapons and wounds, the history of a life tragically cut short.
There are such facts about the life and death of Aurea Bonnie Vargas.
A1.


Review/Theater; A Room With a View of a Family
"The Boiler Room," by Rueben Gonzalez, opens with the wife of a building superintendent praying to the boiler of the title.
Indeed, in the Puerto Rican Traveling Theater's production, the cranky heating plant so dominates Edward Gianfrancesco's ingenious set and the whole theater that it seems natural to find a supplicant kneeling before it.
The boiler guards a mystery revealed only in the last few lines.
It is good we are kept in the dark that long, for the revelation is unsettling, even macabre, while the play is an affectionate portrait of a family of Puerto Rican immigrants in New York, a family so unlucky that the boiler room is its living room and the father, the super, appears to have simply walked away from it.


Congressional Brief; Amid Calls for 'Change,' Senate Stays the Course
When the rest of Washington hums a mantra of "change," count on the United States Senate to stand fast against the kind of loose thinking abroad in the land that suggests the venerable Congressional way of doing business is, well, not quite adequate to the nation's needs.
The faint breath of reform in the Senate was stilled almost before it could be noticed last week when the minority leader, Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, dismissed a series of very modest suggestions for speeding up the chamber's arcane ways.
It was not that Senator George J. Mitchell, the majority leader, proposed anything really radical, like requiring amendments to have something to do with the bill they amend, or even something painful, like a five-day, or even a four-day week.


CHRONICLE
Somewhere out there is the perfect Charlie Goldberg.
He's a boy who's 13 years old, give or take a year or two, with a sharp sense of humor and a savvy New York demeanor laced with sensitivity.
MEG SIMON , a casting director, is scouring the city for him to take over the role as one of the two sons in "Conversations With My Father," the drama about a Jewish bartender on the Lower East Side struggling for assimilation and success.
Since the play's opening in March, the part has been played by two boys, DAVID KRUMHOLTZ , who had never acted professionally and was found in an open casting call, and JASON WOLINER , a professional actor.


Suspects in Fatal Robbery Linked to Others at Banks
The four men who took part in an Upper West Side bank robbery on Friday that ended with the death of a robber and his hostage are suspected in the holdup of the same bank in November, the police said yesterday.
The woman, Aurea Bonnie Vargas, was shot to death by the police as the robber used her as a shield.
The robber, identified by the police yesterday as Sidney Fisher, 24, from Mays Landing in southern New Jersey, is also suspected in six bank robberies in New Jersey.


The Talk of Sundance; The Winners and Notable Losers at Sundance
Mainstream was once a derisive word at the Sundance Film Festival.
Only a few years ago, audiences and judges at the nation's major showcase for independent films embraced arty, esoteric movies and snubbed those dreaded Hollywood-style products.
But the increasing influx of the Hollywood crowd -- coupled with changing styles of film makers -- was evident on Saturday night when audience awards were presented to films that are -- let's face it -- mainstream.
"El Mariachi," a comedy-drama by Richard Rodriguez, a 24-year-old Texas film maker, won the Audience Award for a feature film, which is given on a vote by the festival's 5,000 filmgoers and is a good gauge of a film's commercial prospects.
The film, about a mariachi musician who enters a Mexican border town at the same time as a hit man, was made by Mr.
Rodriguez and his friends for only $7,000.
Initially made as a quickie for the Spanish-language video market, it is about as arty as "Lethal Weapon." But much funnier.
(Not as funny, and overlooked in the awards, but still the most talked about film, was "Boxing Helena," about obsessive love gone haywire. Audiences reacted in two ways: they loved it or they hated it.)
Mr.
Rodriguez, an engaging, coolly confident film maker whose movie is to be released by Columbia Pictures in January, said on Saturday night, "I just hope this inspires people to make their own movies, no matter who they are, no matter how rich or poor." A Winning Documentary
The Audience Award for a documentary was given to "Something Within Me," an affectionate portrait of St.
Augustine's School of the Arts in the South Bronx.
This unusual elementary school uses music and other forms of artistic expression to nurture a sense of responsibility and pride among its poor, minority students.
The movie won two other awards: the Film Makers Trophy and a Special Jury Award for Merit.
The documentary's producer, Jerret Engle, a former editor at the Dutton publishing house, initially heard about the school on the evening news in New York City about five years ago.
Since then, she has worked at part-time jobs and spent years raising $250,000 to make the film.
"I'm just floored," she said on Saturday night.
"I love these kids and their teachers, but I didn't know anyone else would be interested." The film, set for a modest commercial release, has already drawn the interest of the Public Broadcasting Service and Home Box Office.
Four Grand Prizes
In presenting the awards, the audience was somewhat out of sync with the more traditional Sundance jury.
The panel split the Grand Jury prizes among two dramas and two documentaries.
The dramas are "Ruby in Paradise," Victor Nunez's rambling film about a young woman who flees her Tennessee town to find her sense of self on the Florida coast, and Bryan J. Singer's "Public Access." The latter is about a slick, slightly eerie newcomer to a fictional Midwestern town, Brewster, who takes over the public-access cable network and asks the question: "What's wrong with Brewster?" The result is nothing less than paranoia.
The jury's documentary awards were given to two powerful works: "Children of Fate: Life and Death in a Sicilian Family," a heart-wrenching portrait of three generations of a Sicilian family, and "Silverlake Life: The View From Here," a harrowing film about AIDS.
(Other prize-winners included Steve Gomer's "Fly By Night," a drama about New York rappers; Tony Chan's "Combination Platter," about illegal Chinese immigrants; Everett Lewis's "Ambush of Ghosts," about a dysfunctional family; Leslie Harris's "Just Another Girl on the IRT," about a black Brooklyn teen-ager, and "Lillian," about the struggles of a black woman. A documentary prize also went to "Earth and the American Dream," about the destruction of the nation's environment).
"Silverlake Life" traces the final journey of a film teacher, Tom Joslin, and his companion of 22 years, Mark Maasi, both of whom had AIDS.
The two men lived in the Silverlake area of Los Angeles, and both videotaped the film themselves.
The graphic film, which includes a hard-to-watch death scene, was completed by a friend, Peter Friedman, a documentary director.
Mr.
Friedman, 34, a former student of Mr.
Joslin's at Hampshire College in Amherst, Mass., said he culled 40 hours of videotapes to produce the 99-minute film.
"It is a direct and a difficult film which shows the realities of day-to-day life with AIDS," Mr.
Friedman said after the awards.
"The whole spirit of the film is to confront the pain and the love shared by these two men." In recent days, he said, television and theatrical distributors have expressed interest in the documentary.
A Few Words From the Founder
Sundance is plainly going a bit Hollywood; at least six agents from United Talent Agency, one of the festival's numerous sponsors and more aggressive agencies, were seeking new clients.
Still, the awards ceremony hardly resembled the Oscars.
Robert Redford, the founder of the festival, was welcomed onstage with applause and whistles.
He wore boots, jeans, a leather jacket and a striped sweat shirt.
Mr.
Redford, one of the few millionaire movie stars who have actually paid back the industry by nurturing new film makers, told the packed crowd in a converted basketball gym in this ski resort town: "Nobody can understand the blood, the sweat, the dedication it takes to make these films. Nobody can understand that except the film maker."
He said the festival stands for "innovation, for the avant-garde." But other film makers and executives say it was virtually unavoidable for Sundance to turn, unwittingly, into a hunting ground for Hollywood.
In many ways, Hollywood is less interested in the films shown here -- which often flounder at the box office -- than in new film makers with commercial potential.
"It really is a festival of agents," said Jonathan Dana, the president of Triton Pictures, an independent film company, who has been visiting the festival for several years.
"It's a barter economy. Everyone's trading information. But it's a tricky conversion from the narrow world of independent films to the market place."
Mr.
Dana speaks from personal experience.
Last year, Triton bought two of the big prize-winners at Sundance: the comedy, "In the Soup," whose star, Seymour Cassel, was master of ceremonies at this year's awards, and the documentary "A Brief History of Time."
Mr.
Dana, standing outside a movie theater in Park City, said simply, "One worked; one didn't."
Like another big favorite last year, "The Waterdance," "In the Soup" failed at the box office.
But "A Brief History" succeeded.
Mr.
Dana shrugged and voiced the oft-heard Hollywood complaint: "Who knows what works?" 'Orlando' and 'Helena'
Curiously, the two pictures that were most widely discussed at Sundance went unmentioned last night.
One of them, "Orlando," an adaptation of the Virginia Woolf novel by an English film maker, Sally Potter, had its United States premiere at the festival but was not in competition for prizes. (The festival divides films into two major categories, those in competition and those having premieres.) By virtual consensus, "Orlando" was the most dazzling film at the festival.
And then there was "Boxing Helena."
No film at the festival provoked as much rage, hisses, applause and debate as this one.
The film was directed and written by Jennifer Chambers Lynch, the daughter of David Lynch.
Even before it was shown here, the movie created an unusual amount of talk because of the last-minute withdrawals of Madonna and then Kim Basinger from the lead role.
Helena is now played by Sherilyn Fenn.
The film deals with a lunatic surgeon (Julian Sands) obsessed by an elusive, beautiful woman named Helena.
To keep her, he transforms her into his own Venus de Milo by cutting off her arms and legs and placing her on a pedestal.
Hard to believe, but the film is a comedy, albeit very dark.
Ms.
Lynch, like many of the twentysomething directors here, is a very confident, assured film maker, without a hint of self-doubt.
Sipping coffee and chain-smoking the other morning in a hotel dining room, Ms.
Lynch said she was startled by the almost violent reaction to her film.
The film has been called anti-feminist, anti-male and exploitative.
"People want the film abolished," she said.
"They scream at us. I wish they would talk to me. I want to hear them. They don't want to have a discussion. They just get up and leave."
Ms.
Lynch, who never went to college, grew up in Los Angeles and attended Interlochen Arts Academy in Interlochen, Mich.
Upon graduation, she said, she went on a "fairly extensive hike with my boyfriend," lived in Baltimore for several months, and then moved to Los Angeles at 19 to work for her father and write the movie.
She's now 24.
The movie is awaiting a distributor in the United States
"My whole intent was to parody and to show seriously what we do to each other in relationships," she said.
"It's about how we try to change each other. We are equally vulnerable to self-hatred, to obsession, and we try and change each other. It's about how we try to break each other down and control each other -- the thievery that goes on in obsessive relationships."
Although other film makers here find it hard to believe, Ms.
Lynch said being her father's daughter was not a blessing.
"Believe me, people wanted nothing to do with me," she said.
"I was 19; it was a risky script; I was some big director's daughter and female. There's something about being a daughter. You would think it gives you some credibility. It doesn't."
At least, Ms.
Lynch had no trouble getting through the doors of agents and executives.
A Long Island Story
At the other end of the spectrum is Rob Weiss, 26, whose father, Carl, runs a touring business for gamblers in Cedarhurst, L.I.
To raise money for his son's film, "Amongst Friends," which turned out to be one of the strongest at the festival, Mr.
Weiss sent out letters to his customers.
Rob Weiss, who wears his cap backwards and speaks with an unmistakable New York accent, said: "My dad's friends are pretty much high rollers. The letter wasn't done in a schlock manner. It was classy. It said, like: 'Hey, if you're going to bet on ball games your entire life, if you're going to bet on horses, do something good with the money for a change. Bet it on the kid."
The bet on the kid seems to be paying off.
The movie is a gritty exploration of a group of wealthy high-school graduates, most of them Jewish or Italian, from the Five Towns of Long Island who drift into boredom, drugs, petty crime and tragedy.
The director, who grew up on Long Island and attended the Parsons School of Design for about a year, said this was the world in which he grew up.
Mr.
Weiss said he owed a great deal to the works of Martin Scorsese, Francis Ford Coppola and Oliver Stone.
He said he had seen Phillip Kaufman's "Wanderers," about 40 times. (Mr. Kaufman was honored at this year's Sundance Film Festival.)
Mr.
Weiss now has an agent, a lawyer, a manager and a publicity agent.
Studios are beckoning.
But he's not going Hollywood, he insisted.
"You've got to know where you came from," he said.
"I live in South-Central L.A., by U.S.C., with my girlfriend. The neighborhood is predominantly African-American and Mexican. It's reality. That's what I want. That's what I need. Nothing's going to change."


An Oil Import Fee Makes Good Sense
To the Editor:
"Clinton Says He Has Made No Decision on Energy Tax" (Business Day, Jan. 26) misses important points on the oil import fee as a policy option to reduce the Federal deficit.
On Jan. 11, the Independent Petroleum Association of America endorsed such a fee.
Our reasons fall into three policy areas.


Dance in Review
Nina Winthrop and Dancers Theater of the Riverside Church Morningside Heights


Lebow Completes Race
FRED LEBOW, president of the New York Road Runners Club, continued his comeback from brain cancer yesterday, competing in the New York Road Runners Club's 5-kilometer run in Central Park.
Lebow, who also ran in the New York City Marathon in November and the 5K Midnight Run on New Year's Eve, was timed in 29 minutes 14 seconds for the 3.1-mile event.


Two Floors Burned At Midtown Tower
A fast-moving fire damaged three floors of a virtually deserted 29-story office tower at 280 Park Avenue, at 48th Street, about 11 P.M. last night, bringing about 40 pieces of equipment to the midtown scene.
Lieut.
Fred Schwarzrock, a Fire Department spokesmen, said that by shortly after midnight the fire was sufficiently controlled so that firefighters could conduct a preliminary search of the building.
That search, he said, failed to find anyone unaccounted for.
He said most of the damage was confined to the fifth, sixth and seventh floors.


A River Runs Through Courier's Victory in Australia
Jim Courier was running for the river, running toward a repeat of last year's victory swim with his coach and high-energy soulmate, Brad Stine.
But suddenly, Courier stopped and reached for his right leg, feeling the beginnings of a cramp.
The Australian Open final was over, but his body was not about to let him forget two and a half hours in 150-degree heat.


Grand Rabbi of Lubavitch Sect Refuses the Messianic Mantle


When Good Will Is Not Enough; Desegregation Project at Heart of Hartford School Suit
Twenty-six years ago, hundreds of black children from Hartford stepped onto buses to go to schools in five nearby towns.
They were pioneers, the first to take part in Project Concern, one of the nation's earliest voluntary desegregation programs between a city and its suburbs.
The buses still run, yet Hartford's schools are far more racially segregated today.
And so Project Concern finds itself at the heart of a lawsuit challenging the racial and economic segregation dividing Hartford from its suburbs, asking a judge to order what good will has not accomplished.


Results Plus
N.H.L.
A Capital Club Record The Washington Capitals extended their unbeaten streak to a club-record 13 games yesterday with a 2-2 tie against Pittsburgh.
Washington is 9-0-4 at the Capital Centre in Landover, Md., since Nov. 20, outscoring the opposition by 63-43.
The unbeaten string surpasses the previous high set in 1982, and marks the first time Washington has gone two straight months without a home loss.
The second-place Capitals haven't beaten a team with a winning record since New Year's Day, and still trail Pittsburgh by 17 points in the Patrick Division. (AP)


TV Awards Go To 4 Agencies
Four agencies won Best of Show Grand Awards as the New York Festivals presented its 35th annual international television advertising awards on Friday in New York.
D.F.S.D.
Bozell Ltd. in London won for best television commercial, for Panasonic vacuum cleaners.
DDB Needham Amsterdam won for best television campaign, for Centraal Beheer Insurance.


Dance in Review
New York City Ballet 'Two's Company' and 'Reunions' New York State Theater


Robert Pekarsky, 70, Dental Lawsuit Expert
Dr.
Robert L. Pekarsky, a dentist and expert on dental litigation, died on Thursday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan, his family said.
He was 70 years old and lived on the Upper East Side.
He died of a heart attack, said his wife, Ellen.


Iran's Leader Challenges U.S. And Talks of Re-election Bid
President Hashemi Rafsanjani confirmed today that he was ready to run for a second term in June and warned the Clinton Administration in unusually dismissive terms that it was up to Washington to improve relations with his country.
At a rare news conference to which more than 70 foreign journalists were invited, Mr.
Rafsanjani accused the United States of a bias against Muslims and urged the Clinton Administration to release Iranian assets that have been frozen since the country's Islamic revolution in 1979.


Review/Theater; Getting to Know a Joan Who Is Saintly, Shavian And Just a Bit Unlikable
Saint Joan
During the two seasons that the National Actors Theater has been presenting classics on Broadway there has been one consistently salutary note, the work of Maryann Plunkett.
While the productions have been plagued by a variety of artistic ailments, Ms.
Plunkett has gone about her acting with a clear-eyed determination and a talent that shines no matter what the surrounding pallor.
She has demonstrated her versatility in a wide range of roles, from Elizabeth Proctor in "The Crucible" to Masha in "The Seagull," all of them leading to her impassioned performance in "Saint Joan."
In contrast to previous productions of this company, Michael Langham's revival (at the Lyceum Theater) is not undermined by gross miscasting, a factor that grounded the recent "Seagull." But, with the definite exception of Ms.
Plunkett and a few others, the acting is erratic, and the production often takes a simplistic storybook approach to the play.
The direction is on a plateau below the high standard that Mr.
Langham has set in his productions at the Stratford Festival in Canada and as recently as last season in his version of "Heartbreak House" at the Hartford Stage.


Governors Ask U.S. to Set Standards on Health Care
In a sweeping new policy statement, the National Governors' Association said today that the Federal Government should set nationwide standards for health insurance and should limit the tax deductibility of health insurance for both employers and employees.
But in a rebuff to President Clinton, the governors rejected his proposal to impose a national limit on all health spending, public and private.


Money Fund Assets Down
The total assets of the nation's 609 retail money market mutual funds decreased by $3.62 billion, to $383.20 billion, for the week that ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute has reported.
The assets of the 379 taxable retail money market funds fell by $2.09 billion, to $302.11 billion, while the assets of the 231 retail tax-exempt funds dropped $1.53 billion, to $81.08 billion.


Somali Police Back on Duty, With U.S. Aid
Throughout the two years that his country was collapsing into anarchy, Hussein Hassan Awale stood guard at the central police station here.
While looters stripped everything they could from the neighboring buildings, Mr.
Awale lived here, preserving the station's courtyard and terraces from ruin.
Now the steel doors have opened again, and the courtyard has filled with former co-workers signing up for their old jobs.


Review/Rock; Pop Metal's Weight: In the Eye of the Beholder
"Satisfied vanity revealed becomes fatuity. This is the rather impertinent name which the hypocrites of modesty -- that is to say everybody -- have invented, because they are afraid of genuine feelings." So wrote Jules Barbey D'Aurevilly in "Dandyism," published in 1897.
Mr.
D'Aurevilly meant to defend men of fashion against public scorn; but his words apply, almost a century later, to the much-maligned world of pop metal.
The rock establishment considers this musical style, which the Boston group Extreme brought to its pinnacle on Friday night at the Beacon Theater, frivolous and technically lightweight.
In fact, the members of Extreme would probably flinch to hear the label applied to them.
Live, however, the band is pure pop metal, and gloriously so.
Its key assets are the very ones that make rock's "hypocrites of modesty" uncomfortable: bold showmanship and sensual pride.


Gentle Voice, Roses, a Smile: West Side Misses Shy Victim
In all the tales of sudden death in New York, there are always the salient facts: the strange, sad circumstances of the final encounter, the grim details of weapons and wounds, the history of a life tragically cut short.
There are such facts about the life and death of Aurea Bonnie Vargas.
She grew up in a small town in Puerto Rico.
She attended schools there and in New York.
She became a bilingual teacher of handicapped children.
She was 41 years old, unmarried and living at 202 Riverside Drive on the Upper West Side.
And she was killed last Friday when she stepped from her door, was seized by a fleeing bank robber and was shot through the heart in a hail of police bullets.


Review/Music; The Past As Enemy And Totem
Any composer begins by choosing a past, a series of masterworks to be overturned or imitated or studied.
But Luciano Berio has chosen a peculiar relationship to tradition, as could be heard on Friday night, when Dennis Russell Davies led the Brooklyn Philharmonic Orchestra at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in an impressively played concert devoted to Mr.
Berio's music.
The concert, which was repeated on Saturday night, suggested how much Mr.
Berio's avant-garde stance, during more than three decades of composition, has involved wrestling with the past, both in rejecting it and in absorbing it.
Often, the past is something definitely to avoid.
Mr.
Berio was attracted to the experimental music of the 1950's and was a pioneer of electronic music.
Then he produced works like "Sinfonia," whose subject was the countercultural politics of the 1960s.
He pushed solo instruments to their limits in a series of numbered works, each titled "Sequenza," and has combined rigorous musical construction with dramatic textual settings.
Mr.
Berio, who has taught at Juilliard and has been an influential participant in Ircam, Pierre Boulez's research institute for new music in Paris, has written music that is aggressive, distinctive and difficult to like.
He has often gone out of his way to write in a perpetual present rather than a traditional past, his eyes focused on "advanced" technique.


Turning a new page, Playboy takes up the fight against AIDS.
THEY say that only a President like Richard M. Nixon, known for his staunch anti-Communism, could have pursued rapprochement with Communist China.
Perhaps, then, only a men's magazine like Playboy, known for its strong heterosexual orientation, could become so intimately involved in the fight against AIDS.
Beginning with this month's issue, Playboy is undertaking what is being described as the most extensive effort by a men's magazine to support the Design Industries Foundation for AIDS, known as Diffa, which has raised more than $10 million for AIDS awareness, education and prevention since 1984.
Though its value is difficult to estimate, Playboy's contribution, which includes future fund-raising and in-kind contributions like employees' time and services, could eventually reach seven figures.


In Somalia, Now It's the U.N.'s Turn
In just two months, American forces have nearly completed their assigned mission of providing desperate Somalis with emergency humanitarian relief.
The tasks ahead are best handled by the United Nations, not the United States alone.
Yet U.N. authorities have shown extreme reluctance to take charge.
The Clinton Administration's hopes for a U.N.-based, collective-security foreign policy won't get very far unless the U.N. can be persuaded to play a more active role, in Somalia and elsewhere.
That's the challenge facing Secretary of State Warren Christopher in today's meeting with U.N.
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali.


Man Arrested in Abduction Of Boy Who Is Found Safe
Authorities in Monmouth County, N.J., are holding a man in the abduction Friday afternoon of a 10-year-old Keyport boy who was left hogtied in the woods less than a mile from his home.
The incident came less than three weeks after the discovery of the horrifying ordeal of 10-year-old Katie Beers on Long Island.
She was abducted and confined for 16 days in a bunker beneath the home of a family friend.
The friend, John Esposito, who first reported the girl's disappearance on Dec. 28, has been charged with kidnapping.


Perfection in a Hot Dog Is Found in a Drive-In
PETER Gonda and Ford Macieski have been eating hot dogs together for 45 years, and they figure just about all of them have been eaten at Rawley's, a drive-in right out of a Norman Rockwell painting.
"Things haven't changed here much since we started coming in the late 40's," said Mr.
Macieski, of Westport, as he sat in one of the four booths in the back room.
"They made the best hot dogs then, and they make even better ones now."


Fitness Clubs Vie for Market Share
When Marc Tascher looked out the window of one of his New York Sports Clubs the other day, the fine skyline view was not what captured his attention.
Mr.
Tascher, the chairman of New York City's largest chain of health clubs, pointed to a sleek skyscraper a block away and began to criticize what occupies its basement.
"I don't like their business style," he said of the Vertical Club, which is owned by the Bally Manufacturing Corporation and is one of his toughest competitors.
"It's a very hard-sell, aggressive style."


Dr. Diana B. Clark, 56, Educator And Authority on Dyslexia, Dies
Diana Brewster Clark, an educator and an authority on dyslexia, died at her home in Manhattan on Sunday.
She was 56.
Her daughter, Elise S. Pettus of Manhattan, said the cause of death was uterine cancer.


Cleveland-Cliffs reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mutual Funds Continue To Grow at Rapid Pace
American investors continued to pour cash into mutual funds last month, getting 1993 off to a fast start following a record year for the industry, fund managers said yesterday.
Stock funds and municipal bond funds were especially strong in January.
"This is the best month in the history of the firm," Chrissy Snyder, a spokeswoman for the Janus Group, said of January's cash inflow.
T.
Rowe Price and the Vanguard Group were among the other fund groups that said last month was their best ever.


Teen-Ager Shot to Death At a School
One teen-ager was shot to death and another wounded by a third youth after an argument on the grounds of Amityville High School this afternoon, the Suffolk County police said.
The police later arrested a 17-year old suspect and charged him with murder.
The shooting was the second this year at a high school in Suffolk.


Review/Pop; New Guises for Old Sex Roles In a Quadruple Bill of Hip-Hop
Midway through Bobby Brown's set on Sunday night at Madison Square Garden, a bed ascended on an elevator.
Mr.
Brown was on it, face down and fully clothed, atop a woman in a leotard whose high heels waved in the air; then they rolled over so the woman could writhe astride the singer.
It was only one of the bump-and-grinds in a quadruple-bill concert devoted to come-ons and boasts of prowess.
The aptly titled "Humpin' Around the World" tour includes Mr.
Brown, the Jamaican dancehall rapper Shabba Ranks, the three-woman pop hip-hop group T.L.C. and the singer Mary J. Blige.
The directness of hip-hop has shaken up the way songs talk about sex.
Suave double-entendres are now jostled by single-entendres, and onstage, performers like Mr.
Brown act out blunt connotations of lines like "I will not stop/Till I know you're hot." Perhaps in the era of AIDS, freewheeling sex has become one more fantasy to be acted out by pop stars.
But before Mr.
Brown climbed into his elevator bed, he announced that he was using "protection." Hip-hop has also redrawn old sex roles with new wardrobes but surprisingly little change: men conquer and brag, and women acquiesce while they look for "real love." "T.L.C. stands up for the ladies," a member announced, but then the group sang "Ain't 2 Proud 2 Beg."


Bracknell Corp. reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


Police Pull Abandoned Infant From a Trash Bin
Two police officers found a nearly naked baby boy, badly beaten, not breathing and abandoned at the bottom of a trash bin near Newark's Penn Station last night -- the coldest of the winter -- and brought him to a nearby hospital, where officials said he had a good chance of surviving.
The infant, who was not identified, was estimated to be less than a month old.
A witness told the police the baby was beaten and thrown into the trash receptacle by a woman who immediately fled.


Nets Get Technical, Still Breeze
What's wrong with this picture?
Nets forward Derrick Coleman was holding back his coach, Chuck Daly, who was about to go into orbit, he was so mad about an official's call.
Technical foul, Chuck.


Lucas Gets Honor
JOHN LUCAS, who led the San Antonio Spurs to a 12-2 record and 10 straight victories last month, is the National Basketball Asscosiation's coach of the month for January.
Since Lucas became the team's coach Dec. 18, replacing the dismissed JERRY TARKANIAN, the Spurs are 16-3 and have moved from four and a half games out of first place in the Midwest Division to a half-game behind frontrunning Utah.
Last month's record was the best in San Antonio's history. (AP)


Missouri Senator Won't Seek 4th Term
Senator John C. Danforth, an influential Republican moderate from Missouri, announced today that he would retire rather than seek a fourth term in 1994.
The 56-year-old Mr.
Danforth, an Episcopal priest and a lawyer, said in an interview that he was looking into the possibility of working for the church and might also become associated with a law firm.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday showing the relationships between the currencies of members of the European Community misstated the number of countries that belong to the community.
It is 12.


Russia, Under Inflation Threat, Raises Gas Prices
The Russian Government, faced with troubling new signs of very high inflation, sharply increased the prices for natural gas and telephone calls today as President Boris N. Yeltsin called for national resolve in the face of deprivation and difficulty.
Speaking in a nationwide address on his 62d birthday, Mr.
Yeltsin compared Russia's economic difficulties -- with inflation roaring again at nearly 2 percent a day and food prices up 42 percent in the first three weeks of January -- to some of the darkest times in the fight against Nazi Germany.


Ward Plans Return
Florida State point guard CHARLIE WARD plans to return to the team by mid-month, possibly with his left shoulder in a protective harness.


Cominco Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Colonial Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kulicke &amp; Soffa Industries Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Brutal Day to Live Outdoors


Deepest Wrecks Now Visible to Undersea Cameras
THE inky depths of the oceans are fast becoming transparent to all kinds of professional eyes, opening a new world of discovery as wrecks ancient and modern come to light for the first time.
Lost ships have periodically given up their secrets to the public over the decades, but only when found in shallow water.
With 97 percent of the planet's oceans inaccessible, deep wrecks by definition were beyond the reach of salvors and scientists.


Walt Whitman Made No Secret of Being Gay
To the Editor:
"No Wavering on Gay Soldiers" (editorial, Jan. 20) rightly urges President Clinton to stop wavering on his campaign promise to end the blatant policy of discrimination against lesbian and gays in America's largest employer: the military.


A &amp; W Brands (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dell Computer Reports on S.E.C. Inquiry
The Dell Computer Corporation said today that foreign-exchange trading activities during the last 23 months would have produced a net gain of $1 million if the transactions had been listed each quarter at current market values.
The analysis was announced late today after the Securities and Exchange Commission completed a two-month investigation of Dell's accounting of the trading practices.
Dell officials requested the investigation after a securities analyst at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company suggested that the company might have understated its trading losses.


Miscellany
*
Lenore Cooney, formerly president and chief operating officer at Ogilvy, Adams &amp; Rinehart, New York, and Beth Waters, formerly senior managing director and head of the health-care practice there, opened the Cooney/Waters Group, New York, specializing in public relations for health-care and pharmaceutical clients.


ISRAEL TO RETURN 100 PALESTINIANS IT HAD DEPORTED
Yielding to international pressure and convinced that its relations with the Clinton Administration are at stake, Israel agreed Monday night to send home immediately about 100 of the Palestinians it had deported to Lebanon and to cut the exile period for the remaining 300 in half, to a year.
In return, the Israelis said, they had assurances from the United States that it would block United Nations sanctions, which have been threatened because Israel defied a Security Council resolution demanding that all the deportees be brought back to the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.


Medieval French Music
Les Entreprises Occitanes, a group dedicated to performing the music of southern France from medieval to modern times, will present a program called "Troubadours" on Feb. 28 at 8 P.M. and March 1 at 2 P.M. at the Town School, 540 East 76th Street in Manhattan.
The program is a dramatic presentation of original 12th- and 13th-century French songs, translated and adapted by the ensemble's director, Susan Melvoin.
The musical direction is by Suzy Schwartz.
Admission is free, but donations are suggested.
Information: (212) 222-0803.


Treasury Prices Shrug Off Report
Treasury prices were little changed yesterday, holding up well in the face of another report showing that the economy may be moving spritely into the new year.
The closely watched index of the nation's purchasing managers jumped to 58 percent in January from 55.4 percent in December.
This was the index's highest level since the summer of 1988.


Free Tuition To Be Sought In Bias Suits
It was known, in some headlines last fall, as "the black list," a roster of all black male students at the State University of New York's College at Oneonta, that was supplied to the authorities investigating an attack on an elderly woman who had described her assailant as black.
Now, almost five months later, lawyers representing the 125 students on that list have decided to seek an unusual legal remedy from state and city authorities: permission to designate one family member per student -- or someone from the student's hometown neighborhood -- for free undergraduate tuition at a SUNY institution, provided they meet admissions requirements.


Moving On With a Fond Look Back
THIS morning, I awaken to read my final column before moving on to a different career in a different place.
As the noted philosopher Gonzo of the Muppets put it: "I want to go there. I just don't want to leave here."
My departure may please some readers -- hunters, twice-a-day flossers and the haters of children, pets and old men.
Oh, and the ragers, those folks who measure discourse quality by volume and who believe, with the considerable company of the entire population of Washington, that our fundamental problems can be talked to death.
I've always been attracted to the quieter folk in the back of the crowd, those too busy doing to imagine anyone caring about their story.


Anadarko Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


3 Top Editors and Columnist Leave Post for Daily News
At least three top editors and the columnist Mike McAlary left The New York Post yesterday to work for The Daily News amid growing anger toward the man who aspires to be The Post's next owner.
The moves came as The Post, struggling to remain afloat, took the highly unusual step of offering free classified advertising to people looking for either jobs or employees.
The paper also announced plans to base advertising rates on how successful the sales advertised turned out to be.


A.F.C. Teams, Try Not to Fret: It's Just the N.F.C.'s Time to Reign
Is it just one of those things, a sort of statistical anomaly in which for nine straight years a National Footbal Conference team has won the Super Bowl?
Or has the American Football Conference found itself overmatched and overwhelmed year in and year out by a superior force from a superior conference?


A Test Case: Airplane Wars
THE competition to dominate the world market for commercial aircraft is a textbook example of the very modern clash over subsidies to high-technology industry.
It is one that occupies a prominent place in "Who's Bashing Whom" (Institute for International Economics), the new book by Laura D'Andrea Tyson, President Clinton's chief economic adviser.
Modern jet airframes and engines cost billions of dollars to design.
So, too, do the factories and tools to make them.
But once beyond the tool-up stage, the cost of assembling an extra copy is relatively modest.
So the more planes a single manufacturer builds, the lower will be the average cost and the greater the competitive advantage.


Wachtler Charged in Indictment Detailing Harassment Campaign
Sol Wachtler, New York State's former chief judge, was charged yesterday with extortion and other crimes in a Federal indictment that provided new details of what prosecutors called a 13-month campaign by the judge to threaten a former lover.
The case of Mr.
Wachtler, at the time of his arrest last year one of the most influential judges in the country and a potential candidate for governor, has been watched as a measure of how such a prominent man would be treated by the very system in which he was pre-eminent.


Sliding Value
Shares of Glaxo Holdings Plc, a British holding company for pharmaceutical manufacturers, are down xxx percent since the November presidential election.
There investor worries that U.S. health reforms by the new Clinton Administration will affect U.K. drug companies.
Since Glaxo derives 40 percent of its sales from the U.S. market the concern took the stock to a new 52-week trading low of 19 yesterday.


U.S. Judge in New York Is Called Contender for Attorney General
A Federal district judge in New York City has become a leading candidate for Attorney General, White House and legal sources said tonight.
The judge, Kimba M. Wood, is best known for presiding over the case of Michael R. Milken, the financier from Drexel, Burnham Lambert who was convicted of securities fraud.


Imcera Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Delta Queen Steamboat (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mickey Kantor's Historic Task
When historians take the measure of the Clinton Presidency the verdict might well depend heavily on the performance of Mickey Kantor, the new Trade Representative.
The world is struggling to complete an epic agreement -- the Uruguay Round of international trade talks -- that could add trillions of dollars to the world's economies through increased trade by the end of the decade.
Nothing President Clinton is likely to do to spur economic growth can come close to packing the wallop of a completed trade pact.
Mr.
Kantor's foremost responsibility is to resume and complete the Uruguay Round.
His next responsibility is to put the finishing touches on the North American Free Trade Agreement, known as NAFTA, with Mexico and Canada.
And he needs to fend off protectionist efforts by the automobile, textile, steel and other industries seeking to win in the political marketplace what they could not achieve in the economic marketplace.


2 U.S. Arabs' Kin Deny Israeli Charges
The families of two Arab-Americans from Illinois arrested in Israel denied today that they were involved in politics or terrorist activities.
The Israeli Government said it had arrested Mohammad Jarad, who was visiting the West Bank from Chicago, because he was suspected of involvement in a militant Islamic group in the occupied territories.


Knicks' Slumping Smith Hits Double Figures in Frustration
One of Charles Smith's unlaced Reebok Pumps was nearly out the door and into the bitter wind this afternoon when his presence was requested for a press grilling inside the Knicks' practice gym.
Though it was much warmer indoors, Smith did manage to keep his cool.
If only Smith, at 6 feet 10 inches, could be as nimble at the small forward position as he has been in keeping his frustration from exploding into what would be a destructive feud with the Knicks' coach, Pat Riley.
As the season in which he is facing unrestricted free agency rumbles forward, the arrow on Smith's performance chart continues to be flat, if not altogether down.


Critic's Notebook; Photography Wins Advocates, With a Focus Still to Come
The Guggenheim Museum's announcement in early December that it was establishing a permanent photography collection was simply the latest in a dizzying series of moves by major New York City museums to establish or expand their commitment to photography.
It came little more than a year after an Upper East Side neighbor of the Guggenheim, the Whitney Museum of American Art, formed a committee to begin assembling its own collection of photographs.
Some of the first fruits of the Whitney's efforts, including works by Cindy Sherman, Robert Mapplethorpe, Bruce Nauman and Nan Goldin, are on view at the museum through Feb. 21.


Bundesbank Chief Holds The Line on Rate Policy
The head of Germany's central bank defended the institution's tight-money policies here tonight, and he seemed to indicate that the Bundesbank was not ready to lower interest rates to ease the pressure on Europe's battered monetary system.
Although the remarks by Helmut Schlesinger, the Bundesbank president, were not much different from similar statements he had made in recent months about German monetary policy, they came amid a new round of turmoil in the currency markets and growing doubts about Europe's ability to maintain momentum toward greater economic and political cooperation.
The timing suggested that the Bundesbank remained unwilling to jeopardize its goal of suppressing inflation in Germany -- even if it meant risking a new speculative onslaught against a key currency like the French franc.


Harris B. Hull, 83, An Official at NASA And Retired General
Harris B. Hull, a retired Air Force brigadier general who was a special assistant in five NASA administrations, died Friday at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington.
He was 83 and lived in Bethesda, Md.
His son Robert Archer Hull said the cause of death was a heart attack.


Books of The Times; A Year in an Inspired Black Church in Brooklyn
Upon This Rock
The Miracles of a Black Church
By Samuel Freedman
HarperCollins. 373 pages. $22.50.
Early in "Upon This Rock," Samuel Freedman's fascinating account of a year among the congregation of Saint Paul Community Baptist Church in East New York, Brooklyn, the Rev.
Johnny Ray Young-blood preaches a Christmas sermon updating the Nativity story for a troubled black parish where gang violence is a more pressing concern than Original Sin, and where the Virgin Birth must seem supremely beside the point to pregnant teen-age girls.
In Mr.
Youngblood's revitalized Gospel, Mary is a young unwed mother and Joseph is a good man whose faith never wavers despite the strain of explaining his extraordinary domestic situation to the brothers on the street:


CHRONICLE
JOSEPH A. CALIFANO JR., the former Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare, gave up a lucrative private law practice in Manhattan last year to serve as president and chairman of the Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse at Columbia University, a new nonprofit organization that he hopes will offer the nation's first comprehensive examination of the huge and tragic costs of addiction among young people.
The center, which will examine all aspects of addiction, has begun programs in Memphis, Seattle, Boston, Savannah, Ga., and Bridgeport, Conn.
Next week, Mr.
Califano said yesterday, a sixth program will begin in Newark.
"What we want to do is attack the problem of drugs and addiction across the board," he said, "how they impact on everything, such as homelessness, AIDS, TB, prisons, the court system and worker productivity -- the entire gamut of their destructive effect."


Colombian Bombings Called Retaliation Against Escobar
A group calling itself "Persecuted by Pablo Escobar" said today that it set off three bombs around Medellin on Sunday in retaliation for a car-bombing that killed 21 people in Bogota.
The Government blamed Mr.
Escobar, the Medellin cartel leader who escaped from prison in July, for the Bogota attack on Saturday.


World's Thinnest Wires Reported by Scientists
Scientists at the NEC Corporation have made what they say are the world's thinnest wires, with a diameter the width of several atoms.
The results could one day pave the way for ultrafine electronic circuitry or strong fibrous materials.
The scientists were working with so-called buckytubes, microscopic tubes made of carbon that are related to the more well-known buckyballs.
When exposed to lead under the proper conditions, the ends of the tubes opened up and the lead was sucked inside, just as liquid is sucked into a drinking straw.


Fractured Foot Sidelines Cheeks
Nets guard Maurice Cheeks has suffered a stress fracture in his left foot and, according to team officials, will miss three to six weeks.
But at age 36, Cheeks could conceivably be sidelined for much longer.
It is not known how Cheeks hurt his foot.
He went to the team trainer, Ted Arzonico, after the game against Denver on Friday night and complained of pain.
This morning, he went back to Arzonico.
He was then examined in Dallas by doctors, who determined there was a stress fracture of the fifth metatarsal.


Bridge
Nowadays it is taken for granted that in international competition a team needs a nonplaying captain, whose primary duty is to decide which members of the team should play in a given match.
But that was not always so.
When bridge was revived in Europe after World War II, Britain won three straight European Championship titles under a playing captain.
Filling this difficult role was Maurice Harrison-Gray of London, invariably known as Gray, who was one of the world's great players.
On the diagramed deal from a major British event he held the South cards and was headed for catastrophe.
He could not open one no-trump because the British style was to use that bid as weak when not vulnerable.
He ventured the bid on the next round, rather than passing, after the opponents had each bid a major suit.
North naturally thought that South held a stronger hand with a heart stopper, and raised.
East naturally doubled, and Gray had nowhere to go.


Vision Care for Children Offered by Neediest Cases
Luis Gonzalez is 5 years old, so he is particularly concerned these days with dump trucks and fire engines.
When his mother took him to an optometrist in Harlem the other day, Luis jumped at the chance to race his toys through the office.
He did not quite grasp how important the appointment was to his future.
His mother, Roberta Bryant, did.
Like many parents, she fears that if her son's vision falters, he might have trouble reading or seeing the blackboard and might fall behind in school.
To calm her worries, she took advantage of eye examinations at the Children's Aid Society, one of seven charities supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Morgan Fund To Invest In Banks
J.
P.
Morgan &amp; Company, combining its tradition of bailing out troubled banks with its desire to become an aggressive investment firm, said yesterday that it had raised $1 billion for a fund to invest in commercial banks worldwide.
With money from corporate pension funds and wealthy individuals around the world, the fund, called the Corsair Partnership, is similar to the leveraged buyout funds that were popular in the late 1980's, except that it will focus on the banking industry and buy only minority stakes.
Two Years in the Making
Morgan began to organize the fund in 1990, when several major banks appeared to be near collapse.
The bank's management worried that it would be asked by Federal regulators to bail out failing institutions as it had in years past, said Nicholas B. Paumgarten, a longtime investment banker with the First Boston Company who was hired by Morgan to run the fund.


Sports of The Times; The 'New' Jones Way To Win
AT a rent-a-car office 16 years ago, Jerry Jones handed his credit card to a woman behind the counter.
She checked the card's number, then picked up a pair of scissors and cut the card in half.
"Young man," she said, "you've got to learn to pay your bills."


Prosecutor Questioned in Glen Ridge Case
Defense lawyers in the Glen Ridge sex assault trial turned the second-highest official in the Essex County Prosecutor's office into their own witness today in an effort to impugn the testimony of a police detective in the case.
One trial prosecutor, Glenn D. Goldberg, tried to block the move, accusing defense lawyers of "attempting to take the glare of the spotlight off the defendants and the terrible things the defendants did to the victim."


Hillary Clinton's New Home: Broccoli's In, Smoking's Out
Hillary Rodham Clinton says she and President Clinton hope to open the White House to all Americans.
But they won't let them smoke.
In her first interview since the inauguration, Mrs.
Clinton agreed to speak last Friday only about the traditional duty of the First Lady -- taking care of her household -- and not about her responsibilities for helping shape policy in areas like health care.
And in addition to banning smoking in the White House, she said she and the President want to make people feel more a part of government by opening the Executive Mansion to the public on occasion.


By Design; The Long-Skirt Affair
Last fall, anyone with an ounce of fashion had to have a long skirt.
But visitors in Paris last week for the spring couture shows were struck by the lack of long skirts both on and off the runways.
No sightings were reported of chic young Parisians bustling along the boulevards wearing anything other than above-the-knee lengths.
And two couturiers, Gianni Versace and Yves Saint Laurent, made a point of including mid-thigh styles in their respective collections.
New York store executives checking out the cheap-chic section of the Paris ready-to-wear district found only the shortest skirts for sale.


Man in the News; Theologian as Educator: George Erik Rupp
George Rupp has always seemed to be a man in a hurry.
When he was a teen-ager, he collaborated with three others to build houses in New Jersey.
The four of them could frame a house in two weeks.
He has been moving fast ever since.
He became the dean of the Harvard Divinity School at the age of 37, president of Rice University at 42 and now president of Columbia University at 50.


Transactions
Football  National Football League
NFL -- Named Philadelphia wide receiver Fred Barnett to the NFC Pro Bowl team.
Baseball  American League
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Agreed to terms with Mike Schooler, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
National League
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Agreed to terms with Walt Weiss, shortstop, on a one-year contract.
NEW YORK METS -- Signed Mark Dewey, pitcher, and Tito Navarro, infielder to one-year contracts.
Signed John Cerutti, pitcher, to a minor-league contract.


Grace H. Mack, 91, A Horticulturalist
Grace Hayward Mack, a horticulturalist known for her work in hybridizing chrysanthemums, died on Friday at her home in New Canaan, Conn.
She was 91 years old.
Her family said the cause of death was heart failure.


William Carter Awards Account
The William Carter Company, a maker of infant and children's clothing, said yesterday that it had selected Tucker Wayne/Luckie &amp; Company in Atlanta to handle its account.
The decision followed a review that involved seven other agencies, including Ingalls, Quinn &amp; Johnson in Boston, which was Carter's agency before the clothing company changed ownershop.
Frederick J. Rowan 2d, president and chief executive at Carter in Morrow, Ga., said the company planned to spend $4 million on advertising this year, compared with $1 million last year.


Deepest Wrecks Now Visible to Undersea Cameras
THE inky depths of the oceans are fast becoming transparent to all kinds of professional eyes, opening a new world of discovery as wrecks ancient and modern come to light for the first time.
Lost ships have periodically given up their secrets to the public over the decades, but only when found in shallow water.
With 97 percent of the planet's oceans inaccessible, deep wrecks by definition were beyond the reach of salvors and scientists.


C.I.A. Error Still Bloats Our Military Budget; Costs vs. Lives
To the Editor:
Opponents of buying additional B-2's or modifying B-1's argue that a recent Government Accounting Office report indicates that our B-52's can fulfil the nuclear role of bombers until the year 2030.
However, the new aircraft and new enhancements are not only required for their nuclear role but are also vital to maintaining an adequate conventional deterrent.


Touring Windows, Inside and Out
FOR getting a technician's-eye view of a Windows-based computer, Winsleuth Gold is indispensable.
This utility, now in its third incarnation, analyzes, diagnoses and teaches about the machine in unrelenting detail.
The program provides information about the system as a whole, as well as its components: disks, video, ports, memory.
It can also test many of these devices.
The opening screen on the box on which I have installed it shows an illustration of a generic computer and the basic system information of this specific machine: 80386 CPU, with no coprocessor; 640 kilobytes of base memory, 3,456K extended, and details of expansion devices, keyboard, primary video system and disk drives.
It is all there in easy-to-read chart form.


PRESIDENT ALLOWS STATES FLEXIBILITY ON MEDICAID FUNDS
President Clinton today ordered the Federal Government to make it easier for states to use Medicaid funds to introduce new health-care programs for the poor.
His goal is to add much greater flexibility to a health-care system often constrained by Federal regulations.
The red tape Mr.
Clinton seeks to loosen has hindered states seeking to experiment and innovate, making it difficult, for example, to take money earmarked for nursing-home care or for care in state mental institutions and spend it instead on home care for the same patients.
Many patients prefer to be treated at home, and such care is usually less expensive.
Chance to Tailor Programs
Mr.
Clinton obtained approval for such a shift in spending when he was Governor of Arkansas.


Lindros Gets Set
ERIC LINDROS will practice full-scale with the Philadelphia Flyers today, the first time he will have done so since he reinjured his left knee.
Lindros skated Sunday and yesterday at the team's rink in Voorhees, N.J.
But he will miss tomorrow night's game against the Rangers at Madison Square Garden, Coach BILL DINEEN said.


Russia, Under Inflation Threat, Raises Gas Prices
The Russian Government, faced with troubling new signs of very high inflation, sharply increased the prices for natural gas and telephone calls today as President Boris N. Yeltsin called for national resolve in the face of deprivation and difficulty.
Speaking in a nationwide address on his 62d birthday, Mr.
Yeltsin compared Russia's economic difficulties -- with inflation roaring again at nearly 2 percent a day and food prices up 42 percent in the first three weeks of January -- to some of the darkest times in the fight against Nazi Germany.


Corrections
The $25 and Under column in Weekend on Jan. 22 referred incorrectly to the owners of the restaurant Lanza in the East Village.
They are Anthony Macagnone and his sons, Anthony Jr. and William.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the budget for American intelligence organizations referred incorrectly to the military background of R. James Woolsey, President Clinton's nominee for Director of Central Intelligence.
Mr.
Woolsey, a former Army lieutenant, was Under Secretary of the Navy; he is not a retired admiral.


Rackets Trial for Gambino Brothers Opens
Two brothers, John and Joseph Gambino, were portrayed by the prosecution at the opening of their racketeering trial yesterday as the main distributors of heroin smuggled into the United States by the Sicilian Mafia.
The prosecution said it would present sweeping evidence about millions of dollars of Mafia drug trafficking from Italy and South America to Miami and New York, with evidence of violence and murders on both sides of the Atlantic.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.  Jordan Rallies Bulls
Michael Jordan scored 20 of his 37 points in the fourth quarter last night, rallying the Chicago Bulls from a 20-point deficit to a 96-92 victory over the Utah Jazz in Salt Lake City.
The Bulls avoided their first three-game skid since the start of the 1990-91 season.
Utah was led by Karl Malone, who had 40 points and 9 rebounds.
With Utah ahead by 10 points with 5 minutes 46 seconds to play, the Bulls scored 12 of the next 14 -- with Jordan hitting five straight baskets -- to tie the score at 87-87 with 2:16 remaining.
B.
J.
Armstrong's 3-pointer with 53 seconds to play gave Chicago the lead for good. (AP) N.H.L.
Senators Tie Jets
Laurie Boschman scored on a penalty shot in the third period as the Ottawa Senators rallied from a three-goal deficit at home last night, tying the Winnipeg Jets.
After being dragged down by defenseman Sergei Bautin on a breakaway, Boschman scored on the penalty shot by beating Mike O'Neill at 5:31. (AP)


Cincinnati Survives An Ambush
Cincinnati 74, Miami of Ohio 68
OXFORD, Ohio, Feb. 1 (AP) -- Nick Van Exel tied the score in regulation with a layup, then scored 9 points in overtime as No. 4 Cincinnati rallied from an 11-point second-half deficit to beat Miami of Ohio, 74-68, tonight.
Cincinnati (16-1) won its 13th straight game, the longest current streak in Division I, despite trailing most of the game.
Van Exel's layup tied the score at 54-54 with 48 seconds to play, and Miami of Ohio (10-5) turned the ball over with four seconds left, sending the game into overtime.


Dolphins' Humphrey Arrested for Drugs
Miami Dolphins running back BOBBY HUMPHREY was free on bond yesterday after being charged with possession of cocaine and aggravated assault.
But after his arrest, police sought to re-arrest him for giving a false identity.
Humphrey was arrested early Sunday in a Columbus, Ga., hotel room, said Columbus police Maj.
ROBERT MATTHEWS.


Corrections
A picture caption on the first sports page yesterday about a touchdown-saving tackle of the Buffalo Bills' Kenneth Davis reversed the identities of the two Dallas Cowboys shown.
James Washington was in the center, and Ken Norton Jr. at the right.


Judge Delays Move to 'Uncluster' White Pupils at Richmond School
After being ordered by the Richmond schools superintendent to redistribute white pupils among predominantly black classrooms starting today, the principal of Bellevue Model Elementary School received a court order this afternoon to halt the reassignments until a hearing on Wednesday.
The school attracted attention in December when the parents of a black student complained to the Richmond School Board that white students -- about 12 percent of Bellevue's 452 pupils -- were being "clustered" together in one classroom for each grade, while other classrooms remained all black.


Brush Wellman reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


TV Notes; 2 Mormon Stations Drop 'Picket Fences'
Two CBS affiliates have told the network they will no longer broadcast the Friday-night drama "Picket Fences" because of objections to the show's content.
The stations, KSL-TV in Salt Lake City and KIRO-TV in Seattle, are managed by Bonneville International Broadcasting, a company owned by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, also known as the Mormon Church.
The stations first pre-empted the show on Jan. 22 because their station managers objected to the content of that episode, in which a Mormon character used polygamy as a defense in a legal case.


Police Officer Suspended
A New York City police officer was suspended from duty Sunday night because he was unavailable for questioning about a complaint that he had raped a former girlfriend, the police said.
The officer, Dwight A. Nicholas, is alleged by the woman to have raped her at gunpoint Saturday night while he was off-duty, said Suzanne Trazoff, a police spokeswoman.
Mr.
Nicholas, who is assigned to the 32d Precinct in Harlem, is being sought for questioning, and was suspended when detectives from the department's Internal Affairs Bureau could not locate him Sunday for questioning, the police said.


Advertising
FOR all the blather about the Super Bowl being football -- and advertising -- at their finest, one might have looked to the baseball philosopher Yogi Berra to best characterize the commercials broadcast during Super Bowl XXVII: it was deja vu all over again, again.
A losing effort by the Buffalo Bills was not the only familiar element for the estimated 120 million viewers Sunday.
In the 43 extravagant commercials that were interrupted by the game, eye-catching originality and unconventional creativity were as scarce as astronomers who can locate the mysterious Planet Reebok.


ChipSoft Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BEI Electronics Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


In a Surprise, Oldsmobile Retains Burnett
The Oldsmobile division of the General Motors Corporation said yesterday that it would retain Leo Burnett U.S.A. in Chicago as the agency for its estimated $140 million account
The decision was considered a surprise conclusion to a five-month review of the account, which involved 15 agencies and was believed to be the first ever on one of G. M.'s flagship automotive brands.
It was also the first time in two years that a review on an automotive account ended with a victory for the incumbent.


Cambridge Edges Out Chicago
In the realm of economics, the arrival of President Clinton means that the liberals from Cambridge have been anointed and the conservatives from Chicago have been banished.
In making several sages with M.I.T. doctorates the new suzerains of economic affairs, the Clinton Administration has endorsed the Cambridge school's prevailing view that government has a powerful role to play in building a stronger economy.


Purchasing Managers Find Economy Is Gaining Ground
American manufacturers virtually roared into 1993, according to a report yesterday that was the first solid data on the economy's momentum so far this year.
The closely watched purchasing managers' index, a measure of a half-dozen aspects of manufacturing, jumped from 55.4 percent in December to 58 percent in January, its highest level since the summer of 1988, the economy's last really good year.


One Down, One to Go for A.P. Indy in Eclipses
A.P.
Indy, the horse who was scratched from the Kentucky Derby on the morning of the race last May, carried his comeback to new peaks yesterday when he won the Eclipse Award as the best 3-year-old colt in North America.
And he is considered an almost sure bet to crown his career Friday by winning the ultimate award as Horse of the Year.
The colt, the regally bred son of Seattle Slew and grandson of Secretariat, won by a landslide over Lil E. Tee, who won the Kentucky Derby as a long shot outsider but was injured later and did not race in the second half of the year.


Port-au-Prince Journal; In Hiding in Haiti, Dissident Despairs of U.S. Help
More than four months after his imprisonment and repeated beatings by soldiers in Dame-Marie, a tiny town at the end of Haiti's southern peninsula, Ferleau says his ears still run sometimes with the cloudy liquid that began oozing from them once the bleeding stopped.
Since November, Ferleau, a slight 27-year-old guitarist, a player of "musique engagee," or politically inspired songs, has been in hiding in the capital, Port-au-Prince, too afraid for his life to return home.
Although he gave a reporter his real name, he asked that his last name not be used and his face not be shown.


Upjohn's Chief Getting Treatments for Cancer
The Upjohn Company said yesterday that Dr.
Theodore Cooper, a physician and scientist who has headed the diversified health-care company since 1987, has been undergoing treatment for bone marrow cancer.
Upjohn said that the cancer, being treated at the University of Virginia Health Sciences Center at Charlottesville, was at an early stage and that it had not affected Dr.
Cooper's ability to function as chairman and chief executive.
Dr.
Mark Novitch, a physician who is Upjohn's vice chairman, said Dr.
Cooper has been telephoning the company's headquarters in Kalamazoo, Mich., many times a day.


Accounting Scandal at Leslie Fay
The Leslie Fay Companies, one of the largest publicly traded apparel manufacturers in the country, stunned Wall Street yesterday with the announcement that it had discovered accounting irregularities that might erase last year's profits, once its books were corrected.
The company suspended Donald F. Kenia, its corporate controller, and asked its audit committee, made up of outside directors, to review the company's records.
It has also retained the law firm of Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges to handle any shareholder lawsuits that may arise.


Redmen Play Some Hardball
A coach may tell you that a victory is a victory, but don't believe it.
Some ring more deeply than others, and in the Big East, a victory over Georgetown, no matter where or when, is significant.
Particularly if you are Brian Mahoney, a first-year coach out to put an imprint on an established program.
Last night, Mahoney saw his surprising St.
John's team turn in its most inspiring effort.
The Redmen struggled early, then used muscle and pinpoint shooting to hand the Hoyas a 79-61 defeat before 11,690 at Madison Square Garden.


Delmarva Power &amp; Light Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rich Bond -- Right, but Late
Richard Bond did not go gently into retirement.
His swan song as chairman of the Republican National Committee criticized his party's rightward drift in general and its opposition to abortion in particular.
His words, while true, would have carried a lot more credibility had he not waited until he was going out the door to utter them.
Where was Mr.
Bond at the Republican Convention last August, when he might have used his influence to mute the demagoguery that wrong-footed George Bush's campaign from the start?
Mr.
Bond now says he tried to deny Patrick Buchanan his disastrous half-hour of prime time.
Yet Mr.
Bond also spent his time in Houston justifying the proceedings.
"We are America," he told one reporter.
"These other people are not America."


ANTI-WOMAN BIAS MAY BRING ASYLUM
Canada has announced that it will consider granting refugee status to women who are persecuted because of their sex.
In connection with what is seen here as a landmark change in Canada's immigration rules, the Government said on Friday that it had given permission for a Saudi woman to remain in Canada after she said she would be in grave danger if she returned to Saudi Arabia because of her views on the status of women there.


Environmental Elements reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


2 U.S. Arabs' Kin Deny Israeli Charges
The families of two Arab-Americans from Illinois arrested in Israel denied today that they were involved in politics or terrorist activities.
The Israeli Government said it had arrested Mohammad Jarad, who was visiting the West Bank from Chicago, because he was suspected of involvement in a militant Islamic group in the occupied territories.


The President and America's Children
With a dramatic proposal that champions America's youngest, most vulnerable citizens, the Clinton Administration would re-establish values lost during 12 years in which "getting the Government off people's backs" really meant cutting social services till it hurt.
The Administration's plan to provide free vaccinations for all youngsters would put childhood immunization on a par with clean water and a public school education -- something government guarantees to every child, rich, poor and in between.
That's a laudable goal, with as much appeal for the head as for the heart.


Boole &amp; Babbage Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Critic's Notebook; Photography Wins Advocates, With a Focus Still to Come
The Guggenheim Museum's announcement in early December that it was establishing a permanent photography collection was simply the latest in a dizzying series of moves by major New York City museums to establish or expand their commitment to photography.
It came little more than a year after an Upper East Side neighbor of the Guggenheim, the Whitney Museum of American Art, formed a committee to begin assembling its own collection of photographs.
Some of the first fruits of the Whitney's efforts, including works by Cindy Sherman, Robert Mapplethorpe, Bruce Nauman and Nan Goldin, are on view at the museum through Feb. 21.


U.S. Judge in New York Is Called Contender for Attorney General
A Federal district judge in New York City has become a leading candidate for Attorney General, White House and legal sources said tonight.
The judge, Kimba M. Wood, is best known for presiding over the case of Michael R. Milken, the financier from Drexel, Burnham Lambert who was convicted of securities fraud.


Classical Music in Review
Yale Music Spectrum  Merkin Concert Hall
Debussy left the revolutionary statements to other composers, but his last sonatas, along with "Jeux" and the piano Etudes, present in their quiet, almost lonely way the best the 20th century has had to offer.
I don't think I had ever before heard all three sonatas together in concert, but that admirable series, the Yale Music Spectrum, played them back to back on Saturday night.


Wachtler Charged in Indictment Detailing Harassment Campaign
Sol Wachtler, New York State's former chief judge, was charged yesterday with extortion and other crimes in a Federal indictment that provided new details of what prosecutors called a 13-month campaign by the judge to threaten a former lover.
The case of Mr.
Wachtler, at the time of his arrest last year one of the most influential judges in the country and a potential candidate for governor, has been watched as a measure of how such a prominent man would be treated by the very system in which he was pre-eminent.


Q&amp;A
L-Sugars, D-Sugars
Q.
I remember hearing a few years back about a sugar substitute that was molecularly the opposite of regular sugar so that it could not be absorbed by the body.
What happened to it?


COMPANY NEWS;
Acknowledging that it faces monumental expenses during the next 20 years for retiree health-care benefits, the General Motors Corporation said yesterday that it was taking a $20.8 billion after-tax charge against 1992 earnings.
The accounting adjustment means that G.M. will post a net loss of about $23.5 billion for 1992, far exceeding the American corporate record loss of $4.97 billion that I.B.M. set just last week.
On a positive note, G.M. also said yesterday that recent efforts to control operating costs in its troubled North American automotive business were apparently working.
"We continue to be encouraged by recent trends in our North American operations," G. Richard Wagoner, the chief financial officer, said in a statement.


Suspension Is Expected For Schott
The major league executive council is scheduled to meet in Chicago tomorrow to complete its deliberation on Marge Schott and take action that is virtually certain to result in baseball's next court case.
Amid published reports that Schott, the owner of the Cincinnati Reds, would be suspended for a year, Bud Selig, chairman of the executive council, said: "No decision has been reached. That's why we're having a council meeting Wednesday."


Get Ready, Get Set, File!
TODAY is Groundhog Day, but it is also the unofficial start of income tax preparation season.
The final versions of the major 1992 Federal income tax preparation programs have arrived in the stores. (If the groundhog emerges from his burrow today and sees the shadow of an Internal Revenue Service agent, winter will last until April 15.)
Just as the groundhog's fame is fleeting (What does he do the other 364 days of the year?) so, too, is the attention brief for personal computer tax programs.
Anonymous programmers race all year to add new features to make tax preparation easier, all for a program that has at most 10 weeks of optimum use.


INSIDE
Strong Showing by Factories
American manufacturers virtually roared into 1993, according to the first solid data on the economy's momentum so far this year.
Page D1.
M.I.T.
Economists Take Over
Under President Clinton, liberal economists from M.I.T. are supplanting conservatives from the University of Chicago.
Page D1.
A Refugee From Sex Bias
Canada is considering granting refugee status to women who are persecuted because of their sex.
Page A8.
Effects of Cellular Phones
Scientists do not believe cellular phones harm health, but seek more studies.
Science Times, page C1.


Julia Davis Adams, 92, West Virginia Writer
Julia Davis Adams, a writer, died Saturday at Jefferson Memorial Hospital in Ranson, W. Va.
She lived in Charles Town, W. Va., and was 92.
Her family attributed her death to natural causes.


What's Next? Try Bo the Bionic Man
From Birmingham, Ala., to Kansas City, to Chicago, it has always been different, this thing called the Bo Show.
And now more than ever, the saga of Bo Jackson is more discomfiting and compelling.
Discomfiting because Jackson, once able to defy logic by playing two professional sports, is trying once more to shatter all boundaries for a world-class athlete by trying to play for the Chicago White Sox again despite having a metal and plastic implant where his left hip used to be.
A foreign object within a foreign object, wryly observes Jackson, a man used to being looked upon and marketed as an odd, most uncanny athlete.


Chess
Nigel Short has won the right to battle Gary Kasparov for the world title.
By winning Game 12 on Thursday and making a draw in Game 13 on Saturday, the 28-year-old English grandmaster defeated the 41-year-old Dutch grandmaster Jan Timman in their final match for world championship candidates in San Lorenzo de El Escorial, Spain.
Short's 7 1/2-5 1/2 score in the series also got him the $124,000 winner's prize.
And it virtually assured him of more than an additional million dollars, which even the loser in the title contest can reasonably look forward to. (The 24-game championship match, supposed to begin sometime in August, doesn't yet have a sponsor or a site.) Timman was awarded $76,000 for reaching the challenger's finals.


Avemco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CAMBODIA ATTACKS THE KHMER ROUGE
The Cambodian Government has mounted its largest military offensive since United Nations peacekeepers arrived here in 1991 and is threatening to overrun a Khmer Rouge rebel stronghold in western Cambodia, United Nations military observers said today.
United Nations officials condemned the offensive, which they described as a clear violation of cease-fire agreements binding the Government and three rebel groups.
The United Nations warned that the fighting could disrupt planning for internationally supervised elections under the treaty the four parties signed in 1991.


In a Memoir Criticizing Bush, Shultz's Timing Is Questioned
George P. Shultz's assertions in a forthcoming book that George Bush carefully sought to blur his role in the Reagan Administration's arm-for-hostages deals with Iran provide the most authoritative challenge yet to the former President's account that his knowledge of the arms-for-hostages deals was hazy and incomplete.
But while the assertions in an excerpt from the book published this week in Time magazine raise new questions about Mr.
Bush's role, they also raise questions about Mr.
Shultz's timing and motives.
It had long been known that Mr.
Shultz was writing a book about his service as Secretary of State in the Reagan Administration, and his chapter on the Iran-contra affair was long rumored to contain sizzling assertions about his associates, including Mr.
Bush, then the Vice President.


Super Bowl Replay


Croatian Is Unjustly Called Anti-Semitic
To the Editor:
I respond as official translator of "Wilderness of Historical Reality" by President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia to the accusations made by David Harris, vice president of the American Jewish Committee (letter, Jan. 10).
To make President Tudjman appear anti-Semitic Mr.
Harris attributes four statements to him, three not made by him and one that was taken out of an unrelated context.


Wannstedt Going, His Defense Staying
The four-year association of Dave Wannstedt and the Dallas Cowboys ended today, but the legacy and the aggressive defense that helped lift the Cowboys to a Super Bowl victory will live on.
A day after the Cowboys' 52-17 rout of the Buffalo Bills, keyed by nine turnovers created by the Cowboys' defense, Wannstedt flew back to Dallas with the team.
Then he ceased being the Cowboys' assistant head coach and defensive coordinator and began working at his new job as the head coach of the Chicago Bears.


J. Thompson Ruger, Firearms Executive, 48
J.
Thompson Ruger, an executive of Sturm, Ruger &amp; Company, a manufacturer of firearms, died on Sunday at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 48 and lived in Bedford, N.Y.
The cause of death was leukemia, said his wife, Hedi Kravis Ruger.


Their Lives Consumed, Officers Await 2d Trial
Three little girls were playing tag in the living room, a small white dog was barking happily and Sgt.
Stacey C. Koon, who goes on trial on Wednesday in the country's most celebrated police-brutality case, was rolling around on the rug, demonstrating the actions of the man who was beaten, Rodney G. King.
He had just narrated for a visitor the videotape of the March 3, 1991, beating on his large-screen television set, eager to explain, to justify, to defend each baton blow, and he was gripped again by the excitement that overcomes him when he is making his case.


FirstFed Michigan (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Governors Praise Ex-Colleague in the White House
President Clinton spent 12 years building good will with the nation's governors, and today they went to work to pay him back.
Clearly pleased to have one of their own back in the White House, the governors were not as quick as many members of Congress or the news media to write off his first days in office.
They were encouraged, both Democrats and Republicans said, by Mr.
Clinton's announcement today that the Administration will give them greater leeway on health care.


Observer; Sarsa-Pa-What?
Washington is tough.
Washington reporters who infest the weekend TV gab shows kept saying it.
"A tough town." You could sense their pride in that toughness.
That tough town was their town, they had flourished in it, which showed they were tough too: a tough crowd who had risen to the top in a tough town.
New Yorkers sometimes sound like this, also Los Angeles people in the movie business.
Tough town, that New York.
Tough business, those movies.
Talking of the toughness is a way of thumping their chests.
Washingtonians are more likely to thump their noses, for down there "hard-nosed" is a term of praise.


Patterns
A Chance to Crow
Donna Karan should be kvelling.
Her "cold shoulder" black dress finally made it to the White House.


Detective Tennison Develops A Swagger
Helen Mirren is looking pretty tough, standing with one foot forward, arms folded, jaw jutting aggressively.
This, she explains, is the no-nonsense, authority-packed pose she originally envisioned for Jane Tennison, the gritty and ambitious chief detective she plays in "Prime Suspect," a second series of which begins on Feb. 11.
She looks intimidating.
And, she says, all wrong.
"A London policewoman told me: 'Never fold your arms; it's a defensive position. We always keep our arms open,' " Ms.
Mirren said in an interview during a recent visit to New York City.
She threw her arms straight down, palms slightly out, the Tennison way.
"Never fold your arms," she said, "and never cry."


CHRONICLE
The inaugural extravaganzas of two weeks ago would appear to be a hard act to follow in Washington.
But 25 years as a resident theater is a long run in any town, and the city's political, corporate and social luminaries plan to turn out tonight at the Washington Hilton to honor FRANKIE HEWITT, the founding producer and director of Ford's Theater.
MARK RUSSELL, who has made his career satirizing Presidents, will take up where he left off at the inaugural festivities and be the master of ceremonies.


High-Tech Industry Is Hard to Help
Is Washington about to make a grand splash in aid of commercial innovation? Bet on it.
The Bush Administration stuck its toe in the waters, offering modest technology grants through the Commerce Department and encouraging Federal laboratories to strike deals for cooperative research with private concerns.
But President Clinton seems determined to plunge, and there is little opposition in Congress to the notion that the Government should put more money behind projects that generate high-technology exports and high-paying jobs.


Hope Left Behind in Somalia By Disillusioned U.S. Marines
If there was an unspoken vision shared by the American military men and women who began arriving here in December, it was probably this: nursing a starving Somali child back to health under a grateful mother's gaze.
But as nearly 500 United States marines climbed aboard their flight out today after a month dodging snipers and stones, hope had given way to disillusion.
"I figured they would be happy to see us come here to help them," said Staff Sgt.
Jeffrey Johnson, who had volunteered for Somalia duty.
"But some of them didn't want us to help."


Buffalo Should Do Itself a Favor and Copy Dallas
The view from the top is a mighty pretty sight for the Dallas Cowboys.
For the Buffalo Bills, peering up from the bottom of the barrel, there is emptiness.
There is darkness.
"We're a good enough football team to get here three consecutive times and not win it once," said Bills linebacker Darryl Talley.
"It's just a crying shame. Hey, you know how mother said there would be days like that."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  ISRAEL BENDS ON DEPORTEES
Yielding to international pressure, Israel said it would immediately take back about 100 of the Palestinians it had deported to Lebanon and would halve the exile period for the remaining 300.
In return, it sought guarantees that the United States would protect it from calls for United Nations sanctions.
A1  FAMILIES DENY TERRORIST LINK
The families of two Arab-Americans from the Chicago area who were arrested in Israel denied they were involved in politics.
A8


Classical Music in Review
Pamela Frankand Ignat Solzhenitsyn  Violinist and Pianist The New School
Pamela Frank, a violinist, and Ignat Solzhenitsyn, a pianist, played a fairly heady program on Sunday afternoon.
In it, modernists of different stripes (Prokofiev and Webern) were surrounded by Romantics (Dvorak and Strauss).
More striking than the program itself, though, was that Ms.
Frank and Mr.
Solzhenitsyn played it as collaborators rather than as soloist and accompanist.


White House Memo; President's Early Troubles Rooted in Party's Old Strains
When Bill Clinton was a candidate, his electoral promise was that he could straddle the gulf between populism and elitism, between the concerns of the middle classes that provide the Democratic Party's electoral muscle and those of the more liberal academic theorists who provide its ideology.
But so far, Mr.
Clinton has appeared to embody that struggle rather than resolve it, sending signals late in his transition and in his first two weeks in office that blended the suburban populist concerns of his campaign with the special interests of the party elite.
Seeking a New Focus
With the President's political advisers concerned over the perception thus wrought, the Administration is trying aggressively this week to refocus its image as a Government of broad middle-class interests.


Classical Music in Review
Isabella Lippi Violinist 92d Street Y
That Isabella Lippi can play the violin with such an authentic, joyful technique and at the same time be so oblivious to the history of style is a powerful indictment of higher music education.
Whether the music was a Handel sonata, Faure's Duo Sonata in A or the Bach Chaconne, Ms.
Lippi leapt at it on Thursday evening with hurtling, headlong passion, impromptu inspiration replacing any thought for shape, development and pace.
In Bach and Handel, soft lurched to loud in midphrase; tempos accelerated just as suddenly.
Ms.
Lippi seems more heedless than inherently without taste.
She does not make bad interpretive decisions; she makes no decisions at all.


Japanese Company Is Sued By I.B.M. Over Copyrights
I.B.M. filed a $150 million lawsuit today against the Kyocera Corporation, accusing the Japanese company of infringing copyrights on basic software used in personal computers.
The International Business Machines Corporation has filed similar suits against other personal computer companies, but this is the first against a Japanese company.
And the damages that the lawsuit seeks are unusually large.


Executive Changes
DOMINO'S PIZZA INC., Ann Arbor, Mich., named Lawrence Gordon chief operating officer.
GOODY PRODUCTS INC., Kearny, N.J., a manufacturer of hair accessories, appointed Robert L. Euritt senior vice president of human resources.


Opening Day for N.H.L.'s First Commissioner
The first week of the shortest month of the year offers professional hockey a rare share of the American sports spotlight.
Football is finally finished, and the baseball players won't report for spring training for another couple of weeks.
The sports news media poke their collective heads above ground, see Charles Barkley's shadow and realize there are six more weeks of college basketball until the Final Four.
So the stage was set yesterday at National Hockey League headquarters in Manhattan, where Gary Bettman took office as the first commissioner in the league's 76-year history.


Raising the Flag on Black History Month


Aikman's Star Vehicle in Fast Lane
Troy Aikman, urban Cowboy, is about to be marketed like soda pop.
He is 26, has blond hair, sky-blue eyes and lizard-skin boots for every day of the week.
He knows Garth Brooks's phone number, is reading Al Gore's book and can type 80 words a minute.
"Let me tell you what Troy is," said his agent, Leigh Steinberg, who packs an Aikman advertising portfolio.
"He's about 25 percent Los Angeles surfer and about 75 percent Oklahoman-Texan Cowboy."


Attention: Challenger Is Dokes, Not Lewis
It is Michael Dokes who will step into the ring Saturday night at Madison Square Garden and fight for Riddick Bowe's heavyweight title, but the question that Rock Newman, the champion's manager, can't seem to avoid is this: Why isn't it Lennox Lewis who will be meeting Bowe?
Because boxing is a sport that doesn't always yield to logic, the bout between Bowe and Dokes seems to fall considerably short of epic.


Neal Steinman, 50, Public Finance Expert
Neal Steinman, a lawyer and expert in public finance, died on Thursday in a Philadelphia hospital.
He was 50 and lived in Philadelphia.
David F. Girard-diCarlo, a colleague, said the cause of death was cancer.


METROPOLITAN COLLEGE REPORT
Fordham
The Rams are slowly coming alive, and it couldn't happen at a better time.
Fordham, 8-12 over all and 5-2 in the Patriot League, is host to the conference leader, Holy Cross, tomorrow night, and to second-place Bucknell on Saturday.
Fordham is two games behind Holy Cross, which is 7-0 in the Patriot, and a game behind the Bison, who are 6-1.
Bucknell's lone loss came Saturday at Holy Cross (88-86).


Ex-Im Bank Chief Picked
President Clinton today nominated Kenneth D. Brody, an investment banker and limited partner at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, to become the chairman of the Export-Import Bank of the United States.
The Ex-Im Bank, as it is popularly known, helps American exporters by providing insurance for their sales and by lending money to their foreign customers.
Mr.
Brody's nomination requires confirmation by the Senate.


Cellular Phone Scare Discounted
IN the wake of a public panic that cellular telephones may cause brain cancer, scientists said they saw no evidence to persuade them that the phones were dangerous.
Yet they also conceded that they had much to learn about the long-term effects of low-energy electromagnetic radiation on the human body.
Although there is no clear evidence that cellular telephones damage health, a handful of studies raise questions that have not been adequately studied.
Scientists emphasized they must follow up on these findings to understand their significance, if any, to human health.


E.P.A. Plans to Seek Loosening of a Law On Food Pesticides
Faced with a court order to ban many important farm chemicals, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency said today that she would ask Congress to relax a law prohibiting trace amounts of cancer-causing chemicals in food.
At issue is a provision that bans any additive in processed food that has been shown to cause cancer in humans or laboratory animals.
Last summer, a Federal appellate court ordered the E.P.A. to force the withdrawal of any pesticide that caused cancer in animals and that also appeared as residues in flour, juices, baked products and other processed foods.  'These Foods Are Safe'
The agency's new chief, Carol M. Browner, said today that the law at the heart of the ruling, approved in 1958, was a scientific anachronism, although she said her agency would comply with the court's strict interpretation of it unless Congress changed it.


U.S. Fights A European Trade Move
Responding aggressively to new European Community restrictions on American sales of electrical and telecommunications equipment, the Clinton Administration announced today that it would bar companies from the community's member nations from bidding on Federal utility and service contracts.
Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, said that the United States was also considering whether to pull out of an international agreement that prohibits national governments from favoring domestic producers.
Utility and service contracts are already exempt from the pact.


Overnight TV Rating Higher
NBC's telecast of Super Bowl XXVII produced a 43.9 Nielsen rating with a 65 share in preliminary results from 28 overnight markets, an 8.6 percent increase over the 40.4 rating in 25 markets for last year's game on CBS.
One rating point in the overnights equals 462,634 television households.
A share is the percentage of televisions in use.
The telecast received the highest overnight rating since CBS's 1987 Giants-Broncos Super Bowl, which earned a 47.9 rating/68 share.


Lee Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wasps vs. Weevils
A team of scientists from a Federal agricultural research laboratory in Texas says that tiny black wasps imported from Mexico may greatly reduce the damage to the cotton crop caused by boll weevils.
This approach would also reduce the use of pesticides.
Dr.
Edgar G. King, director of the Subtropical Agriculture Research Laboratory of the Agricultural Research Service in Weslaco, Tex., said the wasps wiped out 96 percent of young boll weevils on one- and two-acre test plots without any help from pesticides.
This allowed the plants to produce 3 to 14 times more cotton than plants without the wasps.


Cincinnati Survives An Ambush
Cincinnati 74, Miami of Ohio 68
OXFORD, Ohio, Feb. 1 (AP) -- Nick Van Exel tied the score in regulation with a layup, then scored 9 points in overtime as No. 4 Cincinnati rallied from an 11-point second-half deficit to beat Miami of Ohio, 74-68, tonight.
Cincinnati (16-1) won its 13th straight game, the longest current streak in Division I, despite trailing most of the game.
Van Exel's layup tied the score at 54-54 with 48 seconds to play, and Miami of Ohio (10-5) turned the ball over with four seconds left, sending the game into overtime.


Even the Commercials Looked Familiar
When it came to the commercials shown during Super Bowl XXVII, originality was as scarce as applause during Michael Jackson's bombastic halftime show.
Too many of the expensive spots were derivative, rehashing creative approaches from other commercials or borrowing too ardently from pop-culture sources like music videos.
Here are some of the most notable deja vu spots.


Corrections
A front-page chart on Sunday about homicide arrests in the United States, by suspects' age group, reversed two labels.
The highest levels of arrest were for suspects 18 to 24 years old; the next highest were for those 14 to 17.


Corrections
An editorial on "The New Neediest," published last Nov. 29, could be read to convey an erroneous impression that The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund is a major supporter of SafeSpace, a haven for homeless youths on West 46th Street in Manhattan.
The fund provides no money directly to SafeSpace.
Rather, it provides support to the Community Service Society of New York, which in turn has supported 3 of the 65 volunteers who work with the teen-agers at SafeSpace.


South African Police Clash With Taxi Protesters


Bills' Levy Not Ready To Throw In Towel
It was a fitful night for Bills Coach Marv Levy.
First, he couldn't sleep because he was still anguishing over the team's third straight Super Bowl loss.
Then he got two telephone calls at midnight from reporters inquiring about his health.
It seems a rumor was going around that Levy had suffered a heart attack following the Bills' 52-17 loss to Dallas in Super Bowl XXVII.


C.I.A. Error Still Bloats Our Military Budget
To the Editor:
Our peace dividend has effectively been stolen by the failure to reduce bloated defense expenditures more rapidly, as you convincingly point out in "Uncertain Trumpet at Defense" (editorial, Jan. 17).
In addition, it is important to emphasize that United States military expenditures since the late 1970's have been much higher than they would have been had the Central Intelligence Agency not made a serious error on the growth of Soviet military spending, an error admitted but never properly corrected in official records.


Connecticut Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fire Damages Park Avenue Office Building
Park Avenue Office Is Damaged by Fire
An eight-alarm fire damaged three floors of a 41-story office building in midtown Manhattan Saturday night, injuring 35 firefighters and forcing the building to remain closed yesterday.
The fire in the westernmost of three interconnected buildings of Bankers Trust Company at 280 Park Avenue, between East 48th and 49th Streets, at first was viewed as suspicious because of the high volume of flames.
But at a news conference yesterday, Chief of Department Anthony L. Fusco said that although they had not determined the cause of the fire, investigators thought it might have been accidental.


Market Place; Some say 'not in my backyard' while others see opportunity
IF Hollywood remade "The Graduate" today, the advice whispered into the ear of the young man starting out his career might not be "plastics" but "nuclear waste."
And the American Ecology Corporation, a Houston-based hazardous waste handler, appears to be making a career in one such area: operation of burial sites for low-level nuclear waste.


Checkpoint Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY A NEW STEWARD FOR COLUMBIA
Reaching far outside Morningside Heights for someone they hope will guide Columbia University strongly and securely into the 21st century, the university's board of trustees has named George E. Rupp, an ordained Presbyterian minister who is president of Rice University in Houston, Tex., as the school's 18th president.
Dr.
Rupp, 50, will succeed Michael I. Sovern, the president of Columbia for the last 13 years, who is resigning on June 30 to return to teaching and to spend more time with his wife Joan, who is ill.
A1.


Cadence Design Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Music; A High-Energy Pianist Who Teaches as He Plays
One can rhapsodize about the fluidity of Richard Goode's technique or the combination of overt emotional drama and overarching, deeply reasoned philosophy that he brings to the music he performs.
The bottom line, though, is that it is virtually impossible to walk away from one of Mr.
Goode's recitals without the sense of having gained some new insight, subtle or otherwise, into the works he played or about pianism itself.
Listening to Mr.
Goode play the first of two Beethoven-and-Schubert recitals on Sunday evening (the second is on Feb. 14) at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, one was reminded alternately of Artur Schnabel and Glenn Gould, although his playing really resembles neither.
The Gould comparison is in the physicality of Mr.
Goode's playing.
There is something of a mad puppeteer about him: he sways over the keyboard, mouthing the accents of either melodies or inner lines, occasionally singing audibly, and looking as though he were animating the music by carrying on a dialogue with it.


Fast and Posh, X-2000 Train Picks Up Fans
Ian Campbell boarded the train at Washington's Union Station after arguing a copyright case before the Federal Court of Appeals and pronounced his surroundings "very plush, very good for working and relaxing."
Juanita Jackson came on board in Baltimore, after meeting with an orchestra board, and said, "I thought I'd stepped onto a cloud." Bill Woomer, a lawyer, boarded in Wilmington, Del., and said, "It beats the heck out of what I'm used to, the Yankee Clipper."


Chaus Hires Ex-President Of Esprit
Richard Baker, who left the post of president of Esprit de Corp Womenswear in November, yesterday was named president of Bernard Chaus Inc., the women's clothing manufacturer based in New York.
Mr.
Baker, 46, will report to Josephine Chaus, who became chairman and chief executive following the death of her husband, Bernard Chaus, the company's founder, in July 1991.
She will now relinquish the post of president, which she held before her husband's death.


Arrow Automotive Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Dow Up 22.15 After Foreign Markets Gain
Stocks moved higher in heavy trading yesterday, led by blue-chip issues and aided by the tempo set earlier overseas.
The Dow Jones industrial average gained 22.15 points, to 3,332.18.
Advances yesterday in overseas markets -- The Financial Times-Stock Index of 100 leading issues in London gained 44.40 points, and the Nikkei index of 225 issues in Tokyo rose 109.86 points -- helped create a positive tone in New York.


Ameron reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


No Headline
"Judge Wachtler has dedicated virtually all of his professional life to doing justice and enhancing the administration of the judicial system. He will now put his trust in that system to exonerate him." -- CHARLES STILLMAN, Sol Wachtler's lawyer.  [ B4:1. ]


Classical Music in Review
Chamber Music Society
Alice Tully Hall
The bulk of the two-piano repertory being of such questionable quality, one welcomed the Chamber Music Society's wise choices on Sunday afternoon, also the fact that Gilbert Kalish and Lee Luvisi were there to present them.
The high spirits and the sophisticated sense of sharing in Mozart's D-major Sonata (K. 448) turn somewhat clamorous when played on modern pianos, but these two musicians manage to be elegant without having to stifle the natural power of their instruments.


2 Partners Join Owner Of Lutece
Andre Soltner, the renowned chef and owner of one of the country's most esteemed French restaurants, Lutece, has taken the first tentative step toward retirement by bringing two partners into his family business.
"I get a little bit scared sometimes wondering what would happen if for some reason I couldn't make it to work," said Mr.
Soltner, 60, a dogged individualist who is so wary of delegating responsibility that he has rarely left the helm of his restaurant in 32 years.


Aur Resources reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Rice University President Picked To Succeed Sovern at Columbia
Reaching far outside their Morningside Heights campus for someone they hope will guide Columbia University securely into the 21st century, the university's trustees yesterday named George E. Rupp, an ordained Presbyterian minister who is president of Rice University in Houston, the 18th president of Columbia.
Dr.
Rupp, a 50-year-old scholar originally from Springfield, N.J., will succeed Michael I. Sovern, 61, the president of Columbia for the last 13 years, who is resigning on June 30 to return to teaching law and to spend more time with his wife, Joan, who is ill with cancer.


COMPANY NEWS
BOC HEALTH CARE INC., Murray Hill, N.J., has bought the rights in North America and Europe to Brevibloc, a beta blocker, for $72.5 million from the Du Pont Merck Pharmaceutical Co.
FLIGHTSAFETY INTERNATIONAL INC., New York, has completed the acquisition of McDonnell Douglas Corp.'s visual simulator business in St.
Charles, Mo.
Terms were not disclosed.


The Toughest of Ties, With Nothing but Winners
If the National Hockey League wants to start expanding its audience, it could use tonight's game, a 4-4 tie between the Islanders and the Rangers, as a selling point.
The game was too good to be hidden on the two cable channels that carried it.
The local rivals put on a marvelous performance that settled nothing but showed grit on both sides and left a capacity crowd at the Nassau Coliseum eagerly awaiting more.


CHRONICLE
Proof that STEPHEN SONDHEIM and JULIE ANDREWS are living Broadway legends was clearly evident early yesterday when about 700 of their fans braved wind-chills below zero.
They began lining up shortly after midnight at the City Center Theater to purchase 1,500 tickets for Mr.
Sondheim's new musical revue, "Putting It Together."
The number of tickets was small because the musical is a subscription production of the Manhattan Theater Club and is scheduled to run only from March 2 to May 23.


U.S. Declines to Back Peace Plan As the Balkan Talks Shift to U.N.
The chairmen of the international mediation effort to end the war in the Balkans pressed the United States today to endorse their peace plan, but Secretary of State Warren Christopher declined to do so, setting the stage for a possible confrontation between the mediators and the Clinton Administration.
Cyrus R. Vance, the former American Secretary of State who represents the United Nations in the negotiations, and Lord Owen, the European Community representative, moved the Balkan talks to the United Nations today in an attempt to bring the influence of the Security Council more directly to bear on the three factions in the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina to accept their plan.
But first the United States, a key Security Council member, had to be persuaded.


Rare Rose Not So Singular as Once Thought
IN what botanists hail as a surprise discovery, a member of the rose family long thought to be a single rare species has been found to have a living relative.
For more than 100 years, botanists believed that there was only one species in the genus Neviusia: the snow wreath, found in the Southeast.
But they have now identified a second member of the genus, the Shasta snow wreath, in northern California.


General Datacom Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Soak the Rich, Not the Elderly
The Clinton Administration has hit the ground with a couple of pardonable stumbles, but in considering a freeze on cost-of-living adjustments for Social Security recipients it appears headed for a serious fall.
Yes, the deficit must be addressed and, yes, it will require sacrifice.
But no logic of equity or history dictates that sacrifice fall equally on the rich and poor alike.


Dallas Journal; Big Victory In Football Encourages Wider Hope
The venerable, fedora-topped Tom Landry was revered as the coach of America's Team, as the Dallas Cowboys were called in the 1970's.
But what about Jimmy Johnson, his helmet-haired, ice-water-in-the-veins successor?
The Cowboys are back, and it was Mr.
Johnson who masterminded a remarkable turnaround in the fortunes of a team that had not made it to the Super Bowl since 1979.
As fans here wildly celebrated the team's 52-17 trouncing of the Buffalo Bills in Pasadena on Sunday, they readily proclaimed a new era of Cowboy dominance, and some even saw the victory as a harbinger of a much-needed economic resurgence for their city.


King Comes Out From His Limbo
Twelve days after being released by the Washington Bullets, Bernard King remains a scoring forward in search of a team.
A league source said today that King has sent a telex to every team in the National Basketball Association, with the obvious exception of the Bullets, volunteering his services.
"He wants to go to a team that has a chance to win," the source said.


HBO &amp; Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


On My Mind; Needed: U.S. Goal In Bosnia
The United Nations Security Council will be meeting in New York to talk about Bosnia.
It should be meeting in Sarajevo.
For its entire existence, almost a half-century, the Council that is charged with dealing with peace-or-war crises has not picked itself up to see one.
The delegates have stayed rooted to their chairs and chamber, never seeing one drop of blood, never hearing one scream.


H. H. Beverage, 99, Research Scientist And Radio Engineer
Harold Henry Beverage, a radio engineer and RCA scientist whose research advanced communications technology, died on Wednesday at the John T. Mather Hospital in Port Jefferson, L.I.
He was 99 and lived in Stony Brook.
Mr.
Beverage held more than 40 patents in his field.
He was a co-inventor of the wave antenna and the diversity system for high-frequency reception.


Avoid Arbitrator, Hold On to Salary
Mike Schooler and Walt Weiss avoided salary arbitration hearings and escaped pay cuts yesterday, but Schooler had to settle for the same salary he made last year.
Schooler, the Seattle relief pitcher, agreed to an $800,000 salary after the Mariners submitted a figure of $720,000 for arbitration.
Schooler, who had a record of 2-7, 13 saves and a 4.70 earned run average, had sought a $300,000 raise.


In a Nod to U.S., China Plans to Free 2 Dissidents
The Government said today that it was releasing two prominent political prisoners before the completion of their sentences.
The move was apparently a gesture to Washington and a signal that Beijing may be testing the waters for a broader amnesty.
The better-known of the two is Wang Xizhe, a 44-year-old pioneer of China's democracy movement.
Mr.
Wang's hair has reportedly turned white in his 12 years of solitary confinement.


For Clark in the 800, An Unspeakable Rival
Joetta Clark, the five-time and defending champion in the 800 meters at the Millrose Games, will not say the name.
In her speeches, even in her private conversations, her deeply resented rival, Maria Mutola of Mozambique, is simply "that individual" or "that person."
"I'm aware of that individual's presence on the track, and I try to stay away from that person," Clark said yesterday at a news conference in Manhattan.
"I've seen that person take out a whole field at the world championships in Tokyo in 1991."


Clinton Trade Policy: So Far, Little Is New
During last year's election campaign, Bush Administration trade officials fretted over what they saw as Bill Clinton's protectionist oratory, and in Mr.
Clinton's first two weeks as President there have been a flurry of trade decisions, including the imposition of steep tariffs on steel imports.
But the course of Mr.
Clinton's trade policy has not yet been set, or even seriously considered, Federal officials and Washington trade experts said last week.


Bill Is Passed By Assembly On Gay Rights
After a round of dramatic and often moving speeches, the New York State Assembly passed a gay-rights bill today with an unexpectedly large majority and sent it to a wary State Senate.
The 90-to-50 vote marked the first passage of such a bill by either house of the Legislature in the 23 years it has been considered.
Nine Republicans joined 81 Democrats in voting for the bill, giving its supporters a measure of hope for its prospects in the Republican-controlled Senate.


Aspin Officially Welcomed by the Armed Forces


Business Digest
Companies
Leslie Fay Companies disclosed accounting irregularities that may erase last year's profits, once its books are corrected.
The company also suspended its corporate controller.  [ Page D1. ]


Review/Television; The Easing of America's War on Drugs
On land, on sea, in the air, the United States is losing the fight to keep cocaine out of the country.
That is the message of "What Happened to the Drug War?," tonight's in-the-field expose of high-tech, high-priced, high-hyped weapons that seem to have flopped.
The action takes place along the United States-Mexico border, across which an estimated 70 percent of the nation's cocaine supply finds its way.
Among the costly and apparently unavailing operations mounted by Washington to dam the flow are the use of special speedboats, helicopters and radar planes ($30 million apiece) by United States Customs; the Humvees and nightscopes used by marines, and radar blimps known as aerostats used by the military to detect smugglers.


Cambrex Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Progress at White House: Machines Answer Phones
Who says the Federal Government never gets anything done?
When Zoe Baird's nomination for Attorney General was derailed and President Clinton tried to make good on his promise to allow homosexuals in the military, the main White House phone line became tied up in one giant knot.
Even White House employees had trouble reaching each other.


C.I.A. Error Still Bloats Our Military Budget; Who Says So?
To the Editor:
"Uncertain Trumpet at Defense" (editorial, Jan. 17), like "Who Needs Four Air Forces?" (editorial, Nov. 30), obliges me to ask the question: "Who says so?"


Computer Products (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


American Express Defends Past and Looks to Future
The new era at American Express got off to a halting start yesterday, with the new chairman more intent on defending his earlier recommendation to keep James D. Robinson 3d as chairman than on explaining his ideas for turning the company around.
Richard M. Furlaud was, as expected, elected chairman yesterday after investors, employees and several board members revolted against retaining Mr.
Robinson and putting him in charge of the Shearson Lehman Brothers brokerage unit.
Stock Advances
Investors, who dumped American Express stock last week, reacted to Mr.
Robinson's departure -- announced Saturday and effective Feb. 22 -- by pushing the share price up yesterday by $1.375, to $24.625, on heavy New York Stock Exchange volume.
Combined with Friday's advance of 87.5 cents, apparently on the pending news, American Express gained 10 percent, or more than $1 billion, in value.


Central Maine Power reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.12
3.02
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.97
2.89
3.86
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.03
3.93
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.95
5.96
6.95
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.20
7.19
7.81
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.35
8.35
8.89
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.30
6.31
6.94
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Angola President Says His Forces Are Rearming After Rebel Gains
President Jose Eduardo dos Santos said today that despite a loss of vital territory to rebel forces in recent weeks, the Government was reorganizing and rearming its forces and would be able to prevent a military defeat.
But in an interview at his office, Mr. dos Santos said he did not see an early end to fighting between the Government and rebel forces led by Jonas Savimbi, head of the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, which is known as Unita, its acronym in Portuguese.


Corrections
Thomas More's map of Utopia, which illustrated the Jan. 25 Editorial Notebook "After 1492: A Utopian Encounter," was most recently exhibited at the Cooper-Hewitt Museum and not, as stated, at the Pierpont Morgan Library, which owns the map.


Corrections
An entry in the benefits listing of Styles of The Times on Sunday about a concert to be held on Friday at Carnegie Hall to benefit the Curtis Institute of Music in Philadelphia misstated the area code for tickets by telephone.
The number is (215) 893-5279.


Video Games Can Serve to Diagnose Epilepsy
To the Editor:
A Jan. 24 news item reports that Japanese children have been made ill by video games.
I urge the Nintendo Corporation not to alter its games to reduce flashing lights to prevent seizures precipitated by certain patterns of flashing light.
Light-induced seizures occur only in people with an underlying disorder.
Light will not induce a seizure in the healthy.
If a child with no history of epilepsy has a seizure while playing Nintendo, the game becomes a diagnostic tool in what one could call a relatively safe environment, in the home.


Fast and Posh, X-2000 Train Picks Up Fans
Ian Campbell boarded the train at Washington's Union Station after arguing a copyright case before the Federal Court of Appeals and pronounced his surroundings "very plush, very good for working and relaxing."
Juanita Jackson came on board in Baltimore, after meeting with an orchestra board, and said, "I thought I'd stepped onto a cloud." Bill Woomer, a lawyer, boarded in Wilmington, Del., and said, "It beats the heck out of what I'm used to, the Yankee Clipper."


Corrections
A chart on the Media Business page of Business Day yesterday with an article about staff reductions at The Los Angeles Times carried incorrect dates in some copies for quarterly operating income of the newspaper group of the parent company, Times Mirror.
A corrected chart appears today on page D20.


American Income Holding Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Sect in India Guards Desert Wildlife
In one of the world's most successful and oldest conservation efforts, a tough desert-dwelling Hindu sect has protected wildlife and vegetation from hunters and loggers for hundreds of years along the Great Indian Desert.
The results are visible even to casual visitors: small herds of deer, unafraid of humans, flourish in the millet fields and shrublands around the villages of the Bishnois, who live in India's most arid zone in a belt from southwestern Rajasthan to the state of Haryana, north of New Delhi.


Seeking More Work From City Workers
On the surface, it sounds bizarre, if not preposterous.
The city has agreed to pay garbage collectors a bonus of as much as $866 a year to work a complete workday.
Critics call it a waste.
But the Dinkins administration calls it a milestone, its first major breakthrough in trying to make the city's work force more efficient.
City officials say the agreement last week with the sanitation workers' union shows just how complicated and difficult it can be to wrest more productivity from municipal workers.


Police File Affidavits On Melee
In a detailed account of their handling of the Crown Heights racial violence in 1991, the police commanders at the scene contend that until the third night of the four days of rioting, they were unaware of the extent of the violence or of the inadequacy of the police response.
In affidavits filed yesterday in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, the commanders also insisted that no civilian officials, including Mayor David N. Dinkins, had directed them to hold back in quelling the disturbances.


Couture Finds Itself at a Crossroads
A number of the haute-couture designers who introduced their spring and summer collections in Paris last week were doing business at the same old stand.
A few adventurers attempted a new approach.
The iconoclasts -- Gianni Versace, Christian Lacroix and Karl Lagerfeld for Chanel -- began the week.
The traditionalists, including Yves Saint Laurent, Hubert de Givenchy and Valentino, tended to show at the end of the week.
The tension between the two groups reflects the prevailing attitude toward couture.


A Brutal Day to Live Outdoors


Labor Agreement Will Haunt New York City
To the Editor
"A Missed Opportunity on City Labor" (editorial, Jan. 13), about New York City's new labor agreement, is correct in that Mayor David N. Dinkins's administration abandoned its promise to the taxpayers to offset higher wages with increased productivity -- and that in doing so the administration walked away from a golden opportunity.
But there are a few more wrinkles that readers should be aware of.


Income-Tax Showdown Is Looming for Weicker and Legislature
The Legislature's tax-writing committee today approved a plan to cut state income taxes by as much as several hundred dollars a year for the majority of Connecticut residents while making up the difference with a rate increase for the 10 percent of families with the highest incomes.
But the 24-to-15 vote in the Finance, Revenue and Bonding Committee was only the opening shot of what is expected to be a frantic week at the Capitol.
Legislative leaders said they would bring today's bill to a vote on Wednesday, the very day that Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. is to deliver a budget message expected to start a bitter fight over spending cuts, social programs and gambling revenues.


Altron Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Shortages in Moscow? Not of Science Papers
MOSCOW may be experiencing shortages of consumer goods and other items, but it is producing more scientific papers than any other city in the world, according to the Institute for Scientific Information.
The institute, based in Philadelphia, tracks trends in 3,000 international science journals.
In the December issue of its Science Watch newsletter, it said Moscow led the list of scientifically productive cities, producing more papers than Tokyo, Boston or Paris.


Inter-Regional Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fashion Industry Celebrates Itself at an Awards Ceremony
SEVENTH AVENUE gave one of those parties celebrating itself Monday night, and surprise, everyone seemed to have a great time.
It was an awards ceremony sponsored by the Council of Fashion Designers of America.
Though there had been some caviling when the recipients were announced a few months ago, that had ended by the time the awards were presented at the New York State Theater in a ceremony conducted with wit, style and heart.
On stage, videotapes interspersed events of 1992 with fashion highlights and scenes from the party.


Huge Chrysler Stock Sale Yields Total of $1.78 Billion
In the second-largest stock sale ever, the Chrysler Corporation raised $1.78 billion late yesterday, aided by a sharp surge in its stock price over the last year.
Through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation, Chrysler sold 46 million shares at $38.75 each, according to people on Wall Street, who spoke only on condition of anonymity.


Washington Shifts Gears; 'Motor Voter' Accelerates
President Bush vetoed the "motor-voter" bill last year, offering all sorts of flimsy reasons that barely hid cynical political calculation.
Fortunately, democracy won't die that easily.
The bill, designed to make it easier for all Americans to register and vote, is due to clear the House Rules Committee today and to hit the House floor for a vote by the end of the week.
The common-sense measure's nickname describes its core provision: States would be required to permit voter registration when people obtain or renew a driver's license.
The law would also require that states offer registration by mail and at unemployment, welfare and other government offices.
Those states that already have well-structured "motor-voter" programs posted significantly higher voter registration and voter turnout rates in the 1992 election.


Mets Look to Future But Are Still Worried By an Issue From Past
The Mets, busy making projections for pitchers and home run estimates for outfielders, are about to come face to face with a springtime calculation they regret and dread: what are the chances that trouble will return in 1993?
Last spring, a rape complaint against three members of the Mets unsettled the organization throughout weeks of allegations, investigations and uncertainty.


Kerr-McGee reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Appeal To Be Heard in Jogger Conviction
New York State's highest court today agreed to hear the appeal of a teen-ager convicted in the Central Park jogger case who has argued that his rights were violated during a police interview the day after the attack.
The teen-ager, Yusef Salaam, was one of five youths convicted in 1990 of raping, assaulting and robbing a woman as she jogged alone through Central Park on the evening of April 19, 1989.


Between Fear and Fantasy
Military officials and Congressional leaders cite the possible threat of violence to homosexuals as a reason to continue discriminating against gays in the military.
This raises the obvious question of whether we should be governed by threat.
But we also are left to ask what fuels such aggression.
Throughout the debate, straight military men keep voicing concern that they will not be able to control their aggression against gay men.
Gay soldiers and sailors are threatened with the prospect of being beaten, even murdered.
As if to prove the point, three marines beat a homosexual man outside a gay bar in Wilmington, N.C., Saturday morning while shouting, "Clinton must pay!"


A Victory That Wasn't Riles Islanders
They had played the game, and played it hard, to a 4-4 tie with their visiting Patrick Division nemesis, the Rangers.
Physical exhaustion dominated the locker room at Nassau Coliseum on Monday night, but few Islanders went home to sleep off the effect.
Instead, unsettled by the suspicion that they had scored six goals but received credit for only four, they watched the replay of the game.
That surely guaranteed a sleepless night.
"Because it was such a good game by both sides, I wasn't really upset right when it ended," goaltender Mark Fitzpatrick explained today, after a brisk morning-after workout at the club's temporary practice center in Syosset.
"But then I watched the tape, and I definitely got irritated.


Arts Groups Step In to Fill the Gaps
The decline of arts education in the classroom has motivated an honor roll of public institutions and private groups to fill the void.
In New York City, dozens of arts organizations have donated millions of dollars for arts programs, helped to train teachers, sent performers to schools, run after-school programs or selected promising students for further training.
The city's museums, from the Metropolitan Museum of Art to the Staten Island Children's Museum, run ambitious programs, as do Carnegie Hall, the Brooklyn Academy of Music and Lincoln Center.


Child Magazine to Publish Highly Customized Issues
Child magazine announced yesterday that it would publish what it called the most highly customized editorial sections of any consumer magazine.
It said copies of the magazine would contain four-page sections written about the specific age group of the children of each subscriber.
The sections will not contain advertisements.


Alfred L. Pilson; Executive, 83
Alfred L. Pilson, retired treasurer and chief financial officer of the Simplicity Pattern Company Inc., died on Sunday in Somers, N.Y.
He was 83.
His family said he had been ill for a long time.


'America's Pastor': At 74, Billy Graham Begins to Sum Up, Regrets and All
The Rev.
Billy Graham has been called America's pastor, chaplain to the White House and many other things, including hypocrite and heretic.
He has preached to more people -- in 85 countries -- than anyone else in history.
For four decades, without benefit of any church office and despite repeated political missteps, he has remained the very personification of American Christianity, admired by the masses and befriended by the powerful here and abroad.


Gulf States Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Military Base Jarred by Specter of Gang Killings
In early December, Army investigators were called to a small house on this military base south of Tacoma to sort out a scene of graphic horror: a father and his three children, all military dependents, had been hacked and stabbed to death.
Now, after seven weeks of investigation, Army officials and Federal agents say they believe that Allen King Sr., 25, and his three children were killed by members of a Los Angeles street gang.
Although no charges have been filed in the killings, five people who have been arrested on other charges are being questioned about the deaths.
Among them are two Fort Lewis soldiers and a recently discharged soldier.


House Panel Hears Troubles Of Pension-Insurance Fund
Congress began to grapple today with repairing the financially troubled Federal program that guarantees corporate pensions, but it quickly became clear that there is disagreement over who should bear the cost.
A House subcommittee was told that the deficit of the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation at the end of 1992 was $2.7 billion, an increase of $200 million from 1991.
But the corporation, which insures the pensions of 40 million people, faces no immediate cash shortage in meeting its obligations and there were varying opinions over the urgency of the problem.


U.N. Chief Shifts Key Official To a Role as Peace Mediator
In a move to give the United Nations a stronger role in solving disputes before they develop into armed conflicts, Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali today reassigned the top official overseeing peacekeeping missions to a post in charge of peace mediation instead.
The official, Under Secretary General Marrack Goulding, a former British diplomat, will take over the peacemaking post involving potential conflicts in Europe, Asia, the former Soviet Union and Latin America.
He replaces Under Secretary General Vladimir F. Petrovsky, a former Deputy Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union, who is moving to Geneva to take charge of the United Nations offices there from Antoine Blanca of France.


Garages Should Stop Drunks From Driving
To the Editor:
On Dec. 23 (party time), at 5:30 P.M., while waiting for my car at a parking garage in midtown, I had a disturbing experience.
A customer who was falling-down drunk called for his car.
He was visibly and noisily stumbling around the garage, and just before the car was delivered he decided to wander outside.
The attendant was upset because he disappeared.
I commented he was fortunate, he could not let the man get into his car in that condition.
I suggested he call the police.
He told me garage management policy prevented him from doing so. (I alerted the police, and I trust they stopped him from getting behind the wheel.)


60-Minute Gourmet
N OTHING is so satisfying on a piercing winter evening as a down-to-earth steak-and-potatoes dinner.
And it can be embellished with minimal effort using a few key ingredients.
This recipe calls for a center-cut fillet of beef.
Have your butcher trim it well and tie it with twine so it holds its shape while roasting.
Mushrooms are abundant now, so you can choose the type you like: chanterelles, morelles, shiitake or a mix of wild mushrooms.
The sauce is made by sauteeing the mushrooms in a little of the beef renderings, then adding Madeira, which contributes a lovely sweet essence.
Chicken broth, either homemade or a good canned one, is added, along with just a little tomato paste to bind it.


U.S. Issues Visa to Bosnian Serb to Meet at U.N.
The Clinton Administration issued a visa today to Radovan Karadzic, the leader of the Bosnian Serbs and a man former Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger listed as a possible war criminal.
The State Department spokesman, Richard A. Boucher, said today that the visa was issued to Dr.
Kradzic to allow him to take part in negotiations on a peace treaty for Bosnia and Herzegovina at the United Nations headquarters in New York.
The type of visa issued Dr.
Karadzic normally restricts the recipient to a 25-mile radius from the United Nations headquarters.
He will not be subject to arrest on war crimes charges while he is here.


Lindros Practices Again
The Philadelphia Flyers' rookie star, ERIC LINDROS, resumed practicing with the Flyers yesterday, but he'll wait at least another week to test his recovering left knee in a game. (AP)


Sears Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


World Looks Away While Armenians Die
To the Editor:
As the eyes of humanity focus on other crisis areas around the world, the immense problems in Armenia have been dwarfed.
Yet the difficulties of coping with more than 200,000 refugees and 50,000 homeless are very real, especially in such a tiny country as Armenia.
It is estimated that at least 30,000 people will die in Armenia this winter, more than died in the devastating earthquake of 1988.
This tragedy upon tragedy in Armenia has a number of causes, of which the most significant are:


Review/Film; Escapades Of 3 Pets Hotfooting It For Home
"Homeward Bound: The Incredible Journey" is Walt Disney Pictures' clever, crowd-pleasing remake of the studio's own "Incredible Journey," a nature story first released in 1963 and now obviously dated.
Based on the pet-centric novel by Sheila Burnford, it tells how two dogs and a cat are abruptly relocated, after which they set out on a long, perilous trip to find their real home.
"The Incredible Journey," though sweet, was terribly creaky.
It left most of the talking to a human narrator, kept the animals' thoughts a mystery and relied heavily on acting of the give-me-your-paw school.
This new version improves on the original in every way by adding heartwarming drama, lots of humor, better scenery (the adventure is set in the Sierras) and, most helpfully, small talk.
Thanks to crafty direction and editing, along with the lively voices of Don Ameche, Sally Field and Michael J. Fox, these pets now sound and behave just like people, chatty, wisecracking people any child will understand.


A Dietary Debate: Is the Mediterranean A Nutritional Eden?
AFTER years of dredging up data and issuing conflicting advice, dietary researchers and agricultural economists, food lovers and food manufacturers are looking for common ground.
They dream of a place where public policy and the latest dietary trend can cohabit tastefully, affordably and healthfully ever after -- a simpler place, where the food is less processed, the produce fresher and the nutritionist returned to the happy role of giving the kind of advice that people want to hear.
For decades, dietary experts battled hunger, nearly obliterating diseases of malnutrition, like rickets and beriberi, by prescribing more of certain foods or by fortifying foods with vitamins.
But today, said Adam Drewnowski, director of human nutrition at the University of Michigan School of Public Health in Ann Arbor, "We have to contend with dietary excess."


Losing Stars to News, Post Fires Back With Suit
As The Daily News tried to decapitate The New York Post, luring away top editors and writers, The Post fired back yesterday with a lawsuit to stop the exodus in what the new buyer of The Post called "a fight to the death."
On Monday, The News hired away The Post's editor, managing editor and metropolitan editor, as well as the columnist Mike McAlary, leaving the prospective buyer of The Post, Steven Hoffenberg, fuming.
He accused the new owner of The News, Mortimer B. Zuckerman, of "a crazy kamikaze attack to kill off The Post."


A New Kitchen Cabinet Aims To Showcase American Food
The same people who raised their eyebrows at the suggestion that Hillary Rodham Clinton knew how to bake cookies would be equally astonished to learn how closely she supervised the preparations of the first official dinner at the White House Sunday night, which honored the nation's governors.
From the choice of tablecloths and china to the arrangement of the floral centerpieces and the menu selection, Mrs.
Clinton offered suggestions and made changes, putting her stamp on the proceedings.
And she said she loved every minute of it.


Clinton Seeking $31 Billion in Stimulus
Laying the political groundwork for economic battles to come, President Clinton has told governors and members of Congress that he wants $31 billion in new spending on jobs and on tax breaks for business this year to stimulate the economy.
Mr.
Clinton also emphasized some domestic goals in a speech to the nation's governors today, asking them for help in reorganizing the welfare system.
To that end, he said, he plans to name a group to study the best way to make welfare a form of temporary support with the goal of limiting payments to two years.
He did not provide a schedule for putting his ideas into action.
Unpleasant Choices
Addressing the National Governors' Association in his first policy speech as President and meeting privately with Congressional leaders in sessions that will continue Wednesday, Mr.
Clinton embarked on a strategy to win support for the politically unpalatable choices he is likely to present in coming weeks on taxes, Social Security and the deficit.


Review/Opera; 'Der Rosenkavalier,' With a Cast Switch, At the Metropolitan
There were apparently some Metropolitan Opera ticket-holders who did not attend the season's first performance of Richard Strauss's "Rosenkavalier" on Monday evening because Kathleen Battle, in a quarrel with the company, had pulled out of her appearances as Sophie.
If so, they missed a deft performance of the work.
"Der Rosenkavalier" is a strange mixture of "The Marriage of Figaro" and "Falstaff," a comic story of the undoing of nobility's worst pretenses and privileges and the establishment of a new kind of nobility, based on character.
It is more nostalgic than either of those works; it hedges its bets, neither defusing nobility as in "Figaro," nor radically mocking its affectations as in "Falstaff." But the point is made just the same.
And the opera is just as dependent on ensemble work, on the establishment of subtle relationships, on giving life to the details of the score.


Despite Cold Weather, Homeless Shun Shelters
Carmine Santavicca stirred his chicken and rice stew over a flaming barrel under the Queensboro Bridge Monday night.
Flecks of blackened newspaper flew past him and over a lumpy pile of white blankets where a friend slept.
With the bravado of war veteran who has seen gory battles, Mr.
Santavicca said he would face down the cold from his tattered armchair.
"You haven't been in Chicago," he said.
"You get frostbite there." Avoiding the Shelters
Even on a brutal, wind-whipped early morning like the one yesterday -- the coldest in three years -- many of New York City's homeless chose to avoid the city's shelter system.
They splurged on cheap hotel rooms, huddled around outdoor bonfires or dozed in stairwells -- rites of survival that no longer raise eyebrows in a city that has grown largely indifferent to such sights.


As Schools Trim Budgets, The Arts Lose Their Place
Arts education, long dismissed as a frill, is disappearing from the lives of many students -- particularly poor urban students.
Even though artists and educators argue that children without art are as ignorant as children without math, their pleas have gone unheard as schools have struggled with budget cuts.
Now, in a new campaign to preserve the arts in schools, supporters are taking a different tack.
They argue that art classes teach the very qualities that educators believe can reinvigorate American schools: analytical thinking, teamwork, motivation and self-discipline.
A Vanishing Subject
"Arts education in the public schools is very much at risk of being eliminated if we are not more vigilant," said Carol Sterling, director of arts education for the American Council on the Arts.
"We must demonstrate that when children do arts, they are doing critical thinking and problem-solving and learning about civilization. Unless we categorize this in terms people understand, arts will always be considered a frill."


Historic Preservation Comes of Age in Queens; Scarcity of Landmarks Reflects Distrust Within the Borough and Snobbery Outside It
To preservationists, the history of the city's landmarks law is littered with the ruins of the architectural and historical treasures of Queens.
Even as the law has protected hundreds of historic buildings in Manhattan and Brooklyn, preservationists in Queens have watched with dismay as many of their most cherished landmarks have fallen: Jacob Riis's stately 19th-century home in Richmond Hill, the Bodine Castle overlooking the East River in Long Island City and the Loew's Triboro Theater in Astoria, one of the grand palaces of the Golden Age of movies.


Bosnian Pleads for a Chance at Unity
President Alija Izetbegovic appealed today to President Clinton to reject a proposed peace accord for Bosnia as tantamount to endorsing "ethnic cleansing" by the Serbian nationalists who have seized two-thirds of this former Yugoslav republic.
Mr.
Izetbegovic, in an interview at the presidency here, said the United States would be promoting a "huge tragedy" if it bowed to pressure from the United Nations and the European Community to endorse the accord and to support a resolution in the Security Council to enforce it.


Times Closes a Plant and Moves Press Operations
The New York Times has closed its printing plant in Carlstadt, N.J., and all advance Sunday sections and about one-third of its daily newspapers will now be printed in its new plant in Edison, N.J., The Times announced yesterday.
Two-thirds of the daily papers will continue to be printed in the pressroom of the newspaper's headquarters at 229 West 43d Street in Manhattan.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  MEDIATOR ASSAILS U.S. ON BOSNIA
An international mediator in the Balkan war said the Clinton Administration's reluctance to back his proposal could "scuttle chances of ending the war" in Bosnia.
A1  REJECT PACT, BOSNIA BEGS CLINTON
The President of Bosnia and Herzegovina appealed to President Clinton to reject a proposed peace accord for Bosnia as tantamount to endorsing "ethnic cleansing" by Serbs.
A8
The U.S. gave a visa to a Serb listed as a possible war criminal.  A8
The United Nations shuffled posts to stress prevention of conflicts.
A8  DEPORTEES SPURN ISRAELI OFFER
The Israeli Army began to draw up a list of 100 exiled Palestinians who are to be brought back soon from southern Lebanon.
But the deportees said that no one would return unless all 400 of them did so.
A1
The U.S. praised Israel but Arab nations pressed for sanctions.
A9  RUSSIA'S ARMS SALES RANKLE
Struggling to earn hard currency and preserve jobs, former Soviet republics are selling arms and technology to Iran, China and other nations whose buildups are causing deep concern in the West.
A6
Latvia's assembly voted to disinter remains of Soviet soldiers.
A6  GUARDING WHITES' RIGHTS
South African's white Government proposed a bill of rights aimed at forcing future black governments to honor human liberties and property rights that white rulers have ignored for three centuries.
A3  QUEEN SUES LONDON PAPER
The editor of a British newspaper said Queen Elizabeth II had demanded legal damages because the paper published the text of her annual Christmas message two days before it was to be broadcast.
A3  CAMBODIAN PREMIER HALTS DRIVE
Cambodia's Prime Minister said he had ordered an end to a major offensive against Khmer Rouge guerrillas.
He asked the United Nations to create a buffer zone between the guerrillas and his soldiers.
A7  The Pentagon said Iraq had stopped harassing allied planes.
A5  Cairo Journal: For veiled women, the latest in Islamic chic.
A4  National A10-18  A STIMULUS PLAN TAKES SHAPE
The President has apparently decided on $31 billion in new spending and business tax breaks this year to stimulate the economy.
And, in his first policy speech, he asked the nation's governors for help in overhauling the entire welfare system.
A1
News analysis: The welfare speech was short on detail.  A16
Bipartisanship on the health-care issue was dealt a blow.  A16
Republicans threatened to filibuster the family leave bill.
A17  MORE SIGNS OF SOLID GROWTH
Although unemployment lingers and some regions continue to suffer from the recession, the nation's economy seems to be expanding.
A1  NEW PATENTS ON ANIMALS
After a moratorium of nearly five years, the Government has again begun granting patents on genetically altered animals, with an emphasis on medicine rather than food.
A1  CLINTON HANDS LABOR A VICTORY
The President revoked two election-year orders, issued by President Bush, that had been particular targets of organized labor.
A17  The U.M.W. seems prepared for a long strike against Peabody.
A17  THE PRESIDENT AND THE BISHOPS
Roman Catholic bishops are trying to maintain not only an unwavering stance against abortion but also co-existence with a new President who is at odds with their position.
A14  Billy Graham remains American Christianity's pastor.
A14  'WE LIVE NOW IN A JUNGLE'
The President's choice to head the C.I.A. declined to endorse any immediate cut in the nation's intelligence budget, telling of multiplying threats to American security.
A18
A lawmaker leveled new charges at the C.I.A. on Iraqi armaments.
A18  OVERHAUL ON STUDENT AID
A Government commission will urge that a patchwork of Federal loans, grants and work-study programs be replaced by an integrated approach making every college student automatically eligible for one level of aid, $14,000 a year.
A10  'THESE GUYS ARE IN IT FOREVER'
The murder of four members of one family at Fort Lewis, Wash., has stunned those who believed that military bases were immune to street-gang crime.
A10
Women in their 40's were urged to have regular mammograms.
A13  Education Page A19  VANISHING ARTS CLASSES
Budget cuts have made arts classes disappear from many schools, just as educators argue that arts teach disciplines needed by all.
A1  Metro Digest B1  SURVIVING THE COLD SPELL
Even on the coldest day in three years, many of New York City's homeless chose to avoid the city's shelter system.
They splurged on a cheap hotel rooms, huddled around bonfires or dozed in stairwells -- rites of survival that no longer raise eyebrows in a city that has grown largely indifferent to such sights.
A1  Neediest Cases B4 Business Digest D1  Living Section C1-10  A new kitchen cabinet aims to showcase American food.
Arts/Entertainment C14-22  Sports B7-13  Obituaries A20-21  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials  Israel relents.
Will the Arabs?
Family leave moves forward.
"Motor voter" accelerates.
A chancellor worth keeping.
Letters  Anna Quindlen: Please don't inhale.
William D. Ruckelshaus: Who will regulate the regulators?
Ken Corbett: Between fear and fantasy.
Hilary Rosenberg: Let cities go bankrupt.


Wine Talk
SOAVE, Bardolino and Valpolicella: For many people, this trinity served as an easygoing introduction to Italian wines many years ago.
How many young swains practiced being worldly by ordering one or another of them in Italian restaurants?
Sometimes it was difficult remembering which of the three was white (the Soave) but it frequently didn't matter; lots of little Italian places served the two reds just as cold as the white.


Dexter Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Queen Seeks Damages From Paper Over a Speech
In the latest battle between the royal family and the press, the editor of a British newspaper said tonight that Queen Elizabeth II had demanded legal damages because the paper published the text of her annual Christmas message two days before it was to be broadcast.
Kelvin McKenzie, the editor of The Sun, said he had received a letter from the Queen's laywers, accusing the paper of copyright infringement for publishing the text without authorization.
A spokesman at Buckingham Palace acknowledged that a letter had been sent by the Queen's lawyers to the newspaper, but declined comment.


Moscow Insists It Must Sell the Instruments of War to Pay the Costs of Peace
Struggling to earn hard currency and preserve jobs, Russia and the other republics of the former Soviet Union are selling arms and technology to Iran, China and other countries whose military buildups are causing great concern in the West.
The Russian arms exports in particular rankle Washington even though they are down sharply from cold-war days and appear to have little ideological motivation.
Critics of the sales also concede that Moscow has extensive control over high-technology arms sales and that it tries to adhere to United Nations arms embargoes.


Doylestown Journal; Town Relights a Faded Screen Gem
The neon letters of the County Theater here died slowly, one at a time.
By last August the yellow sign finally went dark.
The crowds had thinned, the films had become second-run, or second-rate, and the shabby Art Deco theater, like thousands of old downtown theaters, seemed destined for demolition or conversion.
But Doylestown, the seat of Bucks County about 15 miles north of Philadelphia, responded with a kind of urban barn-raising.


William C. Sayres, 65, Professor at Columbia
William C. Sayres, a Columbia University professor who helped developing countries improve their education systems, died on Monday while flying from Cairo to Geneva for medical treatment after a heart attack.
He was 65 and a resident of Bogota, N.J.
A university spokesman reported his death yesterday and said Mr.
Sayres was in Egypt as a consultant to its Ministry of Education.


COMPANY BRIEFS
FOOD LION INC., Salisbury, N.C., said it would delay declaring a dividend until Feb. 11, when its board meets to review fourth-quarter results.
UNITED AIR LINES INC., Chicago, selected Hughes Rediffusion Simulation Ltd. to supply flight simulators and training systems for its new Boeing 777 and A320 aircraft fleets.


Springs Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


San Antonio Reserves Deep-Six The Nets
There is depth, and then there is 20,000 leagues under the sea kind of depth.
The San Antonio Spurs might be able to field a pretty decent team with just with their reserves.
Needless to say, their starters are good.
Real good.
And tonight they were too good for the Nets.
Even with supercenter David Robinson playing like his head was out to sea, the Spurs had more than enough to beat the stubborn Nets, 111-93, before 16,057 at the HemisFair Arena.


Youth Arraigned in Killing At Amityville High School
A junior at Amityville High School was arraigned on murder charges today in the slaying of a youth outside the school on Monday afternoon.
The shooting was the second at a Suffolk County school in four weeks and raised fears of the spread of guns among students.
"Amityville has no history of this kind of thing, but the proliferation of guns and shootings in schools is a concern," said Lieut.
John W. Gierasch, the commanding officer of the Suffolk County police homicide squad.
"It's troubling because it's happening so frequently now in places that we consider safe."


Campus Journal; By Quizzing Big Names, They Learn About News
The 28 students in Frank Sesno's winter-term course on journalism and politics were recently having a heated discussion about whether members of the national press had liberal political leanings when Peter Greatrex, a sophomore, got right to the point.
Mr.
Greatrex wanted to know whether a disaffected liberal columnist like Michael Kinsley of The New Republic magazine might challenge President Clinton in the Democratic Presidential primaries of 1996, just as the conservative columnist Patrick J. Buchanan took on President Bush in 1992.


Dow Corning reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
WILLIE NELSON and the Internal Revenue Service seem to be in harmony, finally.
After a year of negotiations, they have reached an agreement on the payment of about $16 million owed the Government by the singer.
Under the agreement, which was made final at a meeting in Austin, Tex., yesterday, the singer will pay about $9 million.
Sally Sassen, a public affairs officer for the Austin district of the I.R.S., said the singer would pay $1 million within 90 days, $1.4 million in increments of $233,000 every six months, and $3 million more within five years.
In addition, he will turn over the proceeds from sales of "Who'll Buy My Memories?: The I.R.S. Tapes" (Columbia Records), an album he made in 1991 from unpublished music seized by the I.R.S.


Tambrands Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Results Plus
TENNIS Navratilova Struggles  Martina Navratilova, playing for the first time in two months, battled for nearly two hours yesterday before beating a Japanese qualifier, Ai Sugiyama, in the first round of the Toray Pan Pacific Open in Yokohama, Japan.
The third-seeded Navratilova held off a desperate challenge by Sugiyama, No. 188 in the world ranking, for a 6-3, 3-6, 6-3 victory on the artificial court at Yokohama Arena.
"It was my first game in two months, and I felt nervous," Navratilova said.
"Much more nervous than usual. I don't know why." Louise Allen of the United States made a quick exit, being defeated by Andrea Temesvari-Trunkos of Hungary, 7-6 (8-6), 6-4. (AP)


Prosecutors Given More Time In a Second Katie Beers Case
Prosecutors won three more weeks today to prepare their case against Salvatore Inghilleri, the husband of Katie Beers's godmother, in connection with sexual abuse charges involving the 10-year-old girl.
Mr.
Inghilleri appeared briefly in Suffolk County District Court this morning for a hearing on the charges and to inform the court that he had hired a new lawyer, Steven Behar.


Let's Go Back to Before Reagan's 'Tax Reform'; Wrong Route on Debt
To the Editor:
It appears the new Administration will reform Treasury debt financing practices to stimulate the economy and cut the budget deficit.
A shift in Government borrowing from long term to short term, as outlined in "Awaiting the Bentsen Treasury" (Business Day, Jan. 19), would no doubt have immediate interest-cost saving, given the disparity between long-term and short-term rates.
However, a possible strategy change comes at a highly unfavorable time in the economic and interest-rate cycles.
Interest rates are likely to move higher as the economy strengthens.
Any Treasury financing saving now would likely be lost later.


Classical Music in Review
Fou Ts'ong  Pianist Alice Tully Hall
Fou Ts'ong, who was born in Shanghai in 1934, studied in Warsaw and has lived in London since 1958.
He is a substantial artist, with an impetuous spirit, a fluent technique and an arresting turn of phrase.
His deeply introspective program on Saturday evening -- Mozart's C-minor Fantasy (K. 475) and Sonata (K. 457), Beethoven's Opus 110 Sonata, Chopin's Opus 27 Nocturnes and Debussy's Book II Preludes -- bespoke seriousness, right down to the encore: Mozart's D-minor Fantasy (K. 397).


Moves by Cowboys
Line coach BUTCH DAVIS was named defensive coordinator of the Dallas Cowboys, replacing DAVE WANNSTEDT, now head coach of the Chicago Bears.
Offensive coordinator NORV TURNER was given the additional title of assistant coach, replacing Wannstedt in that capacity. (AP)


Theater in Review
Playing With Fire (After Frankenstein)  Church of the Holy Trinity 316 East 88th Street Manhattan Through Feb. 21 By Barbara Field; directed by Charles R. Johnson; costumes by Amanda J. Klein; lighting by Nancy Collings; set by Evelyn Sakash; stage manager, Cathy Diane Tomlin.
Presented by the Triangle Theater Company at the Church of the Holy Trinity, Michael Ramach, producing director.


Review/Film; Tricks of the Eye and Ear In a Romantic Fantasy
Maurizio Nichetti's "Volere Volare" is a slapstick love story whose considerable charm begins to evaporate once the movie is taken over by technological gimmickry that is not as captivating as the film makers seem to think.
The movie is the follow-up to Mr.
Nichetti's "Icicle Thief," a parody of neo-realism and modern television commercials that was a small tour de force of special effects.
In the new film, Mr.
Nichetti, an Italian comedian and director, plays Maurizio, a mousy creator of sound effects for cartoons.
The most engaging sequences show the timid sound wizard, who suggests a mustachioed Woody Allen, hard at work in the studio he shares with his brother (Patrizio Roversi), a dubber of erotic films.
Maurizio deftly slices salami on the reels of his projector and grills a steak on its heated metal body.
Maniacally applying sound effects to a Popeye cartoon, he bounces around the dubbing room like a little boy running wild in a dream world of his own creation.


U.S. ASSERTS IRAQ CHANGED BEHAVIOR
The Pentagon said today that the Iraqis had "changed their behavior" and halted their harassment of American planes policing the no-flight zones over northern and southern Iraq.
The Defense Department spokesman, Bob Hall, said in response to questions at today's Pentagon briefing that Iraq had not used target-acquisition radars or fired on American or allied planes policing no-flight zones over northern and southern Iraq since Jan. 23, three days after Mr.
Clinton's inauguration.


Israel Picks Deportees to Go Home But Palestinians Insist on All 400
The Israeli Army began today to draw up a list of100 exiled Palestinians who are to be brought back soon from southern Lebanon, but it seemed a pointless exercise because the deportees said that no one would return unless all 400 of them did so.
The Israeli compromise, part of an agreement reached with the United States on Monday, was also rejected by the Palestine Liberation Organization and allied leaders in the occupied territories, because it leaves nearly 300 men in Lebanon for another year.


Brava, Audrey Hepburn!
To the Editor:
Re "Audrey Hepburn's Perfection" (editorial, Jan. 22):
Audrey Hepburn's appeal had nothing whatever to do with making "skinny" flat-chested women of her generation feel good about themselves.
It had everything to do with her gentleness, her gaminelike beauty, her sincerity and the perfect romantic lilt she brought to her roles.


Richard Lederer, 76, Scarsdale's Historian
Richard M. Lederer Jr., the retired Village Historian of Scarsdale and an author and investment manager, died on Thursday at White Plains Hospital.
He was 76 and lived in Scarsdale.
His daughter, Barbara Rosin of Chappaqua, said the cause of death was heart failure.


Panel Set to Urge Overhaul Of Aid for College Students
A commission selected by Congress and former President George Bush to study revamping financial aid for college students will recommend today that the current patchwork of loans, grants and work-study programs be replaced by an integrated approach.
Under the plan every student would automatically become eligible to receive one level of aid -- $14,000 a year -- regardless of income.
But the type of aid will vary.
Poorer students will get more in grants; those who are better off, more in loans.


Lawsuits Over Leslie Fay Accounting
Shareholders took legal action yesterday against the management and directors of the Leslie Fay Companies, a day after the women's clothing maker announced that accounting irregularities might eliminate its 1992 profits and cause it to restate its 1991 earnings.
At least seven lawsuits were filed accusing the company of deliberately misstating its financial results.


Study Says Trade Pat Will Aid U.S. Economy
The first comprehensive assessment of the North American Free Trade Agreement by a Federal agency has found that the pact will help overall American economic output and employment slightly, while producing job losses in the auto, household appliance and apparel manufacturing industries.
The study by the International Trade Commission, an independent Federal agency, buttresses claims made for the agreement by the Bush Administration and rebuts some of the criticism from labor unions and some members of Congress who have predicted huge job losses.
First Independent Evaluation
The study, to be made public later this week, has been awaited on Capitol Hill and at the White House as the first independent evaluation of the pact's merits.
It was sent to the Senate Finance and the House Ways and Means Committees Monday night, and a member of Congress allowed a reporter to examine it this afternoon.


Stanley S. Lasdon, 83, Head of Philanthropy
Stanley S. Lasdon, a philanthropist and retired vice president and director of the Warner-Lambert Company, died on Sunday at his apartment in Manhattan.
He was 83.
His family said he died after a brief illness.


Political Memo; Clinton's Support of Abortion Rights Has Catholic Leaders on a Tightrope
For 12 years the Roman Catholic Church enjoyed a happy solidarity with the White House on the issue of abortion.
It was an emblematic alliance of the politics of the 1980's: Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush, shoulder to shoulder with cardinals and bishops from Democratic redoubts like New York and Boston, standing firm on the issue that has consumed the church hierarchy in recent years.
Now the bishops have a new President, one who carried the Catholic vote last fall, who is a graduate of a Catholic university and who has endorsed much of the social welfare agenda that the National Conference of Catholic Bishops has advocated for years.
But this President also chose, as one of his first acts, to begin to roll back 12 years of Republican abortion restrictions, and he has promised to do more.


Knight-Ridder Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Investigators Narrow Leads in Killing of Crusading Journalist
The investigation into the slaying of a crusading anti-drug journalist in a Queens restaurant has reached a critical stage, law-enforcement officials said yesterday, adding that they were trying to win the cooperation of suspects in various crimes who they believe have information about the assassination plot.
Eleven months after the journalist, Manuel de Dios Unanue, was shot, investigators say they believe a Queens-based group of drug traffickers and money launderers are among those who conspired to kill him.


Israel Relents. Will the Arabs?
Credit the Clinton Administration with its first modest Mideast success.
Under pressure from Washington, Israel's Government agreed Monday to return at once 100 of the 396 Islamic militants it expelled from the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip in violation of international law.
And it promised to return the others later this year.
That concession makes further Security Council action unnecessary.
Even countries unmoved by Israel's concerns about Islamic terrorism should recognize that any effort to press for the immediate return of all 396 by imposing sanctions would be excessive and counterproductive.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Agreed to terms with Mike Macfarlane, catcher, on a one-year contract.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Agreed to terms with Neal Heaton, pitcher, on a minor-league contract.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Agreed to terms with Eric Fox, outfielder, on a minor-league contract.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Agreed to terms with Henry Cotto, outfielder, on a one-year contract.
National League  ATLANTA BRAVES -- Agreed to terms with Jeff Blauser, shortstop; Kent Mercker, pitcher; and Damon Berryhill, catcher, on one-year contracts.
CINCINNATI REDS -- Agreed to terms with Randy Milligan, first baseman, on a minor-league contract.
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Agreed to terms with Jody Reed, second baseman, on a one-year contract.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Agreed to terms with Ricky Jordan, first baseman, on a one-year contract.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  NBA -- Fined Larry Johnson, Charlotte Hornets forward, $3,500, for taking a swing at an opponent in a game on Jan 30 and Isiah Thomas, Detroit Pistons guard, $2,000, for failing to leave the court in a timely manner and using abusive language after being ejected from a game on Jan 30.
CLEVELAND CAVALIERS -- Activated John Williams, forward, from the injured list.
SACRAMENTO KINGS -- Placed Duane Causwell, center, on the injured list.
Signed Henry James, forward, to a 10-day contract.
Football  National Football League  CHICAGO BEARS -- Named Tony Wise offensive line coach; Bob Slowik assistant coach, and Ron Turner offensive coordinator.
DALLAS COWBOYS -- Reassigned Butch Davis, line coach, to defensive coordinator.
Announced Norv Turner will remain as offensive coordinator and named him assistant coach.
Named Hudson Houch offensive line coach.
DETROIT LIONS -- Named Hank Bullough defensive coordinator.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Named Alex Gibbs offensive line coach.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Named Earl Leggett defensive line coach; Zaven Yaralian defensive backs coach and Al Miller strength coach.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Signed Bud Carson, defensive coordinator, to a two-year contract.


Coal Miners Begin Strike in 4 States
Faced with a threat to its members' high-wage jobs in a layoff-ridden economy, the United Mine Workers Union appeared prepared today for a long strike against the nation's largest coal producer, the Peabody Holding Company of St.
Louis, a subsidiary of a large British company.
Richard L. Trumka, president of the union, ordered his Peabody members to stop work just before midnight on Monday.
The striking workers -- who the union says number 7,700, but Peabody says amount to 5,000 -- work for two of the holding company's coal operations, the Peabody Coal Company of Henderson, Ky., and the Eastern Associated Coal Company in Charleston, W. Va.
They have stopped work at 22 mines in four states -- Indiana, Illinois, Kentucky and West Virginia.


IES Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lac Minerals reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Expert on Demographics Testifies at Hartford Trial
Five days after state officials proposed a timetable for Connecticut communities to integrate their schools by crossing town lines, lawyers began the state's defense today against a lawsuit challenging the racial and economic segregation in Hartford's schools.
From the time the suit, known as Sheff v.
O'Neill, was filed in 1989, state officials have said they supported its goals of improving the quality of education in Hartford's schools and achieving greater racial balance in schools statewide.


Washington Shifts Gears; Family Leave Moves Forward
The Family and Medical Leave Act, twice passed by Congress and twice vetoed by President Bush, is slowly but surely making its way into law.
Despite a last-minute effort to weaken it and a diversionary dispute over homosexuals in the military, the bill is considered certain to pass the Senate this week.
A nearly identical bill goes to the House today.
And countless working parents, covered by the act or not, can welcome the setting of so valuable a standard for the future.


A Sore Dokes Skips Workout
Four days before his heavyweight title bout against Riddick Bowe, Michael Dokes skipped a scheduled workout yesterday afternoon at the Times Square Gym, but he showed up later for a hastily called news conference, where he ate a four-course meal and maintained he was ready to fight.
Despite whispers that he had been injured while sparring on Monday, Dokes said, "I see myself going in there and having the performance of my life."


Eastman Kodak reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
One of the nation's pre-eminent legal figures, A. LEON HIGGINBOTHAM JR., senior judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, in Philadelphia, and its former chief judge, has submitted his resignation to President Clinton.
His move brings to a close a distinguished career in government and on the bench.
Appointed by President John F. Kennedy to the Federal Trade Commission in 1962, he was the first black commissioner of a Federal regulatory agency, as well as the youngest commissioner.
In 1964, he became a judge in Federal District Court and in 1977 rose to the Court of Appeals.


A Tortilla-Chip Casserole Shapes Up
TORTILLA-CHIP casserole?
The very name conjures up mounds of deep-fried tortilla chips covered with salt, gooey cheese and nice, fatty ground beef.
This casserole, a subtle variation, passes muster as a hearty, healthful and delicious quick dinner.


McClatchy Newspapers reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Johnson &amp; Johnson (N)
Johnson &amp; Johnson, a diversified health-care company based in New Brunswick, N.J., reported strong growth in quarterly profits yesterday, led by good results in prescription drug and consumer products.
Net income rose 12 percent in the fourth quarter of 1992, to $307 million, or 47 cents a share.
Excluding a $9 million noncash accounting charge, profits rose 15.3 percent.
Sales in the quarter increased by 11.3 percent, to $3.5 billion.
Twelve-month sales rose 10.5 percent, to $13.75 billion.


Theater in Review
500 Years A Fax From Denise Stoklos to Christopher Columbus  La Mama E.T.C. 74A East Fourth Street East Village Through Feb. 14 Written, directed, choreographed and performed by Denise Stoklos; costume by Veronica Franca; lighting by Ms.
Stoklos and Annette Ter Meulen; production stage manager, Gilda Almeida.
Presented by La Mama E.T.C. and D. S. Productions Ltd.


Review/Film; Is There Life (Hers) After Death (His)?
"The Cemetery Club," adapted by Ivan Menchell from his Broadway play and directed by Bill Duke, is a comedy about three well-heeled widows, pillars of the Jewish community in Pittsburgh, and their attempts to find meaning in their lives after their bereavements.
It's meant to be jolly, but it has the manner of a "Moonstruck" made for senior citizens facing the eternal void.
Doris Silverman (Olympia Dukakis) is everybody's scolding conscience.
She worships the ground her departed Abe is buried under.
Heaven help her pals, Lucille Rubin (Diane Ladd) and Esther Moskowitz (Ellen Burstyn), when they forget their various anniversaries at the cemetery.
Though Doris has the tart tongue of a stand-up comedian, she accepts her widowhood as a kind of religious calling.


MBIA Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tenneco's Ailing Chairman Says Therapy Is Going Well
The chairman of Tenneco Inc. today provided his first medical update since announcing Jan. 19 that he had been diagnosed with brain cancer.
Speaking before 120 Wall Street analysts in New York this morning, Michael H. Walsh said his initial chemotherapy treatments last week had gone "exceedingly well."


Paul Anderson, 85, Educator Who Led Temple Amid Strife
Paul R. Anderson, the retired president of Temple University and Chatham College, died on Sunday at his home in Ponte Vedra Beach, Fla.
He was 85.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


Philips Halts Plans to Build A European High-Definition TV
With the European Community deadlocked over financing further development of a super-sharp television broadcasting system, Philips Electronics N.V. has canceled plans to begin producing high-definition television sets next year.
Philips, the Dutch consumer electronics company, said on Monday that it would not begin producing the sets because of the British Government's decision in December to block $600 million in subsidies the European Community wanted for broadcasters and program producers.
The subsidies would go toward manufacturing the equipment needed to make and transmit shows in Europe's version of the high-definition television format.


WOMEN REASSURED ON COFFEE INTAKE
Pregnant women concerned that a morning cup of coffee may be harmful to the fetus are worrying needlessly, researchers at the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development say.
The researchers found that moderate consumption of caffeine -- three or fewer eight-ounce cups of coffee a day, for example -- did not increase the risk of miscarriage, retard fetal growth or reduce head circumference.


U.S. Resumes Granting Patents On Genetically Altered Animals
The Government has ended a self-imposed moratorium and has again begun approving animal patents, nearly five years after Harvard University made history by patenting a genetically engineered mouse.
The United States Patent and Trademark Office issued patents in late December to three organizations covering "transgenic" mice specially suited to research in human medicine.
These were the first new animal patents since Harvard received approval in April 1988 for a genetically altered research mouse that was predisposed to getting cancer.


PRESIDENT MOVES IN FAVOR OF LABOR
In a move of symbolic importance to labor unions, President Clinton has revoked two election-year orders by former President George Bush that were particularly hated by labor leaders who supported Mr.
Clinton in his Presidential bid.
Late Monday afternoon, Mr.
Clinton signed an executive order rescinding an order issued by Mr.
Bush on April 14 that had required Federal contractors to post notices informing nonunion workers that, under the terms of a Supreme Court decision, they were not obliged to join unions and had the right to stop unions from using money collected in lieu of dues for political activities the workers opposed.


Eugene Blanc Jr., 88, A Manhattan Lawyer
Eugene Blanc Jr., who practiced law in Manhattan for 65 years, died on Monday at New York Hospital.
He was 88 and lived in Manhattan.
His death followed a brief illness, said Leonard Spielberg, a colleague and former partner.


Pepsico Inc. (N)
Pepsico Inc. ended 1992 with double-digit gains in operating profits for each of its three business categories: soft drinks, snack foods and restaurants.
Fourth-quarter operating income, before nonrecurring charges, rose 10 percent in beverages, 20 percent in snack foods and 35 percent in restaurants for an overall increase of 21 percent, to $801.1 million.
"This has been a particularly encouraging year for us," Wayne Calloway, Pepsico chairman and chief executive, said in a statement.


Avery Dennison Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
An article yesterday about a high-speed train being tested by Amtrak referred incorrectly to the manufacturer of Amtrak's Metroliner cars.
The manufacturer, the Budd Company of Troy, Mich., is still in business, producing auto parts, plastics and water skis.
It no longer makes railway passenger cars.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The main index for predicting the economy soared 1.9 percent in December, and sales of new homes climbed 6.3 percent, indicating that the economy is expanding solidly and seems poised to continue growing despite lags in some areas.  [ Page A1. ]
President Clinton told governors and members of Congress that he wants $31 billion in new spending on jobs and on tax breaks for business this year to stimulate the economy.  [ A1. ]


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Arizona Public Service Co., Phoenix, is offering $150 million of 8 percent bonds due in 2025 at 98.75 to yield 8.11 percent through Salomon Brothers.
Callable in 10 years, the bonds are rated Baa-2 by Moody's and BBB by S.&amp; P. and Duff &amp; Phelps.


The Pop Life; Carving a Radio Market Out of the Mainstream
In radio, these are the days of the "squeeze play."
That's how Jeff Pollack, a leading radio consultant for the music industry, describes the problems faced by radio stations that try to appeal to a broad range of musical tastes.
What those stations, called "mainstream contemporary" within the industry, must do to survive will be one of the issues discussed at the Pollack Media Group's 10th annual programming and management conference, which begins today in Los Angeles.


Banta Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Tough Road Stretch Isn't Discouraging Devils' Brooks
In the eyes of Coach Herb Brooks of the Devils, the playoff participants from the Patrick Division will be determined in the last week of the regular season, and two teams that deserve to be in the playoffs will be left out.
"It'll be an unbelievable race," Brooks said after practice on Monday to prepare his Devils for tonight's game with the Calgary Flames.
"It's still a long season, though, and I don't want us to overreact or underreact."


Ogden Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Keeping Guns Out of the Hands of Inmates
To the Editor:
"When Inmates Carry Guns" (editorial, Jan. 20) is right to take aim at the need for improved security measures in New York City's jails to prevent guns from getting into the hands of inmates.
But you fail to acknowledge remedial actions we have taken to make these institutions safer for staff and inmates.
Alarmed by inmate shootings in two of our facilities, I met last summer with leaders representing all of our work force to discuss the need for additional safeguards.
This was not intended as an indictment of the many thousands of dedicated uniformed officers and supervisors, and our equally vital civilian support staff, but rather as an effort to insure everyone's safety.


Murphy Oil reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lorenzo Re-emerges in Plans for a New Airline
Frank Lorenzo, who was cast out of the airline industry for strong-arming the unions and for questionable tactics in managing Eastern Air Lines and Continental, is plotting his re-entry into the business.
According to several industry executives and an industry analyst who insisted that they not be identified, the former head of the Texas Air Corporation, which owned Continental and Eastern, has rounded up several DC-9 airplanes that formerly belonged to Delta.


Heaton Gets Chance With Yanks
Neal Heaton auditioned for 20 minutes at Yankee Stadium yesterday and impressed the Yankees enough that they signed the left-handed reliever to a minor league contract.
He will be among 10 nonroster players the club has invited to spring training, but the one with the best chance of staying.
Heaton, who has a 79-96 record with a 4.07 earned run average over 11 seasons, has a solid chance to make the roster because the Yankees are starved for left-handed relievers.
Steve Howe is the only left-hander in the bullpen.


Theater in Review
Much Ado About Nothing  Bouwerie Lane Theater 330 Bowery, at Second Street Lower East Side Through March 26 By William Shakespeare; directed by Robert Hupp; set by George Xenos; costumes by Susan Soetaert; lighting by Brian Aldous; choreography by Margaret Garrett; songs and musical direction by Ellen Mandel; production manager, Patrick Heydenburg.
Presented by Jean Cocteau Repertory, Mr.
Hupp, artistic director; Scott Shattuck, producing director.


RJR Nabisco Holding Corp. (N)
The company's 72 percent slide in fourth-quarter net, to $45 million, reflected net charges of $162 million forearly debt retirement, restructuring charges in its tobacco and food businesses and a gain from the previously announced sale of its Nabisco coldcereal products.
Sales rose a slim 3 percent, offsetting slight declines in its domestic tobacco operation
"Last year was a difficult one in the consumer products markets as competitors responded to weak consumer demand with aggressive pricing and promotional programs," said Louis V. Gerstner Jr., chairman and chief executive.


Tom Adair Dies at 57; A Dancer and Teacher
Tom Adair, a former soloist with American Ballet Theater and a teacher and choreographer in Poughkeepsie, N.Y., died on Monday at St.
Francis Hospital in Poughkeepsie.
He was 57.
Marsha Preiss, a friend, said the cause of death was lung cancer.


College Hockey Report
Beanpot Tournament  Two ordinary and predictable games on the Beanpot Tournament's opening night Monday in Boston Garden served a purpose.
They set up a heady confrontation for the championship game in the same arena next Monday between Boston University and Harvard.
The Terriers beat Boston College for a fourth time in one season in an 8-2 rout.
The Crimson, somewhat rusty after a two-week layoff for exams, defeated Northeastern as Matt Mallgrave scored three times in a 7-5 victory.


J. Bradford Haley College Administrator, 43
J.
Bradford Haley, an administrator at the Amos Tuck School of Business Administration at Dartmouth College, died Sunday at Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center in Lebanon, N.H.
He was 43 and lived in Hanover, N.H.
The college said the cause of death was heart failure.


On the Columbia Campus, New President Is Cheered
Even at a time when Columbia University is facing daunting challenges to its financial and academic future, the selection of George E. Rupp as the university's 18th president this week has spawned widespread optimism on campus.
"I have spoken to no one on the faculty today who is not elated by the choice of Dr. Rupp and who feels that perhaps we've been luckier than we deserve -- that we have found in Dr. Rupp someone who suits us, who suits the times, who suits the institution," Martin Meisel, a professor in arts and sciences, said yesterday.


Treating Ills in Childhood Cancer Survivors
IN stark testimony to their remarkable progress in curing cancer in children, oncologists are now focusing on the long-term health and social costs exacted by their lifesaving treatments.
More than two-thirds of children in whom cancer is diagnosed now survive without recurrence for at least five years, the unofficial definition of cure, and by the year 2000, one in every 900 American adults will be a survivor of childhood cancer.


Market Place; In cellular telephone stocks, perception is everything.
ARTHUR C. CLARKE, author of "2001: A Space Odyssey," once said, "Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic." In the current scare over wireless telephones and brain cancer, a credulous public may well be confusing high technology with black magic.
And some Wall Street analysts are advising extreme caution, if not with cellular telephones, then with any stock involved with them, at least for now.


Rostenkowski's Prosecutors Pressed on Disclosures
A Federal district judge said today that seven news accounts of the criminal investigation of Representative Dan Rostenkowski appeared to be based on confidential grand jury evidence, and he ordered prosecutors to tell whether they had improperly disclosed the information.
Mr.
Rostenkowski, the Illinois Democrat who is chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, has been under investigation on suspicion of improperly using campaign funds for personal use, taking money from the House post office and violating Federal tax laws.


The Swan, Multiplying Prolifically, Becomes an Ugly Duckling
Swans are multiplying so fast in New York and neighboring states that they have become a growing public nuisance.
Despite their grace and beauty, swans are not only mean and aggressive toward other birds but also potentially dangerous to humans, according to wildlife biologists.


Kubek Sticking to Hard Line
Tony Kubek, the Yankees' cable TV analyst for the MSG Network, said that the return of George Steinbrenner next month to an active role after a two-year absence won't alter his critical style, despite the principal owner's loathing of Kubek's on-air honesty.
"I have no dread of him returning," Kubek said yesterday at a gathering of the network's Yankees' production team.
"Actually, I never thought he was gone. I don't work for him. I work for MSG. I wouldn't work for George."


Knicks Escape As Sparks Lifts Hatch
The Knicks had a 16-point lead midway through the third quarter last night, but they lost it.
And with three minutes to play in the fourth quarter, the Washington Bullets (12-30), the last-place team in the Atlantic Division, had a 4-point lead before a mostly perplexed crowd at Madison Square Garden.
So how did the Knicks escape with a 105-100 victory?


Books of The Times; Success and Failure, All From the Same Source
Promise and Power The Life and Times of Robert McNamara By Deborah Shapley Illustrated. 734 pages.
Little, Brown. $29.95.


Classical Music in Review
Hakan Hagegard  and Warren Jones
Baritone and Pianist  Alice Tully Hall
Hakan Hagegard and Warren Jones appeared on Sunday as part of Lincoln Center's cycle Art of the Song.
Given the depth and the subtlety of these few hours, a subtitle -- "The Art of the Recital" -- might rightly have been added.


Settlement Of Lawsuits Set by Oracle
The Oracle Corporation said today that it had agreed to settle all shareholder class action and derivative lawsuits that have been pending against the company since March 1990.
The agreements, which are subject to court approval, will be provided for in the company's financial results for the current quarter as a nonrecurring operating expense of approximately $24 million, or 12 cents a share.


No Headline
"There's definitely a war." -- STEVEN HOFFENBERG, prospective buyer of The New York Post, after several staff members left for The Daily News.  [ B1:2. ] "Nobody ever said The Post didn't have good people. -- MORTIMER B. ZUCKERMAN, own of The Daily News."  [ B2:3. ]


G.O.P. Threatens Filibuster To Force Vote on Gay Ban
Senate Republicans threatened today to filibuster the family-leave bill if Democrats denied them a chance for a vote on a Republican amendment about homosexuals' serving in the military.
But the Republicans said they had not yet decided just which amendment to propose.
They are understood to be considering various proposals, including one requiring the military to continue to exclude homosexuals.
Another would guarantee that Congress would vote on the issue before any Presidential order lifting that exclusion can take effect.
"I'll let you know when I see a copy," Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican leader, told reporters.


Cash America International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Book Notes
Slamming the Closet Door
Dorothy Allison, whose novel "Bastard Out of Carolina" (Dutton) was a finalist for last year's National Book Award, will not be appearing at a three-day workshop in Oklahoma that had been scheduled for late April.
But the Oklahoma State Center for the Book and the National Book Foundation, which were to have jointly sponsored the program, are publicly arguing over the reasons for the cancellation.


Court Refuses to Hear Sharpton's Appeal of 1990 Conviction
New York State's highest court today declined to review the conviction of the Rev.
Al Sharpton and two co-defendants on charges stemming from a 1987 protest in Brooklyn, a ruling that is very likely to force Mr.
Sharpton to begin serving 45 days in jail on Monday.
In refusing to hear the appeal, Judge Joseph W. Bellacosa of the Court of Appeals let stand the 1990 conviction of Mr.
Sharpton, the Rev.
Timothy Mitchell and Charles Barron on charges of trespassing, disorderly conduct and obstruction of government administration.


Kurt Steiner Road Runners Official, 71
Kurt Steiner, the voice of the New York Road Runners Club and a former marathon runner, died yesterday.
He was 71.
Fred Lebow, the president of the club, said the cause of death was a heart attack.


American Cyanamid reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about the indictment of Sol Wachtler, New York State's former chief judge, misstated the date when prosecutors say he wrote anonymous letters about Arthur and Irene Seale, suspects in the kidnapping of an Exxon executive.
Prosecutors say the letters -- trying to link the Seales to the extortion plot in which Mr.
Wachtler himself was later charged -- were sent in June 1992, not 1991.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.13
3.25
3.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.95
2.97
3.82
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.12
3.10
3.87
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.02
5.95
6.86
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.24
7.20
7.74
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.30
8.35
8.83
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.28
6.30
6.75
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
A article on the Media Business page on Jan. 26 about the sale of WYNY-FM in New York misidentified the headquarters city of Broadcasting Partners Inc., the company buying the station, and misidentified a co-founder.
Broadcasting Partners is in New York.
The co-founder is Lee Simonson.


14 Dancers Get Lausanne Ballet Prizes
Fourteen dancers from nine countries received awards in the 21st Prix de Lausanne, an international ballet competition that concluded on Jan. 31 in Lausanne, Switzerland.
The awards are primarily given to young dancers for further ballet training.
Grants that include a stipend, a medal and a year's tuition at a school of the dancer's choice were given to Marta Barahona Borrego and Asier Uriagereka, both of Spain; Oksana Selezneva of Russia, Mizuka Ueno of Japan and Adriana Dias Duarte of Brazil.
Cash awards were given to Roman Rykine of Russia, Lynn Rielly of the United States, Shintaro Oue of Japan and Wim Vanlessen of Belgium.
Winners of the "Espoir" prize, given to young dancers showing potential, were Miwa Asano of Japan and Evelina Ricci of Italy.
The prize includes a year's full tuition and a stipend.
Professional-level awards of cash and medals were given to Fernando Mora Carrillo of Mexico and Edward Liang of the United States.
Kusha Angst won the cash award and medal for the best Swiss dancer and Miss Selezneva was chosen by viewers of the televised competition for a cash prize from Swiss television.
The award money ranges from stipends worth about $14,500 to cash prizes starting at about $1,500.


State Told To Free Man In Hospital
Larry Hogue, the homeless man who residents of the Upper West Side accuse of terrorizing them and their neighborhood, was ordered released from a state mental hospital yesterday on the grounds that he was not mentally ill and only had what a judge described as an "attitude problem."
But the release order, by Justice Richard Rutledge of State Supreme Court in Queens, was effectively stayed for five days while the state Attorney General, Robert Abrams, files an emergency appeal of the order with the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court.


Ogden Projects reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Economy Shows Expansion, But Jobs and Regions Falter
Despite lingering joblessness and areas where the recession stubbornly hangs on, most economists say the United States economy is expanding solidly and seems poised to continue growing.
Layoffs by large companies like I.B.M. and Sears are grabbing headlines and indeed, joblessness is now higher even than when the recession began.
In this recovery, growth has come primarily from improved production by workers already on the payroll, rather than new hiring.
But this is contributing to hefty corporate profits, more investment by business and longer hours for those employed.
Furthermore, job creation by small companies is starting to offset the very visible job cutbacks at big-name enterprises.
Borrowers have now repaid some of their debts, and consumer confidence has strongly rebounded.
Index Soars 1.9%
Signs of the recovery taking hold showed up strongly in a variety of statistics released in recent days.
The Government's main measure for predicting the economy, the index of leading economic indicators, soared 1.9 percent in December, its third straight advance and the brightest forecast for growth in nearly 10 years, the Commerce Department reported today.


Neediest Are Helped By Auction
It was the middle of December, and the mail room at the Lord West company in Woodside, Queens, was so clogged with Christmas presents from its suppliers that it looked like a small gift shop.
Cheese baskets, bottles of wine and champagne, calendars, ties, a gargantuan fruit cake -- what to do with all this stuff?
For executives at Lord West, which makes men's formal wear, the answer was obvious: hold an auction at the Christmas party and donate the proceeds to charity.
So a few days later, when the office staff of 60 or so gathered for a bit of annual revelry, the company raised about $700, and donated $335 to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Eagles Re-sign Carson
BUD CARSON, the Philadelphia Eagles' defensive coordinator, has decided against retiring and has signed a two-year contract with the team. (AP)


Lopez: Baseball No, Basketball Yes
Three years ago, Felipe Lopez was shooting baskets in the playground of the Alexander Burger Intermediate School in the Bronx when two drug dealers had a score to settle.
One drew a machine gun and opened fire and the other shot back with a hand gun.
"I was right there," Lopez, now a star guard at Rice High School in Harlem, recalled.
"I was looking right at the shooters. I don't know what happened after that because I just took off. I'd never seen anything like that before. I got kind of scared."


Bridge
A relatively new idea that is gaining in popularity is the Continuous Pairs.
It was introduced at the 1990 world championships, and gives a prize for overall performance in a series of minor games at a tournament.
This is now being tried in American tournaments, and the Continuous winner at the Tri-State Regional Championship last month was Joan Dziekanski of Manhattan, who works at the Beverly Club.
On the diagramed deal she held the East cards, with her husband, Paul Dziekanski, in the West position.
Her opponents bid themselves to one no-trump when outnumbered in high-card points, a risky thing to do when vulnerable.
A heart lead to the ten was won by the queen, and South led the spade nine.
West made a good play by putting up the jack, leaving South to wonder about the location of the queen.
South might have won with the king, in the hope of scoring five tricks in the suit, but made the right decision by ducking.
West cashed the diamond ace, looking for a clue, and was not sure about the meaning of his partner's four.
He tried the club nine, and East took the ace and returned a heart.
West took two heart tricks and now worked out that his partner held diamonds.
He shifted back to diamonds, and the defense took eight tricks without South's having to judge what to do in spades.
The moral is that light third-hand opening bids are risky when vulnerable.
Most experts would choose to open with the North hand, but if they fail to find a spade fit they can expect to suffer the same fate as North-South did: minus 200, the kiss of death in matchpoint play.


EARLY MAMMOGRAM GETS ENDORSEMENT
Addressing what it called a public confusion about whether women in their 40's benefited from regular mammograms, the American Cancer Society said yesterday that they should continue to have the breast X-rays it recommends in its guidelines.
At a two-day workshop in New York, the seven men and one woman on a panel of experts agreed that there was no ironclad evidence that women under 50 benefited from mammograms.
But they said there was enough presumptive evidence to make them leery of changing the screening guidelines.


Let's Go Back to Before Reagan's 'Tax Reform'; Structural Recession
To the Editor:
Re "Economists Meet, and Puzzle Over a Slump" (Business Day, Jan. 9), reporting on the American Economic Association meeting in Anaheim.
Calif.: Economists will remain puzzled as long as they insist on talking about "the recession" because there are two different recessions at work, one cyclical -- which seems to be over -- the other structural, going strong and with no end in sight.
The structural recession is characterized by a reversal of the usual cause-effect sequence.
Layoffs, especially at high wage levels, are its main source rather than its result.
The two recessions interact: a cyclical downswing in 1990, combined with drastic cuts in defense spending and with growing global competition, have acted as catalysts to accelerate the restructurings of the workplace.
They were driven in part by the efforts of businesses, mainly in the service sector, to reap long-overdue productivity returns from a huge investment in information technology.


Olsten Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3


Police and Taxi Drivers Clash for Second Day in South Africa


CorrectionsCorrections
A Critic's Notebook article yesterday about growing interest in photography at New York City museums misstated the closing date for an exhibition of the new photography collection of the Whitney Museum of American Art.
It runs through Feb. 14, not Feb. 21.


Stanley S. Lasdon, 83, Head of Philanthropy
Stanley S. Lasdon, a philanthropist and retired vice president and director of the Warner-Lambert Company, died on Sunday at his apartment in Manhattan.
He was 83.
His family said he died after a brief illness.


Injured Firefighter Leaves the Hospital
New York City Fire Capt.
Martin G. McTigue, who was seriously burned two months ago when a pipe burst at Consolidated Edison's steam-generating plant on Manhattan's East Side, was released from the hospital yesterday.
Captain McTigue suffered second- and third-degree burns over 50 percent of his torso when the pipe broke, releasing a blast of 500-degree steam that killed a utility mechanic.


Leafs' Fuhr to Sabres
The Buffalo Sabres, looking for goaltending help to balance their high-powered offense, acquired GRANT FUHR from the Toronto Maple Leafs yesterday.
The Leafs obtained the high-scoring left wing DAVE ANDREYCHUK, goalie DARREN PUPPA and the Sabres' first-round draft pick in June.
Sending Fuhr to Buffalo allows Coach PAT BURNS of Toronto to give the No. 1 job to the rookie standout FELIX POTVIN. (AP)


Foremost Corp. of America (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Caution on Welfare; Even Though They Please Moynihan, Clinton's Actions Are Far From Bold
President Clinton used a speech to the nation's governors today to insist that he was serious about his plan to "end welfare as we know it," promising, as he had in the past, "a dramatic breakthrough" in changing public assistance programs.
But while his talk of pushing people from welfare after two years seemed bold, his actions were not.
He has yet to spell out the policies that would transform his ideas into programs, and he did not even form a task force, as previous Presidents have done when they wanted to buy delay.
Instead, he merely promised to form one, saying the members would be appointed in the next 10 days.


Great Lakes Chemical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lawmaker Says U.S. Concealed Knowledge of Iraq's Arms Plans
The chairman of the House Banking Committee said today that he had received new evidence that the Central Intelligence Agency and the Bush Administration were aware of Iraq's weapons program far earlier than they had acknowledged.
Representative Henry B. Gonzalez, the Texas Democrat who heads the committee, said he believed the intelligence agency also concealed for a time what it knew about the role played by an Italian bank in Iraq's arms-procurement efforts.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Jan. 29
Jan. 22
Jan. 31
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.2
6.9
Distillate production, daily
2.9
2.9
2.8
Gasoline stocks
234.1
229.7
230.0
Distillate stocks
133.3
138.8
128.0
Crude imports, daily
6.2
6.5
5.2
Product imports, daily
1.3
2.1
2.3
Crude stocks
326.8
326.9
334.3
Crude production, daily
7.1
7.1
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
85.3
85.8
80.0
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Marsh Supermarkets (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Holyfield Wants Another Shot at Bowe
He has seen both of them, fought both of them and beaten one of them, and this is how Evander Holyfield sees Saturday night's heavyweight championship fight at Madison Square Garden: Riddick Bowe in a knockout.
Holyfield, once the champion until defeated almost three months ago by Bowe, said yesterday that he did not expect to see a long fight.
What he does expect is an early Bowe knockout of Michael Dokes and then, perhaps, a title shot for himself.


Executive Changes
BUILDERS SQUARE INC., San Antonio, a chain of do-it-yourself home improvement centers and a unit of Kmart Corp., named Frank G. Felicella president and chief executive, succeeding Glen R. Mielke, who retired.
CAPITOL AMERICAN FINANCIAL CORP., Cleveland, a supplemental health insurance company, appointed David H. Gunning as chairman, president and chief executive.


Dispute Over School 'Reflection'
A Queens school board that has begun requiring students to observe a "moment of reflection" after the Pledge of Allegiance is facing the threat of a lawsuit from two civil liberties groups that see the pause as a subterfuge for classroom prayer.
But members of the District 29 board insisted yesterday that the contemplative moment had no religious intent and was meant only to "set a tone" of calm in classrooms.


LTV Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; Riddick Bowe Has Family in Scarsdale
THEY remembered him as a laughing boy, sweet and bright, who graced their home for two weeks one summer.
And then he came back into their lives as the heavyweight champion of the world.
In the summer of 1975, Bob and Sandy Goldstein, newly moved from Manhattan to Westchester, took a stranger into their family.
Through the Fresh Air Fund, they were hosts to a 7-year-old boy from Brooklyn.


Hawaii Is Offering $106 Million Issue
The Hawaii Department of Budget and Finance is offering $106 million of special purpose revenue bonds with a maximum yield of 6.421 percent for an issue due in 2013 through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.
The bonds are for the Kapiolani Health Care Service Obligated Group and are rated single-A by both Moody's and the Standard &amp; Poor's.


Defense Rests In Abuse Trial In Newark
Defense lawyers abruptly rested their case in the Glen Ridge sex assault trial today after calling only four witnesses, saying they were optimistic that the verdict would go their way.
The lawyers representing four former Glen Ridge football players charged with sexually assaulting a mildly retarded schoolmate on March 1, 1989, said they saw no need to call any other witnesses or have the four defendants testify in their own behalf.


Kansas City Power &amp; Light reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Super Bowl, Super Rout, Super Ratings
The Dallas Cowboys's 52-17 rout of the Buffalo Bills in Super Bowl XXVII on NBC Sunday attracted a record television audience of 133.4 million viewers, exceeding the previous record of 127 million set in 1986 when the Chicago Bears defeated the New England Patriots, 46-10, in Super Bowl XX in New Orleans.
The total viewership number is a calculation of how many people watched some or all of the game and does not indicate that 133.4 million people were glued nonstop to the contest for more than three hours.


Public &amp; Private; Please Don't Inhale
The mental picture is riveting: While a four-star fete goes on within, a senator, an ambassador or a captain of industry huddles in a doorway of the White House, cold and disgusted.
He is losing valuable ear time with movers and shakers, he has missed a chance to confab with the President, and he has gone head-to-head with the President's wife.
And all because he needed a smoke.
Since Hillary Rodham Clinton said she would ban smoking in the White House, there has been this irresistible image of people in evening clothes doing what smokers have learned to do in recent years -- go outdoors, as though they were unruly pets.
Or Secret Service agents wrestling a lit cigarette to the ground.
Or alliances unraveling as frazzled envoys from heavy-smoking nations try to get through dinner without nicotine.


Seton Hall Rumbles As Dehere Sinks 29
Seton Hall broke through its own dreadful deep freeze tonight with a much needed though less-than-inspirational 90-71 victory over Providence.
Terry Dehere scored a game-high 29 points and Arturas Karnishovas added 17 as Seton Hall (16-5 over all, 6-3 in the Big East) pulled out of a tailspin that had seen the Pirates lose their three previous games.


MEDIATOR IS UPSET AT U.S. RELUCTANCE OVER BOSNIA TALKS
Lord Owen, one of the two chairmen of the international mediation effort in the Balkans, complained yesterday that the Clinton Administration's reluctance to back the effort threatened to "scuttle chances of ending the war" in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
"Against all the odds, even against my own expectations, we have more or less got a settlement," Lord Owen, the former British Foreign Secretary, said in an interview.
"But we have a problem. We can't get the Muslims on board. And that's largely the fault of the Americans, because the Muslims won't budge while they think Washington may come into it on their side any day now."
"What do they want down there, a war that goes on and on?" he asked, referring to Washington officials. 'It's a Bitter Irony'


Burlington Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


CorrectionsCorrections
A caption in Science Times yesterday for an undersea photograph of a World War II airplane misidentified it.
It was a Grumman Avenger, not a Douglas Dauntless bomber.
A related caption for an undersea photo of a deck bench on the Titanic misidentified the organizer of a 1991 expedition to photograph the ship.
It was the IMAX Corporation.


National Healthcorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Uncle of Mafia Informant Is Found Slain in Brooklyn
Two years ago Peter Chiodo of Staten Island was shot a dozen times and critically wounded, but the 500-pound informer against the Mafia still lived to testify against a dozen major underworld figures.
A year ago Mr.
Chiodo's sister, Patricia Capozzalo, of Brooklyn, was seriously wounded in what the authorities described as a failed attempt by the mob to kill her.


Airborne Freight reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
An article on the Media Business page of Business Day on Monday about cost-cutting programs at The Los Angeles Times misstated the expected saving.
The combined annual saving from an early-retirement program in 1991 and the closing of the San Diego edition last December is $24 million.
The Times expects the saving from a recent voluntary employee buyout program to be at least another $24 million.
Because of an editing error, the article also misstated the source for the paper's advertising figures.
They were provided by the newspaper, not by the Audit Bureau of Circulations.


Revenue Bonds For Arizona Unit
The Salt River Project Agricultural Improvement and Power District of Arizona tentatively priced $261.6 million of electric system revenue refunding bonds yesterday.
Proceeds of the issue will be used to refund bonds sold when interest rates were higher and to lower the district's debt costs.
Underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company said the maximum yield was 6.15 percent for an issue due in 2019.
The taxable equivalent of that bond for an investor in the 28 percent tax bracket is about 8.54 percent.


Cairo Journal; With Islam in Vogue, Egypt Follows in Its Fashion
Al Salam Shopping Center for Veiled Women is the powerhouse of Muslim fundamentalist chic in Egypt: a three-floor store in one of Cairo's finest suburbs, trying to sell solutions to the puzzle of how a woman can cover up from head to toe while preserving a sense of fashion.
In this country of 56 million, where conservatism has been undeniably on the rise in the last decade, ever-increasing millions are being spent at stores like this one.
Year after year, more of Egypt's middle- and upper-class women have been shunning fashionable Western attire, denounced by fundamentalist preachers as sinful, lewd and sexually provocative, for garb they fervently hope can be attractive as well as Islamically acceptable.


Burlington Coat Factory reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Horse Racing; These Days, Bettors Thrive on Imported Races
Most race horses are in the barns or in the South these winter days.
But the horseplayers still swarm into action every afternoon at the Meadowlands, where three potted palms set the tone and 85 parimutuel tellers set the pace.
In the otherwise cold and empty grandstand, as many as 2,000 bettors risk up to $1 million on races telecast from faraway tracks.


Classical Music in Review
Lynn Harrell  and Yefim Bronfman  Cellist and Pianist Carnegie Hall
New kinds of performers have been invented to translate long-ago ensemble music into gestures both large and clear enough for modern concert halls.
The intended intimacies need a bigger scale at no sacrifice of original proportions: new heft, in other words, but not more hot air.
Lynn Harrell and Yefim Bronfman, playing the cello and piano, respectively, did a very good job with such matters on Friday night.


COMPANY NEWS: Conserving While Waiting; Victory for the E.P.A.: Power-Saving Printers
The secret to energy conservation, according to the Environmental Protection Agency, is not always doing more with less.
Sometimes it means doing nothing with less.
Specifically, the agency wants electronic equipment to draw less electricity while it is switched on but waiting for something to do.
So last week, the agency announced that seven leading makers of computer printers, representing 80 percent of the laser-printer market, had agreed to redesign their machines to use less power when they are on standby.
For many printers, that's nearly all day long.


Europe Gripes About Clinton Trade Stance
The 12 members of the European Community let loose a few preliminary grumbles today about what they perceive as the emerging trade protectionism of the Clinton Administration.
"Two examples in two weeks can hardly be an accident," said Niels Helveg Petersen, the Danish Foreign Minister, who speaks for the community on foreign affairs during the six-month Danish presidency that began Jan. 1.


C.I.A. Nominee Wary of Budget Cuts
President Clinton's nominee to head the Central Intelligence Agency refused today to endorse any immediate cut in the nation's estimated $29 billion intelligence budget, warning of multiplying threats to American security.
Resisting invitations to describe a new era of austerity for the nation's intelligence agencies, the nominee, R. James Woolsey, instead outlined what he said were widening and vexing challenges.
He used vivid imagery to paint a portrait of the country's task with the cold war won.


Master Guitar Makers Are Leery of Their Art
A three-story walkup between a city marshal's office and a judo school on Atlantic Avenue in Brooklyn harbors three generations of Del Pilars, the patriarch, 72-year-old William Sr., down to 14-month-old Joshua; a menagerie of cats, dogs, fish and an old, blind bluejay, as well as two -- potentially three -- of the master guitar makers of America.
For almost half a century, from their unprepossessing home above a storefront, the Del Pilars have created classical guitars with a sonorous tone that enthralls few musicians.
Few because the Del Pilars have never made more than 40 instruments a year.


Budget Official Sees No Savings in Clinton's Health-Care Plans
The Congressional Budget Office said today that neither consumers nor the Federal Government would get any short-term savings from proposals to overhaul the nation's health-care system put forward by President Clinton as well as by Republican and moderate Democratic lawmakers.
That conclusion, delivered by Robert D. Reischauer, director of the budget office, prompted expressions of frustration from members of Congress at a hearing of the House Ways and Means Subcommittee on Health.


Out-of-Towner Scales New Heights
THIS is about pinnacles of success and depths of despair but mostly it is about love and mountain climbing in Manhattan.
Its beginning was in a tent pitched outside Vail, Colo., last July Fourth.
"We were on a climbing trip and Michael asked me to marry him," explained Michelle Hayes, the heroine of the tale.
"I was deliriously happy and of course I said 'yes.' " She was still ecstatic two hours later when her boyfriend got around to delivering another surprising bit of news: he had been offered a job on Wall Street as a bond trader.


Food Notes
Waiting for Recognition
The Waiters Association is a new organization founded by Vivienne Wildes and Gerald Foley, two former waiters who met while they were working at the Triangle Restaurant in Mountaintop, Pa.
The association's aim is to make restaurant service a serious career and provide help with training to help the estimated 1.8 million people who work as waiters achieve recognition.
Ms.
Wildes was the director of personnel for many years at the Inn at Little Washington, in Washington, Va., and Mr.
Foley was food and beverage manager for Richmond Hill, an inn in Asheville, N.C.
They are now co-directors of the new association, based in Takoma Park, Md.


Critic's Notebook; Laughing at AIDS Is First Line of Defense
People with AIDS are dying like clockwork in the Manhattan of Paul Rudnick's new play, "Jeffrey." So how can it be that "Jeffrey" is the funniest play of this season and maybe last season, too?
There are two explanations for this phenomenon, one simple, one less so.
The simple one is Mr.
Rudnick's talent.
An essayist, novelist ("Social Disease"), playwright ("I Hate Hamlet") and unbilled Hollywood script doctor ("The Addams Family"), Mr.
Rudnick is a born show-biz wit with perfect pitch for priceless one-liners.
Though only 34 years old, he might be a household name by now had he not chosen to pour some of his most hilarious wisecracks into ramshackle vehicles about cartoonish subjects. (And had "I Hate Hamlet," his Broadway debut, not been capsized by the onstage misbehavior of its star, Nicol Williamson.)


INSIDE
Iraq Is Behaving, U.S. Says
The Pentagon said the Iraqis had "changed their behavior" and halted their harassment of American planes in the north and south.
Page A5.
Russia Barters in Weapons
Weapons sales are helping ex-Soviet republics stay afloat, but the exports are deepening Western concern about buildups in China and Iran.
Page A6.
A Victory for Labor
The President revoked two orders, issued by the Bush Administration, that had been a particular target of organized labor.
Page A17.
Clinton and the Bishops
The nation's Roman Catholic bishops are trying to co-exist with a President whose stance on abortion is very different from their own.
Page A14.
No Smoke, No Fire
The White House smoking ban, unlike some other decisions by the new Administration, has hardly drawn a whimper of criticism.
Page C6.
Post-News Battle Escalates
The Daily News lured more editors and writers from The New York Post and The Post responded with a lawsuit to try to halt the exodus.
Page B1.


Timken Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Antony Kloman, 89, Painter and Art Patron
Antony J. T. Kloman, a retired artist and supporter of the arts, died Thursday at a hospital in Bradenton, Fla.
He was 89 and lived in Newport, R.I.
He died of pneumonia, his family said.


At the Cox Landey agency, an effort to bridge the generation gap is starting very close to the top.
A NEW YORK agency with a reputation for creativity hopes to create its next generation of leadership by naming two young executives to top positions.
Cox Landey &amp; Partners, which serves clients like the Eastman Kodak Company, the Hartmarx Corporation and Hearst Magazines, has named Jane Cavalier, who is 32, as president and director of account management, and Jeff Griffith, 27, as creative director.
They join Martin H. Landey, 56, who continues as chairman and chief executive.


AT THE DOOR WITH: Craig Dawson; Honing His Act Wherever the Stage
THE door swings open and three middle-aged women enter, clustered together as if sent by parcel post.
One clutches theater tickets in her hand.
Surveying the packed tables at Sam's, the ultimate theater insider's restaurant, she gets the first crease of anxiety between her eyes.
"Uhmmm, we don't have a reservation," she tells the maitre d', who looks back, deadpan.


Ayer and Ketchum Halt Merger Talks
The on-again, off-again merger negotiations between Ayer Inc. and Ketchum Communications Inc. are, by mutual agreement, off again, the two agencies said yesterday.
A merger, rumored since August, would have combined Ayer, with billings of $1.4 billion, the world's 18th-largest agency company, and Ketchum, No. 24, at $978.8 million, to create a company that would have ranked 14th in Advertising Age's annual listings.
"Someday, who knows, but at this point we are going our separate ways," said Jerry Siano, chairman and chief executive at Ayer in New York.
"Where we wanted to go was somewhat different from where they wanted to go."


Metropolitan Diary
PASTA CEMETERY  The directions said, "Get off the parkway, make two left turns, pasta cemetery." I backed the car up.
I always wanted to see what happened to that plate of spaghetti I had left over in 1965 because my brother said it looked like worms.
And whatever became of the huge dish of linguine I couldn't finish last year?
Must have been smothered by the white clam sauce.
I recognized some baked ziti we were served at my ex-sister-in-laws one summer.
"Cooked to death," read the epitaph.
The casualties continued: "Rigatoni, created 1975. Destroyed by sauce from a jar."
"Here lies lasagna, dead from neglect in someone's refrigerator."


Another Glitch
Dell Computer is generally reliable, but like a power surge hitting a personal computer, the unexpected causes the stock to go haywire.
The most active Nasdaq issue yesterday, Dell had fourth-quarter sales that fell below analysts' estimates.
In one day last June, Dell plunged more than 25 percent as computer price wars broke out.


Stocks Are Little Changed As Dow Retreats by 3.51
A selloff in medical stocks, stricken again with the regulatory virus, offset gains elsewhere to leave the major market averages little changed yesterday.
Nasdaq stocks continued to recuperate from last week, however, with an improvement of 3.35, to 705.12, yielding a two-day advance of more than 1.2 percent.
The health fears that had beset cellular telephone stocks receded somewhat, and the stocks bounded ahead.


Michel Renault, 65, Star of Paris Ballet And Dance Teacher
Michel Renault, who was one of the Paris Opera Ballet's most popular postwar stars, died on Friday in a hospital outside Paris.
He was 65 and lived in Paris.
A spokesman for the Opera Ballet said the cause of death was hepatitis.


Lockheed Corp. (N)
The Lockheed Corporation reported a loss for 1992 as a result of a $631 million accounting charge to cover the costs of health-care benefits for retirees.
Without the unusual charge, the defense company's earnings would have increased by 13 percent, better than expected by industry analysts, as sales rose.
Lockheed's fortunes appear to be improving largely because one of its major programs, the construction of nuclear-tipped Trident missiles for submarines, has moved beyond the costly research and development stage into full production, which is more profitable.
The Missiles and Space unit, which generated 45 percent of the company's revenue, had margins of 11 percent in the fourth quarter, said Jack Modzelewski, an aerospace analyst at Paine Webber.


Kendall International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reeves Won't Spare The Rod With Giants
Dan Reeves served notice yesterday that the Giants' off season has already ended.
His predecessor, Ray Handley, presided over a reluctant group of players -- as few as a third of the team -- who attended strength and conditioning programs.


Who Will Regulate the Regulators?
The public believes Republican administrations oppose environmental, health and safety regulations because of their ties to big business.
This belief was fueled by the Bush Administration's Council on Competitiveness, which was abolished right after the Clinton Administration took office.
Beginning in 1970, Democratic Congresses gradually stripped regulatory discretion from Republican Presidents when reauthorizing old laws and enacting new ones.
They vested this power in independent agencies like the Environmental Protection Agency and Occupational Safety and Health Administration.


B.A.T. Splits Top Jobs in Management
B.A.T.
Industries P.L.C., the tobacco and financial services group, has split the roles of chairman and chief executive.
The company said today that Martin Broughton had been named the first chief executive in its 90-year history, effective April 1.
Sir Patrick Sheehy will remain chairman, and Mr.
Broughton will have the additional title of deputy chairman.
He will manage the group's business and develop business strategy.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  COLD FAILS TO DRIVE HOMELESS TO SHELTERS
Even on a brutal, wind-whipped early morning -- the coldest in three years -- many of New York City's homeless choose to avoid the city's shelter system.
And police officials reported that at least one apparently homeless man died after falling asleep with a cigarette in his mouth that set his clothes on fire.
A1.
HOMELESS MAN IS ORDERED RELEASED
The homeless man who residents of the Upper West Side accuse of terrorizing them and their neighborhood was ordered released from a state mental hospital on the ground that he was not mentally ill and only had what a judge described as an "attitude problem." B3.


So Far, a Smoke-Free White House Is Drawing No Fire
THE Clinton Administration has come under its share of criticism in its first two weeks, but Bill and Hillary Clinton's decision to ban smoking at White House dinners is bringing forth barely a whimper.
Although this country still has a lot of smokers, there has been little public rebellion against the growing number of public and private places that ban smoking.
And barely a critical word was heard yesterday as news of the ban filtered through the offices of members of Congress, tobacco lobbyists and foreign dignitaries who might be expected to complain.


Division I Signs Up at Curtis
At Curtis High School on Staten Island today, four football players will be huddled around a fax machine waiting for their futures to be transmitted.
On college football's first official signing day for letters of intent from Division I schools, Will Haskell, a wide receiver-running back, will sign with Washington State; Jeff Ford, a quarterback, is headed for the University of Wisconsin; Pete Sorrentino, an offensive guard, is going to the University of Maryland, and Pete Gambardella, a wide receiver, running back and safety, is on his way to Boston University.
Fred Olivieri, their coach, is elated.


Applications Up at Hillary Clinton's Alma Mater
Applications to Wellesley College have reached a record high, college officials say, largely because of publicity about Hillary Rodham Clinton.
Wellesley received more than 2,800 applications from high school seniors by the Jan. 15 deadline for the 1993 fall semester, said Janet A. Lavin, director of admissions at the college.
She said that was an 11 percent increase over last year's total and the most applications the women's college has received in its 117-year history.


OFFER BY ISRAELIS IS PRAISED BY U.S.
The Clinton Administration sought today to cast the offer of Israel to take back about 100 of 400 deported Palestinians in an optimistic light as Arab countriespressed ahead here with their campaign for Security Council sanctions against the country.
In Washington, the State Department spokesman, Richard A. Boucher, called the Israeli decision "a breakthrough" and said the "important process that has been established obviates the need for further action in the Security Council."


CAMBODIANS HALT ATTACKS ON REBELS
Prime Minister Hun Sen said today that he had ordered an end to a major military offensive against the Khmer Rouge rebels and had asked the United Nations to use international peacekeeping troops to create a buffer zone between the Maoist-inspired guerrillas and Government soldiers.
"If we can create a buffer zone, there is no problem," the Prime Minister said after a meeting here with United Nations peacekeepers, who had protested the Government's new offensive as a major cease-fire violation.
"Our intention is to withdraw our forces."


Let's Go Back to Before Reagan's 'Tax Reform'
To the Editor:
Re "Congress and Clinton: A Handshake if Not a Kiss" (The Week in Review, Jan. 10): You are to be commended for quoting Prof.
Charles Jones of the University of Wisconsin asking, "How are we going to solve these problems within the constraints of the great Reagan debt?"
Why do so few have the courage to state openly that our runaway national debt is the Reagan debt continued into the Bush Administration?
The debt incurred during these 12 years is more than the indebtedness accumulated over 200 years of borrowing since the birth of the Republic.
We all know this to be so.


Eating Well
EVEN the Center for Science in the Public Interest, the Washington-based consumer advocacy group, has thrown in the towel.
Instead of exhorting everyone to get the recommended allowances of vitamins and minerals by eating the foods that contain them, the center acknowledges that 4 out of 10 people prefer to get their vitamins and minerals from pills.
The center even admits that people who eat a nutritionally correct diet may have a hard time getting high doses of vitamins E and C and beta carotene, which are antioxidants.
Those are today's hottest supplements because there is some evidence that they help to prevent some cancers.
The January-February issue of the center's newsletter, Nutrition Action, has two articles on vitamin and mineral supplements.
They include plenty of information about the traps consumers encounter in the supplement jungle.
They also offer guidelines on how to choose the best vitamins and minerals and how to spend the least amount of money doing so.


Personal Health
A SIX-PAGE letter arrived last month that aroused first outrage, then sadness and prompted this public response.
It was a plea from Dr.
Joseph DiGennaro, a professor of exercise, sport and leisure sciences at Lehman College, a division of the City University of New York, to help keep physical fitness an integral part of a college education.
A recommendation by an advisory committee to the board of trustees to eliminate tax-supported physical education throughout the city university system is under discussion as one of many cost-saving measures for the struggling system.


Overseas Selloff Dampens Bonds
Treasury prices retreated yesterday because of selling abroad, several reports of positive economic data and concerns about the Treasury's plans for February's quarterly auction, which will be announced today.
Most of the decline came before trading began in New York.
Traders said there was a lot of selling overseas, especially in Japan, where they said there was also concern about the Treasury auction announcement, which some expect will contain a reduction in the number of 30-year bonds offered for sale.


John H. LaMarre; Art Historian, 79
John H. LaMarre, an art historian and appraiser of fine arts and antiques, died on Monday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 79 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause of death was heart failure, his family said.


Capitol Frescoes Take On a New Luster


Review/Theater; In an Eerie Tale, Puppets Play Actors and Vice Versa
A warning notice could be posted outside the theater: the plays of John Jesurun may cause vertigo.
In "Everything That Rises Must Converge," the walls of the scenery were spun around like the blades of a giant propeller, and in another work by this theatrical auteur, the actors onstage exchanged dialogue with larger-than-life figures on a surround movie screen.
In his latest effort, "Point of Debarkation" (at La Mama Annex), Mr.
Jesurun is up to new tricks of disorientation, with a multi-media people-and-puppet play about a clash of cultures during the age of Columbus.
This was a time when Sephardic Jews fled to the New World from the persecutions of the Spanish Inquisition.
In Mr.
Jesurun's play, a theatrical troupe that presents puppet operas has retreated to a city called Alhambraville.
Onstage, actors double in roles as masters and slaves and also manipulate puppets that threaten to replace the actors in performance.


Banks Post a Drop in Yields
Yields on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit for the week beginning today are down slightly from those offered last week.
In the New York market, six-month C.D.'s were lower than at the 20 major banks across the country, with the decline about the same everywhere in money market account yields.


Polaroid Corp. (N)
Late last month, the Polaroid Corporation said a sharp drop in European film sales in the fourth quarter would hurt its earnings.
Yesterday, investors learned how bad the damage was.
Polaroid reported that net income fell by nearly 50 percent in the fourth quarter, to $29.6 million.
Over all, sales rose 2.5 percent, to $649.2 million.


Pretoria Seeks Guarantee of Rights It Long Denied
President F. W. de Klerk's Government today proposed a bill of rights aimed at forcing future black governments to honor human liberties and property rights that white rulers have ignored for three centuries.
The document would forbid discrimination on the basis of race or sex, confiscation of private property, limits on free speech or political activity, restrictions on travel or residence, detention without trial, random searches, exile or expulsion and an array of other practices that were routine in the years of apartheid.


Calming Investors' Discontent
In an attempt to smooth the often contentious relationships between corporations and their shareholders, a group has been formed, based at Harvard University, to create a road map for communication without confrontation.
The group, called New Foundations, draws its 30 members from the top ranks of American corporations, institutional investors and academia.
Among its members are Robert Clark, dean of the Harvard Law School; Ira Millstein, a New York lawyer and consultant to outside directors at General Motors and I.B.M.; Ben Rosen, chief executive of Compaq Computer; Darius Gaskins, former head of the Interstate Commerce Commission, and top executives from Time Warner, the Lockheed Corporation and Avon Products.


Charles Breed Jr., 78, Breast Cancer Expert
Charles N. Breed Jr., a surgeon at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, died at his home in Manhattan on Friday.
He was 78.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


'Postman' Calls on Rangers
Shortly after practice today, John Vanbiesbrouck was in the dressing room playing postman.
With a stack of mail under his arms, the Rangers goaltender went from locker to locker delivering envelopes and wisecracks.
As Vanbiesbrouck made his rounds, music played from a stereo, and several of his teammates joked with an attendant.
For a team with two losses and a tie in its last three games, six players out with injuries and a shaky hold on third place in the Patrick Division, the Rangers do not exactly have worried looks on their faces.


A Chancellor Worth Keeping
New York City's Board of Education meets privately today to decide the fate of Schools Chancellor Joseph Fernandez.
If a majority votes yes, then negotiations to extend Mr.
Fernandez's three-year contract will formally begin.
If a majority votes no, then he will be out at the end of June and the board will begin a tortuous search for a new chancellor.
For the good of the school system and the city, the board ought to give a reassuring thumbs up.
Mr.
Fernandez arrived in January 1990 with an ambitious agenda.
He gave individual schools more authority and pared a bloated central office bureaucracy.
After barely two months on the job, he secured an agreement that allowed transfers and retraining of ineffective principals.


Padres Lose Twice In Arbitration Cases
The San Diego Padres suffered a double-barreled jolt yesterday, losing two salary arbitration cases and $1.1 million to DARRIN JACKSON and ANDY BENES.
The Atlanta Braves won the other case heard Monday and decided yesterday.
Jackson, the Padres' center fielder, emerged with a $2.1 million salary from his hearing before the arbitrator, REGINALD ALLEYNE.
The Padres had tried for a $1.5 million salary, arguing that it provided a sufficient raise from Jackson's $805,000 salary last year.
Jackson batted .249, hit 17 home runs and drove in 70 runs.


LeMond in DuPont?
Officials of Tour DuPont announced a revamped route for this year's race and said that GREG LEMOND might decide to defend his title.
The fifth annual event, the country's largest multiday bicycle race, will be held May 6-16, beginning in Wilmington, Del., and ending in Greensboro, N.C., but will not include any criterium stages.


Jason Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


ALLIED-SIGNAL INC. (N)
Allied-Signal Inc., in the midst of a strategy to restructure and streamline its businesses, reported yesterday that its operating earnings in the fourth quarter and for all of 1992 exceeded its most optimistic expectations.
The aerospace, automotive and engineered materials company reported fourth- quarter operating earnings of $138 million, or 98 cents a share, up 20 percent.
For all of 1992, the company said it had operating earnings of $566 million, or $4.02 a share.
It was Allied-Signal's best yearly operating performance since 1984.
But as a result of $1.25 billion in one-time accounting charges, Allied-Signal reported a net loss of $712 million for the year.


Alexander Schneider, Violon Virtuoso, Dies at 84
Alexander Schneider, the eminent violinist, conductor and teacher who was one of the last links with the Romantic tradition and a mentor to several generations of American musicians, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 84.
Frank Salomon, Mr.
Schneider's manager and a close friend for many years, said that the cause of death was heart failure.


Yellow Freight System (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


2d Trial in Police Beating Begins With a Hard Task
The second trial of four police officers charged in the beating of Rodney G. King opened today, facing one of its most difficult and decisive moments at its very start: finding a jury that will be able to set aside two years of intense publicity and ignore the possibility of a riot if it votes to acquit.
A pool of 333 prospective jurors filed into the Federal courthouse this morning, some of them gasping in surprise as they were handed a 53-page questionnaire intended to determine their attitudes and possible biases.


Who Needs '94 Cup Tickets?
The prices of 1994 World Cup tickets and plans for their distribution were announced yesterday, and although the sale began immediately, the public will have to wait until June to make purchases.
Officials from World Cup USA and the World Cup Organizing Committee of FIFA, the world governing body for soccer, said that a record 3.6 million tickets would be available for the 52 games, and that the price per ticket would range from $25 for a single game in the first round to $475, $300 and $180 for the final, in the Rose Bowl on July 17, 1994.


Jefferson-Pilot reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Armored Car Service Robbery Solved


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Baxter International Inc., Deerfield, Ill., a medical-products company, is offering $200 million of 7 1/4 percent noncallable notes due 2008 at 99.728 to yield 7.28 percent through the First Boston Corp.
The notes are rated A-3 by Moody's, A- by Standard &amp; Poor's and A by Duff &amp; Phelps.
*
Connecticut Housing Finance Authority is tentatively offering $140.8 million of tax-exempt housing bonds through underwriters led by Paine Webber.
The maximum yield is 6.30 percent for an issue due in 2024, while another long bond due in 2013 is priced to yield 6.20 percent.
For shorter maturities, serial bonds are priced to yield from 4.40 percent in 1997 to 5.75 percent in 2007, with all the bonds expected to be rated double-A by Moody's and S.&amp; P.


Fruit of the Loom reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chipcom Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Review/Television; Movers and Shakers of Europe's Past
Even without the elegant presence of Ian Richardson as narrator, "Renaissance" would come across unmistakably as a "Masterpiece Theater" sort of series.
If the subject itself is not a giveaway, there is the careful attention to detail of the re-enactments, in real medieval settings, with candles flaring, costumes ironed and every hair of every wig and beard where it belongs.
The good cast is American, but the resounding commonplaces ("The printing press encouraged the free flow of ideas") know no nationality.
The five programs are organized by theme, beginning with "The Scientist" and continuing with "The Dissenter," "The Prince," "The Artist" and "The Warrior." As the titles suggest, the focus is on great European figures of the 15th, 16th and 17th centuries, with tonight bringing on Copernicus, Kepler and especially Galileo, whose accomplishments and tribulations are respectfully reviewed with the help of colorful graphics.


Norwest Acquiring Citibank-Arizona
The Norwest Corporation, a highly profitable Minneapolis banking company with an appetite for growth outside its home region, said yesterday that it had agreed to buy most of Citibank-Arizona.
Although the Arizona bank has not been a good investment for its New York parent company, Citicorp, Norwest expects to do better.
The Arizona economy has begun to improve, and the terms of the deal call for Citicorp to keep all the bank's questionable loans, which caused a loss of $13.4 million in the first nine months of last year.
Norwest will pay $58 million for the bank's $1.9 billion of deposits and take on about $1 billion of good loans.


Enid Britten Dancer, 46
Enid Britten-Stux, who danced with the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, the Pennsylvania Ballet and the Ballet de Lyons, died on Jan. 22 at her home in Manhattan.
She was 46.
Her brother-in-law, Stefan Stux, said the cause of death was a brain hemorrhage.


Denmark Raises Rates To Protect Its Currency
Denmark was forced to raise interest rates today as waves of speculative selling drove down the value of its currency and increased the chances that the nation would become the latest casualty of the turmoil in the European monetary system.
With the Danish currency, the krone, pushing against its lowest allowable levels within the system by the end of the day, economists said it was increasingly likely that Denmark would have to devalue the currency or pull out of Europe's system of semifixed exchange rates and allow the krone to float freely in value.


Chemical Waste Management reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Standard Register (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


They Talk Not of Bosnia, But of Plans to Cut Jobs
They're up in arms at the State Department.
They're on the phone.
They're caucusing in the halls.
But not about Bosnia or Russia. About "streamlining."


HINDU STORM: A special report.; Trust Is Torn: Police Role in Bombay Riots
Nazira Khatoon rocked slowly back and forth on a dirty mat, a bundle of quilts, a few plastic bags pulled close around her.
A stream of tears glistened on her face as she recounted how a mob broke into her house in a Bombay shantytown and seized her son as the police looked on and did nothing.
"I said, 'Don't do anything to my son,' " she recalled.
"He was married just two days before. The mob of 250 came. They were with swords and stones, and they pushed me into the bathroom. They took all my property and killed my son in front of me. The police just stood there watching."


'Night, Knight; Sleep Tight
WHEN Andy Romero was outgrowing his baby bed a year and a half ago, his father, Howard, a designer, went to work.
A result was the "tree bed," an otherwise unprepossessing single bed that happens to have large hawthorn branches bolted to its four corners and extending overhead, forming a canopy.
All of which has made Andy, now 4, very popular in Johnson, Vt., where the Romeros live.
Mr.
Romero has since designed a medieval castle bed, a New York Central locomotive bed and a Camelot headboard (above).


Stolt Tankers &amp; Terminals (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Billing System For Hospitals Is Overturned
A ruling by a Federal judge in Manhattan yesterday threatens to destroy New York State's delicate system of subsidizing hospital care for some patients.
The judge said the state was violating Federal law by adding an extra charge to hospital bills paid by some insurers and health maintenance organizations.
That arrangement has benefited hospitals and nonprofit insurers like the Blue Cross-Blue Shield plans.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption on Tuesday about two homeless men referred incorrectly in some copies to the capacity of New York City's homeless shelters on Monday night.
City officials said that while the shelters were close to capacity that night, they still had some empty beds, and that the cold weather had not increased the number of people seeking shelter.


By Any Other Name
To The Home Section:
My mom was reading the newspaper to me and in an article my name wasn't in it.
The article was called "Many Last Names Are Now a First" (Jan. 21).
My name is Samara Glyn, and I'm 9 years old.
My father's name is Michael Glyn and my mother's (maiden) name is Patrice Samara.
So my whole name is a last name.
SAMARA GLYN
New York, N.Y.


Union Texas Petroleum Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Arcadian Partners reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Books of The Times; The Cold War Is Over, But Spies Will Be Spies
Point of Impact
By Stephen Hunter
451 pages. Bantam Books. $21.95.  The Last Spy
By Bob Reiss
300 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $20.
Where will the spy thriller go now that the Soviet Union has collapsed?
To judge from these two unusual novels, there is still so much equipment and personnel left over from the cold war that it will take innumerable plots to use them all up.


Douglas &amp; Lomason (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Majority of New York Board Resists Keeping Schools Chief
In the first test of New York City Board of Education sentiment about the future of Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez, a majority of its members indicated yesterday that they were not inclined to renew his contract, school officials said.
That left the prospect of an uphill battle for survival for Mr.
Fernandez, who, after three years of leading the nation's largest school system despite a sometimes troubled relationship with the board, had suggested recently that he did want to stay on.


Events: A Tour Of Harlem
Harlem History
Harlem Your Way! Tours Unlimited, 129 West 130th Street; (212) 690-1687.
On Saturday and again on March 6, from 1:30 to 4:30 P.M., there will be walking tours of Harlem sites connected with the life of Malcolm X, including African Square, the Schomberg Center for Research in Black Culture and the Audubon Ballroom.
Fee, including a reception with refreshments, is $25; those 62 and older, $20; children under 12, $15.
Reservations are required.
Ethnic Tours
Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street (near Delancey Street); (212) 431-0233.
Sunday walking tours of the Lower East Side will be offered through June 27.
One on the influence of immigrants in the neighborhood from the 1800's to the present is offered every Sunday through May 23 at 2 P.M.
Other tours include the Jewish immigrant experience (Sunday at 1 P.M.); Italian culture (Feb. 28) and religious sites in the community (March 14).
The fee for each tour is $12; for students and those 62 and older, $10.
Reservations are suggested.
Manhattan Walks
Adventure on a Shoestring, 300 West 53d Street; (212) 265-2663.
On Sunday, there will be a walking tour of the Union Square neighborhood at noon and of the flat-iron district at 3 P.M.
Valentines will be the theme of a tour on Feb. 14 at 1 P.M., with visits to sites associated with such couples as Donald J. Trump and Marla Maples and Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton.
There will be a tour of the Turtle Bay neighborhood on Feb. 14 at 3 P.M.
The fee for each tour is $5.
Call for reservations.  rooklyn Tours
Pieter Claesen Wyckoff House Museum, Clarendon Road at Ralph Avenue, Brooklyn; (718) 287-3400.
The Urban Park Rangers will lead a tour of the house, built circa 1650, on Saturday.
Future tours will include the Quaker Cemetery in Prospect Park on Feb. 27 (meet at Prospect Park Southwest and 16th Street) and a tour of Prospect Park on Feb. 28, focusing on the park's landscape design (meet at the boathouse).
All programs start at 2 P.M.
No charge.


Alfa Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Business as Usual For Shelter Teams; State's Plans for the Mentally Ill
Dr.
James Farrar and his team of state mental health workers recently weaved their way through the echoing corridors of the Bellevue Men's Shelter before settling into a conference room with a stack of manila files on 12 homeless men.
Soon, the team began summoning the men themselves.
A few waited nervously outside the closed steel door.


Stolen $8 Million Found; F.B.I. and Police Arrest 4
Most of the $8 million stolen from a Brooklyn armored car warehouse late last year was recovered yesterday in an empty apartment four miles away, and the authorities arrested four men they described as members of a feckless gang who were sitting on stacks of hundred-dollar bills that they couldn't spend.
Officials of the New York Police Department and the Federal Bureau of Investigation said the four men who took part in what was described as an inside job surrendered without a fight.


Panel Gives Cuomo Its List Of 7 Choices for Chief Judge
The State Commission on Judicial Nomination today presented Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo with a list of seven nominees for chief judge of the state's highest court.
The list includes two judges currently on the court, Associate Judge Judith S. Kaye and Acting Chief Judge Richard D. Simons.
The Governor now has between 15 and 30 days to select a chief judge to replace Sol Wachtler, who resigned from the State Court of Appeals in January after being arrested on extortion charges.
The new chief judge, who is subject to confirmation by the State Senate, will preside not only over the court but also over the state's entire judicial system, dealing with matters like its budget, judicial salaries and court facilities.


Judge Bars Prosecution Witness in Glen Ridge Assault Case
The prosecution was dealt a sharp setback at the end of the testimony phase of the Glen Ridge sex-assault trial today when the judge barred the appearance of an eyewitness in the case.
Because of the ruling, the jury will not hear some of the most incriminating information that prosecutors possess against two of the four young men charged with assaulting a mildly retarded schoolmate, including that one of them held her legs in the air during sexual acts involving a bat and broom handle.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 27 about grants by the Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund to help art museums broaden their audiences misidentified the director of the Indianapolis Museum of Art.
He is Bret Waller, not Bruce Waller.


Weicker's Budget Proposals Overshadowed by Tax Fight
The Connecticut Legislature today voted to cut income taxes for the vast majority of middle-class families while raising taxes for those earning higher incomes, setting the stage for yet another income-tax battle with Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.
Mr.
Weicker bitterly opposes the bill and has said he may veto it, and it appeared today that legislators would have a hard time overriding a veto.


Radiation Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lord Owen's Googly
With his cheeky, almost condescending lecture to a new American President, Lord Owen has, in effect, welcomed Bill Clinton to the big leagues.
The former British Foreign Secretary, as vain as he is smart, has decided to see if he can get the novice to swing at a trick pitch -- a "googly" they call it in cricket.
Mr.
Clinton is wise to look very carefully at what his British guest is throwing and to take this opportunity to sharpen his diplomatic reflexes before he responds.
Bespeaking his years as David Owen, M.P., the British diplomat has argued his case in the cataclysmic terms that prevail in the House of Commons.
Either Mr.
Clinton must do as he is told or "scuttle chances of ending the war" in Bosnia by not endorsing the deal Lord Owen and Cyrus Vance have brokered.


Topics of The Times; Postage Undue
Anyone who doubts that Congress's free mailing privilege has evolved into a costly tool for protecting incumbents need only consult the 1992 House tabulations.
Predictably, members facing tough re-election battles chalked up the biggest postage bills -- $200,000 in some cases.
With Congress poised to consider campaign finance reform, all those stamps can't be overlooked, not to mention the costs of preparing and printing self-promotional newsletters.
Senate Democrats would help level the playing field for challengers by cutting off free mail in an election year.
But perk-happy House Democrats are moving in the opposite direction.
Charlie Rose of North Carolina, the chairman of the House Administration Committee, wants to allow members to use official funds to buy a new computer system to make it easier to target voters.
The stated reason is "efficiency." The underlying goal is to maximize the political benefit of the frank.


Amtrak Gains Accord for Wide Use of Fast Trains
Clearing an important obstacle to the development of high-speed rail travel outside the Northeast, the nation's freight railroads agreed today to let Amtrak use fast European trains on their tracks.
Under the agreement, Amtrak plans to guarantee that the freight lines will be indemnified against liability for accidents involving its trains, said W. Graham Claytor Jr., president of Amtrak, the national passenger railroad corporation.


McGraw-Hill Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Voters Oust, Then Elect, Their Mayor
Mayor Anthony M. DeFino and the town's four other commissioners were ousted from office for a heartbeat on Tuesday and then re-installed in a confusing exercise known as a recall election.
A majority of the 8,000 people who cast ballots voted "yes" in response to a ballot question asking whether each member of the governing body should be removed from office.
Then, by almost the same majority, voters elected the same officials over the challengers who had forced the recall, including the man who almost defeated the Mayor in 1991 and has already vowed to challenge him again in the next regular election in 1995.


Hong Kong Governor Has Heart Operation
The Governor of Hong Kong, Christopher Patten, underwent a heart operation today to clear two coronary arteries.
Officials said the operation was successful and would not affect the introduction this month of legislation to democratize the territory's political system.
"The team of doctors performing the treatment described the immediate outcome as very satisfactory," the Hong Kong Government said in a statement.
"Mr. Patten can now be expected to make a rapid recovery."


Benetton Organizing Clothing Drive
Luciano Benetton wants his clothes back, but not to wear.
Mr.
Benetton, founder of the Italian apparel company, is appearing in print advertisements to publicize a worldwide clothing drive, scheduled to run through March 13 at participating Benetton stores.
The Benetton Clothing Redistribution Project will accept clothing, regardless of maker, and involve charitable organizations like the Red Cross and Gifts in Kind America.


House Passes Family-Leave Bill; Senate Delays Vote
The House passed the family-leave bill tonight, adopting the Democrats' first major legislative goal after beating back Republican efforts to give employers greater flexibility in complying with the bill's requirement of 12 weeks of unpaid medical leave.
The vote was 265 to 163, with 224 Democrats, 40 Republicans and one independent voting for the bill and 134 Republicans and 29 Democrats voting against it.


Hillary Clinton Gives Taxpayers a Break; Unlike Mrs. Wilson
To the Editor:
While it is probably true that no first lady since Edith Bolling Wilson, as she signed her letters, will have as much power as Hillary Rodham Clinton (news article, Jan. 22), there are vast differences between them.


Fieldcrest Cannon reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Just Think Warm


Hillary Clinton Gives Taxpayers a Break
To the Editor:
Re "Hillary Clinton to Head Panel on Health Care" (front page, Jan. 26): I have yet to read a discussion of the extraordinary generosity of Hillary Rodham Clinton.
How common is it for a well-known lawyer, used to a six-figure income, to assume a major policy role in the White House without a salary?
Ms.
Clinton is taking this on in addition to the considerable ceremonial functions of First Lady.


Times Names Picture Editor
The appointment of Nancy Lee as picture editor of The New York Times has been announced by Max Frankel, the executive editor.
Ms.
Lee, 39 years old, will head a 70-member department comprising photographers, editors and support personnel.
She was formerly deputy picture editor and has been acting picture editor for more than a year.
She was previously graphics editor.


Magic Rookie Gets Nod As an All-Star Starter
Shaquille O'Neal, the No. 1 draft choice and centerpiece of the Orlando Magic, yesterday became the first rookie since 1985 to win election to the starting lineup in the National Basketball Association's All-Star Game.
O'Neal received 826,767 votes, beating Patrick Ewing of the Knicks by almost 250,000 votes for the starting center position on the Eastern Conference All-Stars.
Ewing received 578,368 votes.


Sequent Computer Systems Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Review/Dance; Laura Dean Premiere Exercises the Spirit Of Troupe From Ohio
The Ohio Ballet is one of America's most appealing companies.
No, it it does not have the depth of technique or talent of the powerhouse classical troupes, but on its own ground it does extremely well.
That level has much to do with creativity and the total commitment that all 19 members of this relatively small troupe from Akron pour into their performances.
There is something galvanizing about their ensemble spirit, as the premiere of "Earth," Laura Dean's eco-ballet, demonstrated in its smashing ritualistic climax on Tuesday night.


Ballet Theater Reduces Work Time
The dancers and management of American Ballet Theater reached an agreement yesterday to reduce the performers' guaranteed work weeks from 36 to 26 this year.
The dancers have also agreed to extend their current contract, which runs through Oct. 31, for another year without wage increases.
The unusual agreement, part of a larger stabilization plan, is expected to save Ballet Theater $2 million in the next two years.
Management and the dancers have also agreed to negotiate the number of guaranteed work weeks if similar reductions appear necessary for the 1994 season.


Lawton Calhoun Food Executive, 82
Lawton Miller Calhoun, a business executive and banker in Savannah, Ga., died Tuesday at Memorial Medical Center in Savannah.
He was 82.
Mr.
Calhoun, a native of Macon, Ga., graduated from Washington and Lee University and joined the Savannah Sugar Refining Company in 1940.


Sundstrand Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Home Video
It's called a video, but nothing about Voyager's special edition of "A Hard Day's Night," to be released next month, resembles a movie video in the conventional sense.
To begin with, the picture image, which measures 2 by 3 inches, takes up only a fraction of the screen.
That's a computer screen, not a television screen.
Intended for a small group of film buffs, the Voyager edition of Richard Lester's 1964 Beatles film is produced in a CD-ROM format designed to be played on a Macintosh computer.
CD-ROM (Compact Disk, Read Only Memory) is an umbrella term for the many different ways of compressing text, music, voice, still pictures, full-motion video and other types of information onto compact disks.


Sales of U.S.-Built Vehicles Hit Highest Level in 2 Years
Sales of domestically built vehicles surged 24.6 percent in late January to their best level in two years, the nation's auto makers said today, confirming earlier indications of a recovering national economy.
Sales of domestically built cars from Jan. 21 through 31 rose 19.1 percent from the comparable period last year, to 215,493.
Sales of domestically built light trucks, a category that includes mini-vans, sport utility vehicles and pickups, rose 34.1 percent from a year earlier, to 140,716.
There were nine selling days in the current period, compared with 10 selling days in last year's period.


Defense Plans Filed
A group headed by the Olympic silver medalist KEVIN MAHANEY of Bangor, Me., has been accepted conditionally as a defense candidate for the 1995 America's Cup.
Mahaney submitted his defense plans to the San Diego Yacht Club and told its defense committee members Tuesday that he will mount an America's Cup effort called the PACT '95 Syndicate.


Weirton Steel reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.N. STOPS USING BALKAN AID ROUTE
United Nations aid convoys stopped plying the key overland supply route between the Croatian port of Split and central Bosnia and Herzegovina today after a United Nations aid worker was killed on Tuesday in a shelling attack on a column of aid trucks.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ordered the organization's aid convoys to quit using the road, from Mostar to Sarajevo, and the rest of Bosnia's heartland until the incident was investigated and Bosnian leaders honored promises to halt the almost-daily attacks on aid columns.


CHRONICLE
BENAZIR BHUTTO, the former Prime Minister of Pakistan, gave birth yesterday in London to her third child, a daughter.
The baby was delivered by Caesarean section three weeks before its due date because Ms.
Bhutto was having severe pain from gallstones, according to Reuters.
Ms.
Bhutto, 39, left Karachi, Pakistan, on Saturday for treatment of the gallstones.
Her adviser, Naseer Shaikh, issued a statement that said she and the baby, who weighed 6 pounds, 2 ounces, and has not been named, were doing well.
Ms.
Bhutto's husband, ASIF ALI ZARDARI, a businessman, has been in jail for more than two years on charges that include kidnapping, murder conspiracy and extortion.
He was arrested in October 1990, two months after Ms.
Bhutto was removed as Prime Minister by President Ghulam Ishaq Khan because of alleged corruption and government mismanagement.
She remains a leader of the opposition Pakistan People's Party.
Mr.
Zardari has been released from prison several times to attend sessions of the National Assembly, the lower house of the Pakistani Government, because he has not been convicted.
Ms.
Bhutto was the first woman to be a named a prime minister of a Muslim country.
She was appointed in 1988 and has two other children, a daughter, Bakhtawar, 3, and a son, Bilawal, 4.


A Place in the Sun


Mobil Promotes One of 3 in Race for Chief
The Mobil Corporation said yesterday that it had named Lucio A. Noto president and chief operating officer.
Analysts said the promotion was a signal that he was ahead in the race to succeed Allen E. Murray as chairman and chief executive next year, when Mr.
Murray reaches the mandatory retirement age of 65.
Mr.
Noto, 54, becomes the third New Yorker in a row to be president of the oil giant, which moved its headquarters from 42d Street in Manhattan to Fairfax, Va., three years ago.
Mr.
Murray, born in Queens, followed the Brooklyn-born William P. Tavoulareas in the job.


Houston Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Nova Corp. of Alberta reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.18
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.89
2.95
3.82
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.03
3.12
3.86
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.96
6.02
6.78
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.21
7.24
7.72
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.30
8.30
8.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.28
6.28
6.74
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Most Big Concerns Post Gains in Quarter
Fourth-quarter reports from nearly two-thirds of the nation's 500 largest companies show a strong rebound in profits, helping to support the stock market's brisk advance.
Based on announcements so far, Wall Street economists now expect the quarter's net earnings to nearly double the total from the last quarter of 1991.
The 1991 net results, however, were severely depressed by one-time charges for layoffs and cutbacks, far greater than the write-offs taken in 1992.


Dokes Now Challenges Purse as Well as Bowe
Riddick Bowe is a heavy favorite to retain his heavyweight title Saturday night, but he apparently believes that a little divine intervention doesn't hurt, either.
Bowe, making his first title defense, will fight Michael Dokes at Madison Square Garden.
Yesterday, he brought his entourage to a media gathering at a midtown hotel.
It included two nuns.


Two Who Inspired Many Prompt Gifts to Neediest
Many Americans reacted with deep sadness to the recent deaths of Thurgood Marshall and Audrey Hepburn, as if close relatives had passed away.
The two touched the lives of millions of people -- he as a legal titan whose work energized the civil rights movement and she as an actress whose graceful beauty awed moviegoers.
After their deaths, several contributors sent donations to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund in memory of them.
In letters to the fund, they wrote that they were inspired by Mr.
Marshall and Miss Hepburn even though they never knew them personally.


Salomon Shows a Turnaround in Earnings
Three months after a weak earnings report for the third quarter, Salomon Inc. reported strong profits for the fourth quarter and the year yesterday, and investors responded by bidding the stock up $3, to a 52-week high of $40.
Paced by huge gains in trading revenue and interest income, Salomon reported net income of $143 million, or $1.10 a share, for the final three months of the year, compared with a loss of $29 million, for the corresponding period of 1991.


Apache Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


United Dominion Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Allen Organ Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Progressive Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lilly (Eli) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Agreed to terms with Jose Lind, second baseman, on a one-year contract.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Agreed to terms with Mike Maksudian, catcher; Jeff Reboulet, infielder; and George Tsamis, pitcher, on one-year contracts.
National League  CHICAGO CUBS -- Agreed to terms with Greg Hibbard, pitcher, and Matt Walbeck, catcher, on one-year contracts.
NEW YORK METS -- Named Mark Bingham vice president of marketing.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Named Bob Rose director of public relations.
Reassigned Robin Carr Locke, director of communications, to publicity coordinator, and Jim Moorehead, media relations assistant, to media relations manager.
Eastern League  EL -- Named John Levenda president.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  NEW JERSEY NETS -- Activated Tate George, guard, from the injured list.
Placed Maurice Cheeks, guard, on the injured list.
Football  National Football League  DENVER BRONCOS -- Named John Paul Young linebackers coach.
Announced the resignation of Lide Huggins, director of football operations.
Hockey  National Hockey League  NEW YORK ISLANDERS -- Recalled Daniel Marois, forward, from Capital District of the American Hockey League.
College
OKLAHOMA -- Announced the resignation of Gary Hudson, women's basketball coach, effective at the end of the season.
PLYMOUTH STATE -- Announced the resignation of Lou Desloges, football coach.
SACRAMENTO STATE -- Announced the resignation of Bob Mattos, football coach.
Named Mike Clemons interim football coach.
TEXAS-ARLINGTON -- Named Eddie McCarter men's basketball coach.


Cytel (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CLINTON REBUFFED ON PLAN TO REDUCE ELECTION SPENDING
President Clinton summoned Congressional Democrats to the White House today to seek help in keeping an election-year promise to act swiftly to change campaign finance laws.
But he won no agreement on the basic elements of such a package, and there were signs that the White House was backing off its own plans in the face of Congressional resistance.
Leading Democrats emerged from the one-hour session declaring that for the first time in 12 years they were in accord with a President over the general notion that the amount of money needed to run for office should be reduced and that donations by political action committees should be limited further.
President Carter's Mistake
But the participants said they did not discuss specifics, and there was no agreement on issues that were at the heart of promises made by Mr.
Clinton during the campaign.
One pledge was to limit political action committee contributions to $1,000, instead of the current $5,000 per candidate; another was to provide free or discounted television time for candidates who agree to limit their spending, and a third was to restrict "soft money" donations that are intended to skirt Federal spending limits.


Baby Boy Left in Gym Bag Is Expected to Recover
First they named him Jim, because the police found him in a gym bag in some bushes, where he was abandoned less than an hour after he was born.
Then the nurses at Winthrop-University Hospital, who slowly warmed him with heat lamps, soft blankets and hot water bottles, decided they preferred the name Christopher.


Monetary Fund Criticizes Russia on Inflation
In an unusually strong criticism, the International Monetary Fund's top official faulted Russia's Government today for letting inflation get out of control, saying the risk of hyperinflation threatened Russia's fledgling democracy.
The official, Michel Camdessus, the fund's managing director, said hyperinflation would hurt Russia's poor the most, would jeopardize other economic reforms, and was causing a severe flight of capital that would make economic recovery more difficult.


INSIDE
Hospital Billing System In New York Is Rejected
A ruling by a Federal judge threatens to destroy New York State's delicate system of subsidizing hospital care for some patients.
The judge said the state was violating Federal law by adding an extra charge to hospital bills paid by some insurers and health maintenance organizations, an arrangement has benefited hospitals and nonprofit insurers.
Page B1.
House Backs Family Leave
The House passed a family-leave bill requiring employers to provide 12 weeks of unpaid medical leave.
It awaits Senate action.
Page A18.
Justice Dept.
Choice Is Near
President Clinton is close to selecting an Attorney General, and the top candidate is said to be Judge Kimba M. Wood of New York.
Page A19.
Power Shift Urged for Zaire
As fighting intensified in Zaire, the United States, France and Belgium demanded that President Mobutu Sese Seko transfer power.
Page A3.
Historical Library to Close
The New-York Historical Society, despite a $1.5 million loan, will close its library this month and cancel all its public programs.
Page C15.


Amtrak Gains Accord for Wide Use of Fast Trains
Clearing an important obstacle to the development of high-speed rail travel outside the Northeast, the nation's freight railroads agreed today to let Amtrak use fast European trains on their tracks.
Under the agreement, Amtrak plans to guarantee that the freight lines will be indemnified against liability for accidents involving its trains, said W. Graham Claytor Jr., president of Amtrak, the national passenger railroad corporation.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about two Arab-Americans arrested by the Israelis referred incorrectly in some editions to the month in which more than 400 Palestinians were deported from the occupied territories.
It was December, not last month.


Edward Myers, Dancer And Troupe Head, 42
Edward Myers, the director of the Nashville Ballet and a former principal dancer with the Pennsylvania Ballet, died on Monday at Vanderbilt University Medical Center in Nashville, Tenn.
He was 42 and lived in Nashville.
His companion, Richard Steinhart, said the cause of death was AIDS.


Florida Rock Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


HINDU STORM: A special report.; Trust Is Torn: Police Role in Bombay Riots
Nazira Khatoon rocked slowly back and forth on a dirty mat, a bundle of quilts, a few plastic bags pulled close around her.
A stream of tears glistened on her face as she recounted how a mob broke into her house in a Bombay shantytown and seized her son as the police looked on and did nothing.
"I said, 'Don't do anything to my son,' " she recalled.
"He was married just two days before. The mob of 250 came. They were with swords and stones, and they pushed me into the bathroom. They took all my property and killed my son in front of me. The police just stood there watching."


VeriFone Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Gartner Is a Spark in a Vacuum as Rangers Tie Again
Mike Gartner goes to the All-Star Game today.
He wasn't selected by the voters or even the coach.
This is a question of Darwin's theory, survival of the fittest.
He can walk, he can talk, he can shoot the puck -- shoot it well.
He's headed to Montreal.
Not that Gartner doesn't deserve the honor.
He should represent the Rangers on Saturday, there is no question of that.
If anyone had doubts, Gartner answered them last night, when he scored two goals and bounced an overtime shot off the left post in the Rangers' 2-2 tie with the Philadelphia Flyers at Madison Square Garden.


Pop and Jazz in Review
'All-Girl Cobra'  Knitting Factory
John Zorn's "Cobra" has become a favored pastime among New York improvisers.
The Knitting Factory has played host to many "Cobras," but Sunday's performance featured only women -- a band of rebels who offered a stimulating performance.


Perplexed Recruiters Sort Out Orders on Gay Ban
Five days after President Clinton announced that applicants to the military would no longer be asked if they are homosexual, there is much confusion among recruiters about how to handle the issue if it arises and about what to tell recruits who volunteer that they are homosexual.
Most recruiters said they simply scratched out questions 27 (a) and (b) on the military's standard induction form, which ask new recruits whether they are homosexual or bisexual and whether they intend to engage in homosexual acts.


Stanley Works reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Magazine Will Tell All About Bubba
You could say Mr. Potatoe Head died so that Bubba might live.
This week, the last issue of The Quayle Quarterly, a publication devoted entirely to mocking Vice President Dan Quayle, hits the newsstands, while in Manhattan, final efforts are afoot for the Feb. 9 debut of Bubba, a magazine exclusively concerned with poking fun at Bill Clinton.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  U.S.
WON'T PRESS MUSLIMS  Clinton Administration officials said they would not press Bosnian Muslims to accept the peace plan put forward by Cyrus R. Vance and Lord Owen and that they were working on their own approach.
A1  TWO VIEWS OF BOSNIAN CONFLICT  News analysis: The very different views of Bosnia between Americans and Europeans is product of geography: Sarajevo is a long way from Washington, but it is on Europe's doorstep.
A10


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Changes in medical spending are clouding the future for pharmaceuticals companies.
After more than a decade of sharply rising prices for prescription drugs -- and profits to match -- the dimming prospects are battering drug stocks.  [ Page A1. ]
The Connecticut legislature voted to cut income taxes for most middle-class families and raise taxes for upper-income earners, setting up a battle with Governor Weicker.  [ B7. ]


Boxing; At Garden, Boxing Comes to Life, if Only for a Night
Boxing is glitz.
It is Las Vegas and Atlantic City.
Slot machines and blackjack tables.
High rollers and three-day weekends.
It is show business.
What it isn't anymore is New York.
It used to be.
It was Ali-Frazier.
It was Joe Louis.
It was Jersey Joe Walcott.
And now, for at least one night, it will be Riddick Bowe.


Navy Plans Murder Charge in Death of Gay Sailor
In a criminal case that is being followed closely in the debate over whether homosexuals should be allowed in the military, the Navy announced today that it had decided to charge a sailor with murder in the killing of a gay sailor last fall at a United States naval base in Japan.
The Navy made no comment on possible motives, but some have contended that the slaying was a case of gay-bashing because the victim was about to be discharged after telling his commander that he was homosexual.


The Post Attracts Others Wanting to Buy or Invest
The latest crisis at The New York Post is producing the unlikeliest of results: a line of wealthy people who are interested in buying some or all of the beleaguered newspaper.
Steven Hoffenberg, the prospective new publisher, said yesterday that he was not backing away from his promise to buy the newspaper.
But he acknowledged that he had talked with several well-financed people who he said also wanted to save the newspaper.
Some of those who have expressed interest appear anxious to enter a partnership with Mr.
Hoffenberg.


Economic Scene; Will Clinton halt or foster a drift toward trade protectionism?
JUST where does Bill Clinton stand on free trade?
If the President knows, he is not telling.
Mr.
Clinton's refusal to be pinned down during the campaign was probably smart politics, allowing the self-styled New Democrat to hang onto union votes even as he was wooing Kmart shoppers who cared more about the price of blue jeans than their national origin.
But smart campaigns do not necessarily make for smart government.


What's 3 Letters and Zoologically Incorrect?
The New York Zoological Society, deciding the word "zoo" had become an urban pejorative with a limited horizon, announced yesterday that it was dropping the word from the Bronx Zoo, the Central Park Zoo, the Queens Zoo and the Prospect Park Zoo.
They are to be called Wildlife Conservation Parks beginning Monday, said William Conway, president of the society, who concedes he risks greatly bestirring much of the urban menagerie beyond the 10,000 creatures of the, uh, zoos.
But he says he must do something about the little word.


Inco Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


ALLIED-SIGNAL INC. (N)
Allied-Signal Inc., in the midst of a strategy to restructure and streamline its businesses, reported yesterday that its operating earnings in the fourth quarter and for all of 1992 exceeded its most optimistic expectations.
The aerospace, automotive and engineered materials company reported fourth- quarter operating earnings of $138 million, or 98 cents a share, up 20 percent.
For all of 1992, the company said it had operating earnings of $566 million, or $4.02 a share.
It was Allied-Signal's best yearly operating performance since 1984.
But as a result of $1.25 billion in one-time accounting charges, Allied-Signal reported a net loss of $712 million for the year.


Family-Leave Bill: Peace-of-Mind Issue
HELEN MORGAN knew the working world as it was, when the the notion that an employer must allow a worker time off to cope with demanding family health crises was a utopian fantasy.
So for her, the passage of the Family and Medical Leave Act, now being considered by Congress, would be a vindication, a public declaration that she was wronged when her company closed its doors to her after her maternity leave.
But beyond the vindication, beyond the bustle of shuttling between lawyers' offices and talk shows as one of dozens of "poster children" illustrating this issue nationwide, one thing would mean more to Ms.
Morgan than anything else: she could have a family and a job, and a crisis in the first would not automatically mean a disaster in the second.


Zapata Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Cuts Size of Long-Bond Auction
The Treasury announced yesterday that it was cutting the size of the 30-year bond auction next week by $1 billion, to $9.25 billion, and said it was beginning a review of its debt-management practices.
The announcement pushed the price of the 30-year bond up 13/32 as it regained most of what it lost on Tuesday.
Some traders have argued that a reduction in supply will increase the demand for the bond.
The yield fell to 7.21 percent, from 7.24 percent on Tuesday.
The prices of Treasury notes rose just a few 32d's.


Scripps Howard Broadcasting (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


GWC Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Results Plus
HOCKEY  Bruins Stop Nordiques' Streak  Don Sweeney scored two goals, one short-handed and the other into an empty net in the closing seconds as the Boston Bruins beat Quebec, 4-1, last night, ending the Nordiques' five-game unbeaten string.
Dmitri Kvartalnov's power-play goal at 18 minutes 24 seconds of the second period was the winner.
Glen Featherstone provided the Bruins with a 3-1 lead, scoring his fourth of the season before Sweeney extended the margin, finding the empty net with 13 seconds to play.
Joe Sakic, with his 34th goal five minutes into the game, connected for the Nordiques, who entered the game with three victories and two ties in their previous five outings.
The Nordiques, whose second-place lead over Boston in the Adams Division was sliced to 2 points, are 1-3-1 against the Bruins this season. (AP) Senators 3, Oilers 2: In Ottawa, Bob Kudelski scored twice as the upstart Senators defeated Edmonton to pick up their fifth point in a week.
Kudelski has 13 goals in 21 games since arriving in a trade with the Los Angeles Kings.
More surprising, the Senators have two victories and a tie in their last four games.
With a record of 6-46-4, that represents almost one-third of Ottawa's total output in its first season.
Ottawa goalie Peter Sidorkiewicz, making his first start in the last 10 home games, was strong in stopping 27 shots, a good tuneup for his appearance in this weekend's National Hockey League All-Star Game in Montreal. (AP) TENNIS Graf Advances Easily in Japan  Top-seeded Steffi Graf breezed into the second round of the Toray Pan Pacific Open by beating Japan's No. 1 player, Kimiko Date, 6-1, 7-5, yesterday in Yokohama, Japan.
Second-seeded Gabriela Sabatini of Argentina withdrew because of the flu, ending her hopes of winning for the third straight year. (AP) BOXING Hodkinson Retains W.B.C.
Title  Paul Hodkinson stopped Ricardo Cepeda 37 seconds into the fourth round yesterday to retain his World Boxing Council featherweight title in London.
It was the third title defense for the 27-year-old Englishman, who improved his record to 23-1-0.
Cepeda, of Puerto Rico, lost for the third time in 27 fights. (AP)


Mahoney's Way: 'A Little Bit More'
You never plan the victories and the defeats in advance.
Not even in pencil.
The apprenticeship of Brian Mahoney made that clear.
There are too many factors changing too quickly, even in the best of basketball seasons, and too many potential disappointments severe enough for a coach to remember all his life.
So last November, when the coaches of the Big East were asked to submit their projections on the conference standings, it was better for Mahoney, the successor to Lou Carnesecca at St.
John's, to think about something other than projections.
"For me to spend time thinking about it would be foolish," he said.


Greiner Engineering Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CRSS Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ohio Edison reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Charles Tierney, 86, State and City Judge In New York, Is Dead
Charles G. Tierney, a retired judge in the New York City and State courts, died on Tuesday at the New Rochelle Hospital Medical Center in New Rochelle.
He was 86 and lived in Pelham.
Justice Tierney was elected to the City Civil Court in 1961 and to the State Supreme Court in 1974.
He retired in 1982 as a justice of the Appellate Term of that court.


Hercules reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


TNP Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


HOME IMPROVEMENT
INDOOR condensation -- moisture in household air changing from vapor to liquid -- occurs primarily in winter and often results in dampness on windows, mildew or peeling paint on walls and ceilings, and frost in unheated attics.
An occasional occurrence is seldom serious, but chronic condensation can cause structural damage.
Condensation develops when warm air cools; for example, from contact with a cold surface.
Because warm air holds more water vapor than colder air, a wet film is deposited wherever the two meet.


A.T.&amp; T. Loses Its Credit-Card Mastermind
Paul G. Kahn, who founded and ran A.T.&amp; T.'s Universal credit card business, said yesterday that he had resigned to form his own financial services company.
Since the card's introduction in March 1990, 10.5 million accounts have been signed up.


CHRONICLE
It's not easy to intimidate L. JAY OLIVA, the president of New York University.
But facing the prospect of teaching a course on Russia starting Monday, he said: "I am sort of scared. This is one of the most high-powered classes I will ever teach."
The two dozen or so students enrolled in the three-session seminar include some of the biggest names in the New York business world: Mortimer B. Zuckerman, Lewis Rudin, Thomas S. Murphy, Sheldon H. Solow and David Margolis.


Computer Network Technology (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


MINNESOTA MINING &amp; MANUFACTURING (N)
The Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company said yesterday that its strong fourth quarter was led by American sales that were the best in four years.
The St.
Paul-based diversified manufacturer said earnings rose 11.5 percent in the period, while sales rose 4.7 percent.
It said weakness in Japan and Europe offset the strong sales in the United States and Latin America.
"In view of the slow economy in the U.S. and internationally last year, the company has done a good job, particularly since a lot of their products are in cyclical businesses," said Frank Rolfes, an analyst at Dain Bosworth in Minneapolis.


What's the Bid? Sky's the Limit
DEFYING a worldwide dip in art sales, auctiongoers bid the highest prices ever last year for everything from an Audubon book and Lincoln autographs to an Art Nouveau table, a baseball shirt and a Dudley Do-Right lunch box.
"The dollars are chasing Americana," said David N. Redden, who heads sales of books, manuscripts and collectibles at Sotheby's in New York.
"American manuscript sales this past year were the strongest ever in terms of prices."


UtiliCorp United reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


General Housewares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Arvin Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gunman at Arkansas Plant Kills a Worker and Wounds 7


So Where Do Zoos Come From?
The word "zoo," short for "zoological garden," phonically pleasant and redolent of the images and sounds of a collection of animals, was bound to adopt a second meaning as a place of "confusion or disorder."
The roots of the word "zoo" are in the ancient Greek word zoion, meaning "living being."


New York City Must Act Right Away on Watershed Protection
To the Editor:
The Environmental Protection Agency's determination to give New York City another year before it mandates filtration of the city's drinking water (news article, Jan. 20) should not make us rest, or drink, easy.
Release from this ominous requirement is temporary and conditional.


It's a Bank. It's a Brain. It's Superphone.
PROGRESS lurches on.
In the last few years, the nation's telephone companies, especially local carriers, have begun offering a bewildering array of new phone services.
Companies like Bell Atlantic and Nynex have been aggressively selling services like "three-way calling" and "speed calling," often with free installation.
Most of these services go begging.
Some services are just poorly marketed.
Others are not widely available, so they get little favorable word-of-mouth.
But, for the most part, the services are difficult to use, discouraging even interested consumers.


Union Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Super Bowl Ads Were Memorable
An agency's annual poll of Super Bowl viewers indicates, despite some critics' complaints about cluttered airwaves, the commercials that ran during the game seem to have been remembered.
The fifth annual Super Poll conducted by Cramer-Krasselt in Milwaukee found that of 1,000 people who watched Super Bowl XXVII on Sunday, an average of 66 percent were able to recall particular commercials the next day.
That compared with an average recall rate of 23 percent for commercials shown during regular prime-time programming, and an average of 57 percent in previous Super Polls.


Bosnia War: Quagmire or Just Cause?
The differences between the United States and Europe over what to do about the fighting in Bosnia and other parts of the former Yugoslavia are grounded in differing views of the conflict.
Not at all a distant war here, bleeding Bosnia is on the doorstep.
Refugees in rags are pictured on television nightly and some are turning up on the streets of European capitals.


Topics of The Times; Fire Alarm, False Alarms
It is standard practice for office buildings to require anyone who enters at night or on weekends to sign in --
and sign out.
But failure to sign out is as common and casual as jaywalking; everyone has done it and no one pays much heed.
The skyscraper fire in New York City Sunday night should make the heedless think twice.
More than 20 people didn't sign out when they left the Bankers Trust Company's headquarters building on Park Avenue last weekend.
When fire swept three floors of the building late Sunday night, and filled the entire building with smoke, firefighters had no way of knowing those people were not still there.


Hong Kong Governor Has Heart Operation
The Governor of Hong Kong, Christopher Patten, underwent a heart operation today to clear two coronary arteries.
Officials said the operation was successful and would not affect the introduction this month of legislation to democratize the territory's political system.
"The team of doctors performing the treatment described the immediate outcome as very satisfactory," the Hong Kong Government said in a statement.
"Mr. Patten can now be expected to make a rapid recovery."


Weicker Faces Another Battle on the Connecticut Income Tax


Price Tag: Psychotherapy
Here's a look at the cost of psychotheraphy in the United States.
Estimates are based on average fees charged by psychiatrists, psychologists and social workers for a 45-50-minute therapy session.
Figures are for 1991 unless otherwise indicated.
Health-insurance coverage varies.
Many policies cover a portion of the fee -- typically 50 to 80 percent -- and many impose an annual maximum on payments for mental-health care.
Shown are the average costs of group therapy, individual psychotherapy, and family or couples therapy; average charge per psychotherapy session state by state; who's in therapy and who isn't; and figures on what Freud's fee would be if he were alive today. (Sources: American Psyciatric Association; American Psychoanalytic Association; Mutual of Omaha Company; Medical Economics; Bureau of Labor Statistics; "Freud: A Life for Our Time," by Peter Gay.)


Morgan Products Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


UPJOHN CO. (N)
The Upjohn Company said yesterday that it had flat earnings growth in 1992 because of falling sales of lucrative drugs, including a $107 million plunge in Halcion, a sleeping pill that used to be the world's top seller.
Halcion sales dropped to $131 million, from $238 million in 1991.
The company also absorbed a $24 million charge for the previously announced early retirement of 500 of its employees.


Head Off A Trade War
Fears are spreading that the Clinton Administration is moving toward a trade policy so aggressive as to unleash protectionism and a trade war among the major industrial countries.
During the campaign, Mr.
Clinton was ambiguous about what trade policy he would pursue.
On one side, he proclaimed support for an open world economy based on free-trade principles; on the other, he courted business and labor by promising a highly aggressive campaign against foreign countries and companies accused of wiping out American jobs.
Mr.
Clinton and his aides now seem to have come down on the aggressive side.
The Administration has threatened to block sales to the Government of European telecommunications and power-generation equipment and a wide array of services, charging that the European Community has run a buy-Europe policy against American products.
His Trade Representative, Mickey Kantor, declared that the U.S. might withdraw from the government-procurement code of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.


Wheelabrator Technologies Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rubbermaid Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


One Man's Garbage Is Another Man's Evidence


Salonika Journal; Greeks' Word for That Republic Isn't Macedonia
Stavros Georgopoulos, a fishmonger here in Greek Macedonia, was prying apart layers of frozen sole with all the surgical delicacy that a screwdriver permits as he talked about his neighbors in the former Yugoslav republic that is also called Macedonia.
"We should dig out the tomahawk and go on the warpath," he said, brandishing the screwdriver like a battle-ax.
"Ask anybody here -- we should go put the boot in. They have stolen our name."


Accounts
*
Checkers Drive-In Restaurants Inc., Clearwater, Fla., to the Morrison Agency, Atlanta, as the first agency to handle its account, with billings estimated at $3 million.


North American Mortgage Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


GTE Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Calendar: 10 Years of Graphics
Design Retrospective
Arthur A. Houghton Jr.
Gallery at Cooper Union, 41 Cooper Square (Astor Place); (212) 353-4214.
Frieda and Roy Furman Gallery in the Walter Reade Theater, 70 Lincoln Center Plaza (65th Street); (212) 875-5600.


Tribune Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Valmont Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Marciulionis's Concern
He and his Golden State Warriors teammates had arrived in New York from Cleveland at 4 A.M. yesterday, but only hours later SARUNAS MARCIULIONIS was selling his autograph for $25.
No, he was not at a trading-card show or charging youngsters for his signature on a basketball.
Rather, he was putting his signature on T-shirts emblazoned with the Grateful Dead logo.
They adorn shirts depicting his native Lithuania's bronze-medal finish in last summer's Olympic Games.
Marciulionis, the aggressive guard, was Lithuania's star in Barcelona.
There might never have been a Lithuanian basketball team if it weren't for the financial support of the Grateful Dead.
The band knew of hsi concern for his country, and it helped fund the team.
Shirts and jackets with their skeleton logo became hot items.
Now the shirt proceeds are going to his Lithuanian Children's Fund, which helps bring children who have complicated medical problems to the United States for treatment.


Torchmark Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


General Instrument reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Show for Art That Sold Oranges
"ORANGE crate art," an exhibition of 600 labels from 1900 to the 1930's that decorated the ends of wood crates filled with oranges, apples and yams, is on view at the Nostalgia Factory in the Back Bay section of Boston.
The show, which runs through Feb. 28, reveals a period when advertising was colorful, but not necessarily truthful.
In markets today, some produce is labeled by grade: fancy, choice, good.
But not in the early 1900's.
Victoria Avenue Citrus Association in Riverside, Calif., sold two brands of oranges: Lincoln, whose label depicted Abraham Lincoln, and Victoria, whose label pictured Queen Victoria.
"Victoria was the fancy, and Lincoln was the choice," said Rudy Franchi, owner of the Nostalgia Factory, a gallery devoted to memorabilia.


Sports of The Times; Schott Punished for Wrong Thing
THE hypocrisy of the Marge Schott decision yesterday by major league baseball is that the owners are punishing her for the wrong thing.
They have no business coming down on her for racial and ethnic slurs that were uttered in private, something, to be sure, some if not many of them have said in one way or another themselves.
And if they haven't said it, they have certainly acted as though they believe such racial and ethnic stereotypes are written in stone, or at least the baseball bylaws.


It's Dullsville, but It's Also Fourth Place
It wasn't very pretty and it sure wasn't exciting.
It wasn't much more than 2 points in the standings for the Islanders.
And they will take them, thank you very much, and take a few days off for the All-Star break.
They out-droned the Maple Leafs, 3-2, tonight at Maple Leaf Gardens as Benoit Hogue scored two goals to increase his total to 24 for the season and 99 for his National Hockey League career.


Green Forest Lumber reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Owners' Ruling on Schott Is Assailed and Lauded
Although the saga of Marge Schott officially ended tonight with the suspension of the Cincinnati Reds' owner, what has not ended is the scrutiny and criticism of baseball's hiring policies.
"Twenty-seven other white owners of major league baseball teams have agreed that Marge Schott's words and behavior were so embarrassing, so unacceptable and a threat to the interest of baseball that they had to do something," said the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, founder of the recently established Rainbow Committee for Fairness in Athletics.


Hibbard Gets Big Raise
GREG HIBBARD, a pitcher who has moved from the South Side of Chicago to the North Side by way of Florida, moved up on the salary scale yesterday.
Settling his arbitration case with the Cubs through negotiation, Hibbard got a raise that exceeds the 1992 major league average salary.
The left-hander, who was 10-7 with a 4.40 earned run average in 1992, raised his salary by nearly $1.2 million, from $210,000 to $1,375,000.
Hibbard had sought a $1.8 million salary while the Cubs, who acquired him in a trade after the Florida Marlins took him from the White Sox in the expansion draft, offered $1,025,000.


Petro-Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


IMCO Recycling reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Jazz; A Band of Improvisers Rapt in Meditation On the Master's Work
Slide Hampton and his orchestra spent most of their first set at the Village Vanguard on Tuesday night smiling at each other.
A soloist would pull off an especially acrobatic phrase, or superimpose a piece of pungent harmony on a tune, and eyebrows would rise.
When the trumpet section -- Jon Faddis, Claudio Roditi and Roy Hargrove -- blasted a difficult riff, or slid into some of Mr.
Hampton's well-imagined dissonance, there would be knowing nods.
And the rhythm section, swinging with complete authority, had the other band members turning around in admiration.
The audience, aware that something special was going on, wouldn't let the band offstage until the 60-year-old Mr.
Hampton genially explained that at his age, he had a right to take a break.


We Should Treat Depression, Not Assist Suicide
To the Editor:
Re "Why Dr. Kevorkian Was Called In" (editorial, Jan. 25): As a physician, I strongly believe not only that physician-assisted suicide should remain illegal, but that it is also in violation of the Hippocratic oath's command not to give deadly medicine if asked.
Your description of Dr.
Jack Kevorkian as "egregious" seems apt, but the rest of the editorial appears to support his grim work.


F.B.I. Widens Inquiry on Palestinian Fund-Raisers
The Federal Bureau of Investigation has intensified investigations of small groups of Muslim militants in the United States who are raising money for a Palestinian fundamentalist group, Hamas.
The fund-raising has attracted increased scrutiny because Hamas has a military branch responsible for a surge of attacks on Israeli troops and civilians.
But Clinton Administration officials disputed Israel's contention that the United States had become a center of planning for such operations.


Reebok International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jesus and the Parade
To the Editor:
Jesus sometimes walked with very large crowds during His public ministry; there is no record that He asked the gays and lesbians in these groups to walk a different road.
Does anyone truly believe that Jesus would refuse to march with gays and lesbians in the St.
Patrick's Day parade?
AMADEO D'ADAMO JR.
South Somerville, N.J., Jan. 22, 1993


Fina Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Creativity vs. Academic Study: How Should Schools Teach Arts?
The question in Sharon Anderson's drama class was, What do poor people want for Christmas?
The answer came in a song.
To the tune of "The 12 Days of Christmas," the students shouted their answers: red roach spray, two dollar bills, three mice traps, and so on, up to 10 food stamps, 11 neck bones, and down to no collard greens.
They punctuated each verse with a barked, sardonic "Ho, Ho, Ho!"


We Should Treat Depression, Not Assist Suicide; To Let Them Go
To the Editor:
Thank you for "Must They Tinker With the Dying?" by Nancy M. Lederman (Op-Ed, Jan. 16).
I sang in nursing homes for several years, and I too came to the conclusion that we must let people go.


Clinton to Take Show to Detroit
Bill Clinton grew so fond of campaigning on live television over the last year that he will continue the practice as President next week in a one-hour question-and-answer session broadcast from Detroit with audiences in three other cities.
Administration officials announced today that the President would travel to Detroit on Feb. 10, for a program that would be simultaneously broadcast on ABC affiliates in Detroit, Seattle, Miami, Atlanta and nationally on the C-Span cable network.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  AFTER REVIEW, 'ZOO' WON'T DO
The New York Zoological Society, deciding the word "zoo" had become an urban pejorative with a limited horizon, announced that it was dropping the word from the Bronx Zoo, the Central Park Zoo, the Queens Zoo and the Prospect Park Zoo.
They are to be called Wildlife Conservation Parks beginning Monday.
A1.
BOARD SUPPORT FOR FERNANDEZ FADING
In the first test of New York City Board of Education sentiment about the future of Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez, a majority of its members indicated that they were not inclined to renew his contract, school officials said.
That left the prospect of an uphill battle for survival for Mr.
Fernandez, who had indicated recently that he wanted to stay on.
A1.
INVESTORS LINE UP FOR THE POST
The latest crisis at The New York Post, which lost another columnist, Amy Pagnozzi, to The Daily News, is producing an unlikely result: a line of wealthy people interested in buying some or all of the newspaper.
Besides the financier Steven Hoffenberg, they include Ronald S. Lauder, the former Republican candidate for Mayor of New York, and James Nederlander, the New York City theater owner B3.
OPERATOR OF QUEENS HOME LOSES LICENSE
Citing a record of "brazen plundering" of funds from residents of a group residence for the mentally ill in Queens, a state agency revoked the license of an organization that has operated the home, HiLi Manor, for 14 years.
B3.
TURMOIL AMONG THE TRANSIT POLICE
In the last several months, high-ranking transit police officials have been accused of improper conduct, from sexual harassment to the showing of pornographic movies, while the chief of the department, Michael F. O'Connor, has reshuffled his top command in a way that has placed him and the head of the union that represents transit officers in a bare-knuckles feud.
Reverberations from the troubles are beginning to be felt in the tunnels under New York City's streets.
B4.
REGION  WITNESS BARRED IN ASSAULT TRIAL
The prosecution was dealt a sharp setback at the end of the testimony phase of the Glen Ridge, N.J., sex-assault trial when the judge barred the appearance of an eyewitness likely to provide some of the most incriminating information against two of the young men charged with assaulting a mildly retarded schoolmate.
The prosecutors did not call the witness because they believed the defense planned to.
B6.
RECALL VOTE OUSTS AND REINSTATES MAYOR
Mayor Anthony M. DeFino and the town's four other commissioners in West New York, N.J., were ousted from office for a heartbeat and then re-installed in a confusing exercise known as a recall election.
B6.
ROAD TO CAPITAL RUNS THROUGH NEW YORK
The Clinton Administration is looking to New Yorkers to fill a variety of Federal positions.
B6.
Cuomo receives a list of nominees to replace Chief Judge Sol Wachtler.
B6.
Baby found in gym bag is doing well as the police seek the person who abandoned him.
B6.
Neediest Cases B3  Chronicle B22


Public Service Co. of New Mexico reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Arctco Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Foreign Affairs; Personal Hometown Terror
The Hercules from Split leveled off over Sarajevo, then dove for the airport to make itself a harder target.
The Brits met me on the tarmac and deposited me in what they call a "soft-skinned vehicle" -- a non-bulletproof Land Rover -- and we dashed past endless checkpoints to U.N. headquarters at Kiseljak.
"You can't slow down," Sgt.
Chris Vale said.
"It gives them time to think."
In Kiseljak, the Cheshires picked me up and stuffed me into a Warrior, a monster of a fighting personnel carrier straight out of "Star Wars," for the hour's drive to their headquarters in Vitez.
The 600-troop Cheshire battalion is the heart of the British contribution to the U.N.
Protective Force in central Bosnia.


Insight; Lagging Giants
Smaller stocks are still moving higher, but Nasdaq's biggest aren't.
The Russell 2,000 index of secondary stocks and the large institutional issues in the Nasdaq 100 ran parallel through the rally last fall.
The larger stocks moved 4 percent ahead over the first two weeks of the year, but since then the Russell stocks have virtually pulled even.


Executive Changes
CARDINAL DISTRIBUTION INC., Dublin, Ohio, a medical supply concern, named John C. Kane president and chief operating officer.
EMCOM, San Mateo, Calif., a waste management company, named James M. Felker president and chief executive.


American Business Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chrysler Debt Rating Raised as G.M.'s Is Cut
The Chrysler Corporation's debt ratings were raised yesterday, buoyed by a successful offering of new common stock and strong profit and sales figures.
But ratings for the General Motors Corporation were lowered because of concerns over the company's huge obligations to retirees.
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation said that it had raised ratings on about $15.6 billion of debt issued by Chrysler and its affiliates.


LSI Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Playboy Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Address Was in the 100's
Aquiles Familia, a former city welfare worker and aspiring novelist, has been laboring in his Brooklyn apartment to produce what he describes as a "realistic novel about social problems." What he did not know until yesterday was that sitting in the empty apartment next door was the stuff of a compelling nonfiction tale -- the $8 million in cash that had been stolen from an armored-car company in December.


3 Western Nations Demand Zaire Leader Yield Power
As bloodshed intensified here, the United States, France and Belgium demanded today that President Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire transfer power to the transitional government led by his rival, Prime Minister Etienne Tshisekedi.
A note was turned over to a Mobutu aide here, and was made public in Brussels.
It essentially called on Mr.
Mobutu to live up to an earlier accord to give the transitional government control of the economy and management of the government.
Mr.
Mobutu, who has ruled Zaire for 27 years, was reported to be at his palace in the northern part of the country.


One Name From Two
To The Home Section:
When my daughter, Vicky Heiman, and Steve Dickoff married, they decided to blend their last names.
They took the "H" from Heiman, the "off" from Dickoff, the "man" from Heiman and created Hoffman.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ELECTROLUX A.B., Stockholm, the giant Swedish home-appliance maker, cut its dividend for the first time in its history, to 85 cents a share from 1.70, after reporting slightly lower earnings for 1992.
FREEPORT-MCMORAN INC., New Orleans, a mining company, said it was laying off 184 workers and hiring an outside company to fulfill its research and engineering requirements.


Eagle-Picher Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Cascade Natural Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


GERMANS CANCEL BIG U.S. PURCHASE
Defense Minister Volker Ruhe announced today that he had canceled plans to buy a $1 billion American-designed high-altitude reconnaissance system whose German subcontractor is at the center of a political scandal about reported bribery.
Mr.
Ruhe told legislators that the system, Lapas, had fallen victim to the need to cut more than $500 million out of this year's $30.7 billion German military budget by imposing a general freeze on all new weapons acquisitions.


NBC Names a Chief for West Coast
Faced with prime-time ratings that have been declining for six years, NBC yesterday named Donald W. Ohlmeyer Jr., a longtime producer of sports events and television movies, president of NBC West Coast.
All of NBC's employees in entertainment-related businesses will now report to Mr.
Ohlmeyer, including Warren Littlefield, the president of NBC Entertainment.


Transit Police Feud
Just a year ago, the transit police, long afflicted by high crime and low morale, were beaming from their achievements.
Robberies and muggings were down, and many officers, despite the grim nature of their work, were actually happy.
The department was suddenly a model for other city agencies.
But the heady times for the nation's seventh-largest police force appear to be over, clouded by scandals and controversies and some very public sniping.
In the last few months, high-ranking officials have been accused of improper conduct, from sexual harassment to the showing of pornographic movies, while the Chief of the department, Michael F. O'Connor, has reshuffled his top command in a way that has placed him and the head of the union that represents transit officers in a bare-knuckles feud.


Differing Views on Bosnia
The United States and Europe differ over Bosnia and other parts of the former Yugoslavia because of how they look at the conflict.
Page A10.


Bio-Dyne Corp.(NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Jazz; Celebrating Fitzgerald's 75th Birthday
Ella Fitzgerald's 75th birthday is still more than two months away.
But festivities honoring the singer, who was born in Newport News, Va., on April 25, 1918, have already begun.
"A Celebration of Ella," a gala concert at Carnegie Hall on Tuesday evening, brought together performers from Harry Belafonte to Diane Schuur, from Ashford and Simpson to the Duke Ellington Orchestra, in a birthday tribute to the singer, who was too frail to make the trip from her home in Los Angeles.
A sedate affair at which Mr.
Belafonte and Maya Angelou took turns telling Miss Fitzgerald's story, the gala was timed to coincide with Black History Month.
Its proceeds will benefit the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, in Harlem.


Illegal Workers: a Long Road to Legality
The line of applicants seeking green cards so they may legally work in American households is so long that unless the law is changed, it is virtually pointless to apply, immigration lawyers say.
Before quotas were tightened in 1991, such cases were routine.
But no more.
Even when the Immigration and Naturalization Service and the Labor Department have formally certified a specific need for a foreigner to do work that no qualified citizen or permanent resident wants, the quotas effectively mean a wait of 15 to 20 years for those who apply now.


Aldus Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Keystone International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Nipsco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pop and Jazz in Review
Beth Carvalho
The Ballroom  253 West 28th Street  Chelsea  Through Feb. 14
Brazilian samba is anything but single-minded.
It can be a street celebration for thousands of people or a private whimsy, a buoyant love song or a pointed educational tract.
Beth Carvalho, whose latest album, "Perolas" (on Sigla, a Brazilian label) commemorates her 25 years as a samba singer, has brought a sweeping survey of samba and Brazilian pop to her Ballroom engagement, which opened on Tuesday night.
Interspersed with bossa novas and pop ballads, the set moved from intimacy to exuberance while Ms.
Carvalho's fans gleefully sang along and got up to dance.


Franklin Electric (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Clinton Seeking $14 Billion Cut By the Military
Defense Secretary Les Aspin has directed the Pentagon to produce a spending plan for the next fiscal year that is at least $14 billion less than the budget for the current year, according to internal Pentagon documents.
Before he left office, President Bush had already proposed spending $3 billion less on the military in the next fiscal year, which begins on Oct. 1.
But Mr.
Aspin's directive would cut the spending by nearly four times as much and make the Clinton Administration's first step toward honoring a campaign pledge to reduce military spending more.


Foothill Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


ON THE FRONT LINES WITH: Joseph Steffan; From Midshipman To Gay Advocate
HE is every mother's dream for her daughter: an ex-midshipman, handsome as can be, with a principled intelligence and a diffident way.
But there is a hitch: he's gay.
And therein lies the story of Joseph Steffan, his battle with himself and his battle with the Navy.
These are hectic days for the 28-year-old Mr.
Steffan.
As the fight over homosexuals and the military rages on, he is in demand.
Everyone, it seems, wants to hear how he was kicked out of Annapolis for being gay just a week before graduation in 1987.
One minute, it's the networks; the next, the news weeklies, all asking about his lawsuit to be reinstated in the Navy. (It was dismissed in late 1991 in Federal District Court in Washington and is being appealed.) All the while, he tours the country, speaking at colleges about gay men and lesbians in the military and promoting his book, "Honor Bound" (Villard), now in its second printing.


Seven Killed in Georgia Plane Crash


Beaucoup Blissful Bunnies, in Bed
JUDY LICHTENSTEIN likes to repeat the word "happy" when talking about her children's pillows and bedding and "Beach Bunnies," a children's book she illustrated (Rizzoli, $12, 1992).
Indeed, the pillows have unapologetically blissful baby-room colors: pinks, blues, yellows, purples and oranges so gentle you may start thinking about a nap yourself.
They are 100 percent bleached-cotton muslin on the front and cotton on the back, with polyfiberfill.
Ms.
Lichtenstein, who is not related to the artist, Roy Lichtenstein ("Sometimes I lie and say I am," she said), draws the images herself but has other people paint them by hand, using nontoxic paint, of course.


Beneficial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tyson Foods (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Late Spurt Helps the Rams Hold On
Fordham 81, Holy Cross 73
Fordham (9-12 over all and 6-2 in the Patriot League) almost lost a 20-point second half lead but managed to hold off Holy Cross by 81-73 last night at Rose Hill Gymnasium.
It was the Rams' third straight victory and moved them within a game of the first-place Crusaders, (14-5, 7-1), whose eight-game winning streak ended.
Fordham was clinging to a 28-23 lead when Rob Feaster, the Crusaders' leading scorer with 16.8 points per game, got tangled up with Rams center Sean Hope underneath the Holy Cross basket.
The two were about to separate and run upcourt when Feaster lunged at Hope with his arms extended as if he were about to throw a punch.
But the referees quickly intervened and one official, John Letscher, assessed Feaster a flagrant personal foul, which resulted in an automatic ejection.


USG Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Television; It's Jane Seymour, M.D., In the Wild and Woolly West
One recipe for a successful series: take a contrived concept, sprinkle with homespun truisms updated for political correctness and mix well with tired plot devices.
Process and serve.
And out comes "Dr. Quinn, Medicine Woman," CBS's new hit on Saturdays at 8 P.M.
Possible subtitle: "Little Shtick on the Prairie," and very little, at that.
Allegedly inspired by the ratings and artistic triumph of the Glenn Close television movie "Sarah, Plain and Tall," "Dr. Quinn" bears no resemblance to that intensely lean story, based on an award-winning children's book by Patricia MacLachlan (a two-hour sequel, "Skylark," also starring Ms. Close and Christopher Walken, will be broadcast Sunday on CBS).
Developed by Beth Sullivan with CBS Entertainment, "Dr. Quinn" is a television construct, its every nuance calculated out of lowest-common-denominator concerns.
Art, or even craft, decidedly takes a back seat to commerce.


Historical Society To Close Library
The board of the New-York Historical Society voted yesterday to shut down the institution's library on Feb. 19.
All public programs are to be canceled, with the exception of a traveling show of 90 Audubon watercolors that had long been planned, and 41 staff members will be dismissed; a skeleton crew of 35 will be left to handle security, conservation and disposition of the collections.
Last week the society seemed to have weathered a financial storm by putting up $3 million worth of artworks from its collection to secure a $1.5 million loan from Sotheby's auction house.
But board members said yesterday that despite receiving the loan, they had decided to shut the library after a staff report indicated that the extra funds would not sustain even a greatly scaled-down operation for six months, as originally planned.


NBC Names a Chief for West Coast
Faced with prime-time ratings that have been declining for six years, NBC yesterday named Donald W. Ohlmeyer Jr., a longtime producer of sports events and television movies, president of NBC West Coast.
All of NBC's employees in entertainment-related businesses will now report to Mr.
Ohlmeyer, including Warren Littlefield, the president of NBC Entertainment.


Witco Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Short Skis Come Back Into Style
This season, short skis, which have always had a faddish appeal because of their ease in turning and their adaptability for hot-dogging, are making a comeback.
Three new versions are being introduced at Eastern ski areas.
One model, now in limited production, is the Gauer 360, named for its inventor, Richard Gauer, and its ability to be used in making 360-degree maneuvers.
The skis are made of foam-injected polyethylene, are 80 centimeters (31.5 inches) long and are turned up at the tip and the tail.
They are thick and heavy, weighing three and a half pounds -- about the same as traditional 195 centimeter skis -- and have metal edges.


New Driver for Rahal
BOBBY RAHAL has scheduled a telephone press conference for Monday, when he is expected to name a second driver to his Indy-car team for selected races this season.
Rahal, who drives for the team and is co-owner with CARL HOGAN, will name MIKE GROFF, a 31-year-old Los Angeles driver, as his teammate, sources say.
Groff, who was the 1989 champion in the American Racing Series, a farm system for Indy-car drivers, is expected to join the team sometime after the Indianapolis 500.


License of Home for the Mentally Ill Revoked After a Fiscal Inquiry
Citing a record of "brazen plundering" of funds from residents of a group residence for the mentally ill in Queens, a state agency yesterday revoked the license of an organization that has operated the home for 14 years.
But a lawyer for the home, Hi-Li Manor in Far Rockaway, Queens, said it would remain open and fight the revocation in court.
The revocation was ordered by the State Department of Social Services, which licenses adult homes for the mentally ill, after an investigation and hearings conducted in the last seven months.
In June, a state monitoring agency, the Commission on the Quality of Care for the Mentally Disabled, asserted that from 1985 to 1992 the managers of Hi-Li diverted as much as $4 million in public funds for their personal uses.


U.S. WILL NOT PUSH MUSLIMS TO ACCEPT BOSNIA PEACE PLAN
Clinton Administration officials said today that they would not press the Bosnian Muslims to accept the peace plan put forward by Cyrus R. Vance and Lord Owen and that they were working on their own approach, which President Clinton himself would unveil "relatively soon."
The Administration will not object if all the parties are ready to agree to the Vance-Owen plan on their own, the officials said.
But they said they did not expect the Bosnian Muslims to do that and would not press them to accept what they themselves viewed as a flawed initiative.


Review/Music; Brooklyn College Opera Tries Handel's 'Hercules'
All the stage doings on Friday evening at the Walt Whitman Hall of Brooklyn College, all the moralizing from chorus and secondary characters, stressed the baleful effects of jealousy.
But the sin more vividly illustrated in the Brooklyn College Opera Theater's production and performance of Handel's music drama "Hercules" was excessive ambition.
Neither opera nor oratorio, "Hercules" was evidently not intended to be staged, though the interplay between characters adapts well enough to dramatic treatment and in some respects seems to demand it.
The idea of presenting the New York staged premiere of the work was admirable in principle, but Richard Barrett, the director, and Harry Saltzman, the conductor, seriously overestimated their resources as well as their potential audience.


William P. Drake, 80; Transformed Company
William Plummer Drake, a retired Philadelphia industrialist, died Jan. 22 at his home in Devon, Pa.
He was 80.
Mr.
Drake was associated with the Pennwalt Corporation for 49 years.
He started out as a summer trainee in 1934 when it was the Pennsylvania Salt Manufacturing Company.
In 1955 at the age of 42 he became its youngest president.


Frederick H. Amendola, Surgeon, 89
Dr.
Frederick H. Amendola, a retired chief of surgery at Roosevelt Hospital, died at his home in Manhattan on Friday.
He was 89.
Dr.
Amendola, a Phi Beta Kappa graduate of the City University of New York, received his medical degree from Cornell University Medical College and joined the Roosevelt staff in 1927.


Sprint Forms Joint Venture With Alcatel
The Sprint Corporation, the nation's third-largest long-distance company, announced today that it would form a joint venture with Alcatel N.V. of France to develop and sell a new generation of superfast communication systems.
The venture marks a potentially powerful alliance to develop a system that industry experts say is increasingly becoming the technology of choice for high-speed networks meant to carry voice conversations, video and huge volumes of computer data simultaneously.


No Headline
It's short and snappy -- zoo -- and we know we created a problem.
But in The American Heritage Dictionary the word 'zoo' has a secondary meaning of a situation or place marked by 'rampant confusion or disorder.' We are not confused or disordered. - WILLIAM CONWAY of the New York Zoological Society.  [ A1:4. ]


Cabot Oil &amp; Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pope Warns Sudan on Imposing Islamic Law
Beginning his 10th African tour, Pope John Paul II served notice today that the Vatican and its supporters would strongly resist the imposition of Islamic law on Christians in the Sudan but indicated that he wanted African priests elsewhere on the continent to lower their political profile.
The two themes emerged in comments to reporters aboard the plane carrying him from Rome and in an address tonight to the bishops of Benin, where the Roman Catholic Church played a central role in the democratization that led to elections in 1991 after two decades of Marxist rule.


GERMANS CANCEL BIG U.S. PURCHASE
Defense Minister Volker Ruhe announced today that he had canceled plans to buy a $1 billion American-designed high-altitude reconnaissance system whose German subcontractor is at the center of a political scandal about reported bribery.
Mr.
Ruhe told legislators that the system, Lapas, had fallen victim to the need to cut more than $500 million out of this year's $30.7 billion German military budget by imposing a general freeze on all new weapons acquisitions.


Hyphens Ad Infinitum
To The Home Section:
Dean Skylar and Chris Ledbetter, the couple who spliced their surnames and bestowed Skybetter upon their offspring, are breaking creative ground in nuptial nomenclature.
This is a vast improvement over the hyphenation of recent years, in which Mr.
Smith and Miss Jones exchange vows as the Smith-Joneses, their son and Miss Butcher-Baker presumably become the Smith-Jones-Butcher-Bakers, and so on ad infinitum.


Kelly Services (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Midwest Resources Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


L.I. Protests U.S. Data-Gathering Change
The Nassau and Suffolk County Executives and the president of Long Island's largest business and civic group today urged the Federal Government to rescind a decision that would eliminate the Island as a separate statistical area in gathering Federal data.
At a news conference this morning, officials said the change could cost Nassau County $17 million in Federal money and would have a similar impact on Suffolk County, where figures were not yet available.
They also added that the change could deter the Island's efforts to attract private businesses.


Japan Cuts Key Rate By 3/4 Point
After more than a week of tense behind-the-scenes prodding, the Bank of Japan announced this morning that it had cut its official discount rate to 2.5 percent from 3.25 percent in an effort to revive a badly weakened economy.
Today's three-quarters of a percentage point reduction in the discount rate, which is what the central bank charges commercial banks for short-term loans, is effective immediately.
It brings the rate down to match the low set during the economic boom of the late 1980's.
The rate is also a benchmark that affects other rates banks charge for loans and offer on deposits.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
FOR many children, puberty is marked by feelings of awkwardness.
It is as if their changing bodies no longer fit them snugly.
An adolescent whose development is out of step with that of his or her peers may be at risk for physical, social and emotional problems.
On average, girls in the United States show the first signs of reaching puberty (usually a change in their breasts) when they're approximately 10 1/2.
Menarche (the first menstrual period) arrives about 18 months after those first changes.
Among boys, the first sign of puberty is usually the development of pubic hair, which appears, on average, a few months after the 11th birthday.


Clinton Turning to New York To Fill Health Agency Posts
James R. Tallon Jr., the majority leader of the New York State Assembly, has rejected overtures from the Clinton Administration about taking a top job in the Department of Health and Human Services, officials in both Albany and Washington said today.
It appeared increasingly certain, however, that Mary Jo Bane, the state's Social Services Commissioner, will be offered a job as Assistant Secretary of Health and Human Services in charge of the Federal welfare bureaucracy.
Ms.
Bane joined the Cuomo administration only last year after leaving a teaching position at Harvard's John F. Kennedy School of Government.


Riley's Tight Rein May Limit Knicks
More pictures from the Alamo City of John Lucas leaving the San Antonio Spurs' team huddle to let his players do the talking were seen in these parts the other night.
At roughly the same time, a few spaces up the digital dial, the Knicks were making Pat Riley crazy again in the fourth quarter.
While the revitalized Spurs were winning for the 18th time in 21 games under Lucas, blowing away Chuck Daly's Nets, the men of Riley were coughing up a 16-point lead, falling behind, then rallying behind the mercurial John Starks to tame the 12-victory Washington Bullets.
Again, Riley was left at his post-game news conference to explain his team's disturbing habit for attacking a wounded, inferior opponent with the enthusiasm and flair of a man defending his wallet.


Convex Computer reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Money Market Mutual Funds
The regular weekly article and table on money market mutual funds do not appear today in Business Day.
A table on the week's performance of money funds will appear in the Business section on Sunday.


A broadcaster and publisher plan to reach out to consumers in action -- at the mall.
COLLABORATION between magazine publishers and television networks typically begin as True Romances yet conclude in "Divorce Court." The fierce competition between them for advertising dollars, not to mention the difficulty in translating what works in one medium into something successful for the other, usually disrupts even the most assiduously planned ventures.
But CBS Inc. and The New York Times Company hope to overcome the cross-media jinx.
The two companies are planning an elaborate promotion that mixes CBS's entertainment programming, information from the Times Company's Women's Magazines division and product promotion by four of the nation's largest advertisers.


Pentair Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sprint Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Stone Container reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Late Push By Duke Denies Tar Heels
Duke students had camped out for nearly a month to watch this game, and North Carolina players had waited nearly a year for a chance to banish their arch-rivals' long shadow.
The fifth-ranked Blue Devils had been waiting, too, building a run at a third consecutive national title.
Tonight Duke appeared to hit its stride, breaking open a fiercely contested game in the final two minutes to defeat North Carolina, 81-67 before 9,314 at Cameron Indoor Stadium.


Playground of Harmonious Sculptures
THEY look more like sculptures than musical instruments, but they are definitely harmonious.
The five sections of the "Sound Playground," designed by the Manhattan artists Bill and Mary Buchen, add art, music and architecture to the courtyard of Public School 23 in the Belmont section of the Bronx.
"The children really like the gradations in sounds," said Carolyn Jones, the school principal.


Essay; Truth From Shultz
"The obstacle to everything I want to do," Bill Casey told me in 1984, "is George." When I expressed surprise that George Bush had asserted himself, the C.I.A. chief gruffed: "No, no, the Vice President is on our side -- it's George Shultz who stands in the way."
Now we are beginning to see how the principled resistance of the best Cabinet officer in recent history failed to save two Presidents from the blundering and deceit that so tarnished their reputations.


We Should Treat Depression, Not Assist Suicide; Not a 'Right to Die'
To the Editor:
"Catholic Group Won't Fight Proposed Right-to-Die Bill" (news article, Jan. 14) reports on a New York State Assembly Health Committee hearing, at which Bishop Howard Hubbard of Albany, chairman of the Catholic Conference's public policy committee on the surrogate-decision-making proposal prepared by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's task force on life and the law.


Boundaries Hold Key to Yugoslav Solution
To the Editor:
"European Community Holds Balkan Key" (letter, Jan. 14) by Prof.
Zygmunt Plater really does not contribute to the solution of the problems that have followed the disintegration of Yugoslavia.


Hunt (J.B.) Transport (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Nicholls Returns; Devils Fall Flat
A smile broke out on the face of Bernie Nicholls, who tonight scored his first goal for the Devils since he was acquired from Edmonton on Jan. 13.
It wasn't enough to stop the Devils from giving up a lead in the last period and suffering a 5-4 defeat to the Calgary Flames at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
But the smile was unmistakable and offered a moment of relief for Nicholls.


DEPORTEES' RETURN DEFENDED BY RABIN
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin told Parliament today that his agreement with the United States to bring back a quarter of the 400 Palestinians banished to Lebanon had preserved his right to deport hundreds more people in the future.
"The principle of our ability to remove for a limited time hundreds of inciters, leaders, organizers remains," he said, replying to harsh criticism that he had surrendered to Washington this week by accepting the swift return of 100 deportees to the occupied territories.


G.M. Promotes Supply Chief
The executive brought over from Europe by the General Motors Corporation in May to shake up the company's supplier network has been promoted.
J.
Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua was named vice president and group executive of G.M.'s worldwide purchasing group.
Mr.
Lopez, 52, had previously been vice president of purchasing.


Cheeks Out And George In As Nets Cope With Injuries
The Nets continued to shuffle their lineup yesterday in the wake of injuries to some leading players, activating backup point guard Tate George and putting guard Maurice Cheeks on the injured list.
The move means that Cheeks, who has a stress fracture in his left foot, will miss a minimum of five games but perhaps at least four weeks.
It also means that George, who has been on the injured list since Jan. 26 because of a mild hip injury, will probably see some significant playing time as compared with very little time before he was hurt.


Aflac Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pop and Jazz in Review
Ute Lemper  Alice Tully Hall
Late in Ute Lemper's go-for-broke solo concert on Monday evening, the German chanteuse delivered three successive renditions of "Falling in Love Again," each of which boldly reconceived one of Marlene Dietrich's best-loved signature songs.
The first, sung a cappella and in German, was delivered as a semi-parody of Dietrich's husky performance in "The Blue Angel." The second, also in German, brought in accompaniment by piano, drums and a string quartet as the singer's enigmatic hauteur abruptly changed to a party-loving ebullience.


M.S. Carriers (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


WACHOVIA SELLS STUDENT-LOAN RECORDS UNIT
Creating the largest processor of records of student loans, Eduserv Technologies Inc. of St.
Paul, said yesterday that it had acquired Wachovia Student Financial Services, a subsidiary of the Wachovia Corporation in Winston-Salem, N.C.
Terms were not disclosed.


Writer Gets $2 Million for His First Book
Little, Brown &amp; Company and Warner Books have agreed to pay about $2 million dollars to a first-time, unknown novelist for a thriller about an American doctor who uncovers a neo-Nazi conspiracy in Europe.
The amount is believed to be a record for a first-time novelist and is considered especially high because the two publishers, both divisions of Time Warner Books, obtained the hard-cover and paperback rights only for the United States and Canada.
Although publishers have been paying record sums to established authors over the last few years, they have usually been able to secure world publishing rights.


One Gun Per Month
Effective gun control requires national laws because so many firearms used in urban crime are smuggled across state lines.
The latest proposal, growing out of concern over gun trafficking in Virginia, is simple and potentially powerful: Limit purchases of handguns by an individual to one per month.
Virginia's Governor, Douglas Wilder, has been pushing a one-gun-per-month bill for his state because it has become a source for illegal gun smuggling on the East Coast.
Dealers from New York City, where local laws sharply restrict access to guns, drive to Virginia and fill the trunks of their cars with weapons purchased in stores with the help of local residents.
Then they haul the guns back to New York and sell them illegally on the street at huge markups.


Mentor Graphics (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Senior C.I.A. Analyst Admits Discord Over Russia
Reflecting the complexity of Russia's problems, one of the Central Intelligence Agency's most senior analysts today laid out the divisions within the intelligence community and among independent Western and Russian experts on how best to reform Russia and promote its nascent democracy.
George Kolt, the National Intelligence Officer for Russia and Eurasia, told a Senate panel of three broad areas of disagreement over the degree and pace of reform.
His testimony illustrates how difficult it will be for the Clinton Administration to reach a consensus on a strategy for Russia as it begins its formal policy review.


Akira Okaya Is Dead; Research Physicist, 72
Akira Okaya, a physicist who worked with fiber optics and laser technology, died on Jan. 20 at Norwalk Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 72 and lived in New Canaan, Conn.
The cause of death was respiratory failure after a brief illness, his family said.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Flavor but No Flowers
Q.
I've been growing ginger, a root I bought at an airport in Hawaii, for three years, but there have been no flowers.
Can I expect them soon? -- Michael S. Oruch, New York
A.
I don't think so.
It isn't easy to duplicate the conditions needed to bring these tropical plants into flower on a windowsill in a cold climate.
And in any case, since there are several flowers that Hawaiians call ginger, I'm not sure which one you have.


Medical Trends Shake Prospects Of Drug Makers
After more than a decade of sharply rising prices for prescription drugs -- and profits to match -- fundamental changes in medical spending are clouding the prospects of pharmaceutical companies, which have long ranked among the most profitable and technologically innovative of corporations.
The outlook is battering the companies' stocks, long a favorite of investors, and many reached lows in trading yesterday before bouncing back with the market as the Dow Jones industrial average surged 45.12 points in a burst of economic optimism.  [ Page D1. ]


Niagara Mohawk Power reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Market Place; Snapple shares are flying high, but some analysts see a fall.
WHEN the Snapple Beverage Corporation went public in December and investors bid up the shares to dizzying levels, not everyone weighed the shares with unbiased analysis.
Many institutional investors in the stock have told their peers that they love the company's flavored iced teas and other soft drinks.
And Renaissance Capital, a research firm in Greenwich, Conn., said it had to fend off fans of Snapple products who wanted to buy stock, even though Renaissance does not offer brokerage services.
After a couple of months have passed to lend some cool detachment, the stock remains generally popular among investors and is trading near its highest levels, closing yesterday in Nasdaq trading at $36.75, up 75 cents, after being offered at $20 a share and commencing trade at $31.
But Snapple, based in Valley Stream, L.I., remains a matter of taste among analysts of the beverage industry.


BALKAN MEDIATORS PRESS THEIR PLAN
The international mediators trying to solve the Balkan crisis continued their efforts today to build international support for their peace plan here, emphasizing that it calls on Bosnia's Serbian nationalists to surrender substantial portions of the land they have conquered.
At the same time, France let it be known that if the peace talks here failed and fighting continued, it had an alternative plan for the Western allies to throw a ring of heavily armed troops around Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and drive the Serbian gunners back from the surrounding hills so they could no longer shell the besieged city.


Baseball Bans Cincinnati Owner For a Year Over Racial Remarks
Major league baseball's ruling executive council today suspended Marge Schott from the day-to-day operation of the Cincinnati Reds for one year and fined her $25,000 after concluding that she had made ethnic slurs.
Bud Selig, chairman of the executive council, which runs the sport in the absence of a commissioner, refused to repeat what he considered the most vile remarks investigators now attributed to Mrs.
Schott.
But he released a 10-page report outlining a pattern of language that Mrs.
Schott's fellow owners termed "the most base and demeaning type of racial and ethnic stereotyping."


After Florio Visit, Clinton Ends Medicaid Impasse
New Jersey will get a $412 million Medicaid reimbursement as a result of personal intervention by President Clinton in the long-running financing dispute, a Federal official said today.
The decision came after Gov.
Jim Florio met with the President in Washington this week to discuss the reimbursement issue.
The Governor had been a prominent supporter of Mr.
Clinton early in his Presidential campaign, and helped deliver his state to the Democratic candidate in the November election.


Exxon President in Line To Be Next Chairman
The Exxon Corporation said yesterday that it expected Lee R. Raymond to be elected chairman and chief executive in April, succeeding Lawrence G. Rawl, who will reach the mandatory retirement age of 65 in May.
Mr.
Raymond, 54, is a 30-year Exxon employee who became president of the company in 1987, when Mr.
Rawl became chairman, and there was little surprise in the announcement.


John Berry Dies at 78; New York Bar Official
John E. Berry, a former executive director of the New York State Bar Association, died on Jan. 25 at the Shrewsbury Nursing Home in Shrewsbury, Mass.
He was 78.
His family said he died of heart failure.


Snap-On Tools Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


SUNBEAM-OSTER CO. (N)
The Sunbeam-Oster Company reported strong growth for the fourth quarter yesterday, exceeding Wall Street's best forecasts by a penny a share.
Sunbeam, based in Providence, R.I., reported gains in all divisions, which make a variety of consumer products.
Profits grew 70.7 percent, and sales grew 10.4 percent.


VWR Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Williams Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dolls That Say a Lot Without Words
THE women who made these African heritage dolls (below) range in age from 60 to 94, says Onnie Millar, the art teacher who led the retirees' workshop that produced the work.
The dolls will be displayed in a one-day exhibition on Saturday at the Brooklyn Historical Society; children and adults both may be surprised to learn that the dolls are made of wood.
"The dolls are meant to be people in the Underground Railroad, including Harriet Tubman," Ms.
Millar said.
"There's even a doll shown having a baby, made by a woman who used to be a midwife."


The Grandeur of Inauguration Day Lingers


Slingshot to Video, David Still Wins
MEL GIBSON, in an almost unrecognizably sonorous voice, narrates the story of "David and Goliath" in a new musical video series for children by Rabbit Ears Productions, a family-entertainment company.
In all, "The Greatest Stories Ever Told" includes 13 stories from the New and Old Testaments; other examples are "Noah and the Ark" and "Joseph and His Brothers." The stories are available on videotape and feature well-known actors, musicians and illustrators.
They are also on compact disks and audio cassettes, with additional music in lieu of visual narrative.
The stories are meant for children 5 and older.
The videotapes use dissolve animation, which produces something like a picture book on screen.


Choice for Attorney General Is Near, Official Says
President Clinton is close to a decision on a choice for Attorney General, with the leading candidate being Federal District Court Judge Kimba M. Wood of New York City, an Administration official said tonight.
Mr.
Clinton, who hopes to make the final decision in the next day or two, is also said to be considering Charles F. C. Ruff, a Washington lawyer, and Gerald L. Baliles, a former governor of Virginia, the official said.


American Colloid (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Effective Test Is Developed To Find AIDS in Newborns
Researchers say they have found a quick method to determine whether infants are infected with the virus that causes AIDS.
The new method, developed by researchers at the University of California at Los Angeles, can identify more than 80 percent of the infants who are infected.
At the same time, it does not give any false results for those who are uninfected.


New Jersey Resources Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bridge
If a declarer does something brilliant or tricky, a defender can often solve the problem if he takes a little time.
An example is the diagramed deal, which helped Chip Martel win the International Bridge Press Association's Bols Tip Prize for 1992.
His tip was this: When analyzing a hand, be sure that your reconstruction is consistent with the bidding and play of
both
unseen hands.
South arrives in four hearts after West has opened with one diamond.
Notice that South's jump to two hearts, in the pass-out seat, is strong, not weak.


Times Mirror Reports Quarter and '92 Loss
The Times Mirror Company, which publishes The Los Angeles Times, Newsday and other newspapers and magazines, today reported a fourth-quarter loss of $61.7 million, as a result of several charges to reduce staff, restructure operations and make accounting changes.
The charges, which totaled $268.8 million for 1992, gave the company a net loss of $66.6 million for the year.


Federal-Mogul reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dow Jumps 45.12 Points; Volume High
Stocks rose broadly and strongly yesterday, with the Dow's laggard giants leading the way on a burst of economic optimism.
The Dow Jones industrial average gained 45.12 points, or 1.36 percent, to 3,373.79, for the largest gain since late summer.
Investors put an exclamation point on their enthusiasm by trading 345.4 million shares, the seventh-highest volume in Big Board history.


Pinnacle West Capital reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Will Marriott Ever Stand Divided?
The Marriott Corporation's proposal in October to split the company in two has not only put at risk the squeaky clean reputation forged by three generations of close-knit Marriott family management.
It has also provoked a lawsuit by bondholders that some analysts say could unravel the restructuring plan and hobble the hotelier.
"If they don't come up with a compromise position that satisfies bondholders, they would have to continue operating as one company," said Arthur Adler, a hotel consultant at Coopers &amp; Lybrand.
"That could adversely affect their ability to fund a whole range of initiatives that will make them a more profitable company -- everything from expansion to developing new computer systems."


Reynolds Prepares to Fight the I.A.A.F.
Between banishments at the moment and set to race again tomorrow at 400 meters in the Chemical Bank Millrose Games, Butch Reynolds hopes he is the start of a track and field revolution.
Reynolds is calling on his fellow athletes and USA Track and Field, the governing body for the sport in the United States, to declare war against the International Amateur Athletics Federation.


Writer Gets $2 Million for His First Book
Little, Brown &amp; Company and Warner Books have agreed to pay about $2 million dollars to a first-time, unknown novelist for a thriller about an American doctor who uncovers a neo-Nazi conspiracy in Europe.
The amount is believed to be a record for a first-time novelist and is considered especially high because the two publishers, both divisions of Time Warner Books, obtained the hard-cover and paperback rights only for the United States and Canada.
Although publishers have been paying record sums to established authors over the last few years, they have usually been able to secure world publishing rights.


Police Give New Details In Shooting Of Hostage
Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said yesterday that new details surrounding the deaths last week of a bank robber and the woman he grabbed as a hostage on the Upper West Side suggested that police officers were forced to fire at the gunman because he had been shooting at them throughout a four-block chase.
In addition, the time that passed between the moment the gunman grabbed his hostage, Aurea Bonnie Vargas, an elementary school teacher, and the time they were shot by the officers was no more than 90 seconds, far less than originally thought, Mr.
Kelly said.


For Children
Videos for Black History Month A singing Tom and Huck  Improvisational theater in Manhattan.
Children's Film Festival
The Studio Museum in Harlem
144 West 125th Street
(212) 864-4500
Recommended ages: 4 and up
Through Feb. 27
John Henry, the steel-driving hero, is a legendary giant of the railroad who was born "with a hammer in his hand." His powerful story, with shake-rattle-and-roll music by B. B. King, is the first in a series of international videos that will be shown during Black History Month at the Studio Museum in Harlem, starting tomorrow.


Sterling Software reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Zilog Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Linamar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Diner's Journal
A Blend of David Kehs
In David Keh's long and colorful career as a culinary showman he has undergone more costume changes than a fashion runway model.
His styles have ranged from elegant (Auntie Yuan, Uncle Tai's Hunan Yuan) to mainstream (David K's and David K's Cafe) to whimsical (Pig Heaven).
Mr.
Keh's latest Manhattan venture, David K's Noodle Road, is a bit of everything.


Southdown Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wynn's International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Critic's Choice; A P.S. 122 Celebration
Performance Space 122, a lively, invitingly scruffy center for the avant-garde, has gone through a slew of catchy titles in the decade or so since it began presenting an annual benefit.
"More Light" raised money for a better lighting system.
"Sound Off" helped upgrade the theater's sound equipment.
This year, in hard economic times, it's simply "Full Support" -- "emotionally and financially, from every section of society," -- said Mark Russell, the artistic director of P.S. 122.


Hillary Clinton Visits Capitol In Vivid Display of Her Clout
Demonstrating in unmistakable terms her intent to serve as the Administration's chief lobbyist and negotiator on health care, Hillary Rodham Clinton went to Capitol Hill today for closed-door policy discussions with leaders from both parties.
Mrs.
Clinton's lobbying trip, extraordinary for a First Lady, was the latest manifestation of her influence.
An unpaid volunteer with no official Government job, Mrs.
Clinton has nevertheless emerged as the most important White House adviser on domestic issues.


Genesis Health Ventures (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Honda Stalls Indy-Car Plans
Honda, which announced last month that it planned to enter Indy-car racing in 1994, is reconsidering because of rules that could require the company to build as many as 100 racing engines by 1995.
The company had planned to announce which team would use its engine in 1994 next Tuesday, said Tom Elliott, executive vice president of American Honda.
But, Elliott said yesterday, that was canceled after a decision by IndyCar, the group that sanctions the 15 Indy-car races other than the Indianapolis 500.


A Tale of Inside Aid in $8 Million Robbery
The man suspected of driving the getaway car in the $8.2 million robbery of a Brooklyn armored car company last December turned in three confederates, gave away the hiding place of the bulk of the loot and confirmed what investigators had believed all along: that it was an inside job, Federal officials said yesterday.
The officials declined to say if their informant, Joseph Jesus James, whom relatives described as a man easily swayed, had cracked under the pressure of around-the-clock surveillance by investigators or had agreed to cooperate for leniency on robbery-conspiracy charges carrying up to 15 years in prison.


7 Journalists Drop Plans to Leave The News
Seven reporters and columnists who had announced they were leaving The Daily News said yesterday that they would stay after all.
The seven, including the columnists Juan Gonzalez and Jerry Capeci, had opted for a severance package offered by the publisher, Mortimer B. Zuckerman, last month in the midst of his takeover of The News and his bitter battle with the Newspaper Guild of New York.
The guild is the only one of 10 unions at The News that remains without a contract with Mr.
Zuckerman.


On Not Reading Too Much Into a Suit
To the Editor:
I find "Peekaboo Power Suits" (Op-Ed, Jan. 28) by Ann Taylor Fleming very disturbing.
Mixed messages, pshaw, to use an old-fashioned word!
Barbra Streisand's evening suit at the inaugural gala -- I stress
evening
-- by Donna Karan, was elegant and provocative.
What's wrong with that?
She was entertaining, not conducting a board meeting or running for P.T.A. president.
As for her momentary flattery at being asked to run for the Senate, it was hardly a serious consideration and was refuted in hours.


Hypocrat Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


France, After 50 Years, Plans Memorials to Jews Sent to Die
Often criticized for refusing to apologize for the deportation of Jews from France during World War II, President Francois Mitterrand has created a national day of remembrance of the racist and anti-Semitic crimes carried out by the collaborationist Vichy regime.
The decision, which was warmly welcomed by Jewish leaders here, was seen as an important step in France's gradual acceptance of the role played by French citizens -- as well as by Nazi occupation forces -- in the deportation of some 76,000 Jews from France to German death camps.


TNT Freightways (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Lawyer Denied a Rehearing In Sex-Bias Suit Against Firm
A Federal appellate court here has refused to rehear a sex-discrimination suit brought against a Philadelphia law firm by a former associate who had been denied a partnership.
The plaintiff, Nancy O'Mara Ezold, had requested a hearing before the full United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit.
A three-judge appellate panel from the court ruled in December that the law firm, Wolf, Block, Schorr &amp; Solis-Cohen, had not engaged in sex discrimination when it denied Ms.
Ezold a partnership in the firm.


Lemieux Is Skating
MARIO LEMIEUX has responded well to the first four days of radiation therapy for his Hodgkin's disease and skated yesterday for the first time in weeks, the Pittsburgh Penguins said.
Lemieux, the N.H.L.'s leading scorer, began the radiation treatments Monday after taking antibiotics for two weeks to combat a lung infection. (AP)


In Home Health Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Shop as the Mirror Of a Museum's Soul
IF you could wrestle a museum onto the analyst's couch and peer inside its head, what you would find might look something like its museum shop.
Although this theory has not been scientifically tested, field research gives it a certain force.
Careful study of any one of the sometimes seductive, often chaotic, commercial venues housed within New York museums can resemble a close encounter with the institution's most intimate thoughts and fantasies, about both itself and its public.
In short, today's museum shop is rife with conflicts and desires, and they're not all coming from the shoppers.
Museum shops have always mirrored their parent institutions, but they've come a long way since the reflection consisted primarily of exhibition catalogues and posters, postcards of works in the collection and relevant art books.
For some time now, major museums have emblazoned their logos on tote bags and umbrellas, and have been developing other more creative ways to capitalize on their holdings and cachet.


Carolina Freight Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Army Coach Dismissed
His team is 3-15 this season and 13-61 during his tenure, but Coach TOM MILLER of Army was dismissed yesterday because of his poor relationship with his players, officials at the United States Military Academy said.
Miller, a 1970 West Point graduate who played basketball at the Academy under BOB KNIGHT, "publicly degraded" his players and had been told twice this season by administrators that his outbursts were inappropriate, school officials said.


Russia's Mirror in Space Reflects The Light of the Sun Into the Dark
Unfurling a thin aluminum and plastic mirror in space, Russian scientists and engineers for the first time have sent a narrow beam of reflected sunlight flashing across the darkened side of the Earth.
They said the experiment early yesterday proved the feasibility of putting much larger mirrors in space to illuminate areas tens of miles across.
Proponents say such mirrors could change night into twilight, saving billions of dollars in electricity and extending planting and harvesting seasons.


Fritz Henle, 83, Dies; Travel Photographer
Fritz Henle, a prolific freelance photographer renowned for his stylish travel pictures, died on Sunday at Teachers Hospital in San Juan, P.R.
He was 83 and lived in St.
Croix, V.I.
His son, Martin, said the cause of death was heart failure.


65 Seized in Sale of Drugs
More than 65 men and women, believed to be illegal aliens involved in the distribution of narcotics, were arrested in Fordham, the Bronx, last night by the police and the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
Farrell Adams, an immigration service spokesman, said the arrests resulted from a yearlong investigation stemming from complaints by Fordham residents about the sale of drugs.
Mr.
Adams said most of those arrested were from the Caribbean, principally the island of Jamaica.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.13
3.56
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.91
2.90
3.80
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.08
3.10
3.86
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.96
6.00
6.81
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.18
7.21
7.76
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.30
8.30
8.88
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.25
6.28
6.74
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  A MILE IN THE SHOES OF WELFARE CLIENTS  Barbara J. Sabol, the head of New York City's Human Resources Administration, posed as a welfare applicant last year to experience firsthand the huge bureaucracy she administers.
Ms.
Sabol disclosed her odyssey through a process she found "depersonalized" and rife with indignities at a time of bitter feuding with a First Deputy Mayor.
A1.
BACKERS LOBBY FOR SCHOOLS CHANCELLOR  Joseph A. Fernandez's supporters sought to rally backing for the Schools Chancellor before today's meeting of the Board of Education, a majority of whose members have said they are unwilling to renew his contract.
B3.
CHINATOWN KIDNAPPING ENDS IN DEATH  It began as a kidnapping and armed robbery on a Chinatown street, an increasingly common crime in the Asian-American community.
But a witness called relatives of the victims, who set up an ambush.
When the kidnappers arrived at the victim's home in Manhasset, L.I., one was killed by an uncle of the victims, the Nassau County police said.
B3.
A $200 TOLL TO CROSS THE HUDSON  In the latest skirmish in the trans-Hudson wars, officials in New Jersey said that they would begin charging New York City limousines and taxis $200 a year per vehicle for the right to bring passengers from New Jersey to New York.
B3.
KELLY RESERVES JUDGMENT ON SHOOTOUT  Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said that it was too early to pass judgment on officers who responded to a bank robbery that devolved into a wild shootout on the Upper West Side, leaving a man and his hostage dead.
Mr.
Kelly suggested that new details reinforced that the situation was uncontrollable.
B2.
A second homeless mentally ill man is ordered released from a mental hospital.
B2.
REGION
ASSESSING HOSPITAL ORDER  A ruling by a Federal judge in Manhattan struck down a large part of New York's payment system, saying hospitals could no longer impose extra charges, a practice begun in 1983 when the state began regulating hospital rates.
The ruling, if upheld, will deprive the hospitals of $160 million a year, make the position of the ailing Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield even more precarious, and, threaten to dismantle New York's complicated and fragile hospital financing system.
News analysis, B5.
DEMOCRATS ANGERED BY WEICKER ADDRESS  The tone of Governor Weicker's budget address and his dismissal of an income-tax bill angered Democrats, who for the most part have been his allies, and may carry a high price, especially if he decides to seek a second term next year.
B4.
CENSUS-TRACT PLAN SAID TO BE REVERSED  After a public outcry from Long Island officials and civic leaders, the Federal Government has agreed to reverse a decision that would have lumped Nassau and Suffolk Counties with New York and northern New Jersey in the same census tract, a Long Island Representative said.
B5.
Yale names Richard Brodhead, chairman of its English department, as dean of Yale College.
B4.
Our Towns by Joseph Berger B5  Neediest Cases B3  Chronicle B4


BIC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3


Making Do With the Arts in New York Schools; With Budgets Cut, Artwork and the Sounds of Music Are Fading, but Some Persist
There is something missing on the sparkling-clean walls of P.S. 34 -- children's artwork.
What little art there is -- snowmen made of cotton balls, cut-out paper hearts, sponge paintings -- is the little that this school on the Lower East Side, like schools all over New York City, can afford.
The only formal arts training in Public School 34 is a part-time stringed-intruments class, taught to a lucky few children culled from the fourth, fifth and sixth grades by a teacher whose main qualification is having once studied the piano.


Polgar Defeats Spassky In Fourth Match Game
Judit Polgar, the 16-year-old Hungarian chess whiz, defeated Boris Spassky today in the fourth game of their exhibition match.
The score is now 2 1/2-1 1/2 in her favor.
Today's marathon game lasted nearly seven hours.
Spassky, a former world champion who now lives in France, resigned on the 65th move of a hard-fought endgame.


CHRONICLE
BETTE BAO LORD, the novelist and human-rights activist, has been named to become the chairwoman of Freedom House, which monitors and works for human rights around the world.
On March 1, she will succeed MAX KAMPELMAN, the former arms-control negotiator, who has been the chairman for the last 10 years.
"When I heard about it, I said I felt like a shrimp elevated to dragon because of the kinds of people who have been chairman in the past," Ms.
Lord said yesterday.
"The only other women in that post have been Eleanor Roosevelt and Margaret Chase Smith. Being an immigrant, this is terrific."
Ms.
Lord, 54, left China, her homeland, when she was 8 and did not return for 27 years.
Her husband, Winston Lord, was the United States Ambassador to Beijing from 1985 to 1989.
She was a consultant there to CBS News during the brief democractic movement that ended with the Tiananmen Square crackdown in June 1989.
"With the end of the cold war and with new problems of ethnicity erupting everywhere, with our own questions of diversity, this is a critical time to emphasize the importance of democracy and democratic values," she said.
The author of two best-selling books, "Spring Moon" and "Legacies, a Chinese Mosaic," she is at work on a new novel for Alfred A. Knopf, tentatively titled "The Middle Heart."


A Zoo by Any Other Name . . .
After two years of debate, the wise heads at the New York Zoological Society have decided to change the names of their organization and all its facilities.
No longer will there be a Bronx Zoo; as of Monday, it's the International Wildlife Conservation Park.
Gone is the Central Park Zoo; it's the Central Park Wildlife Conservation Center.
Even the New York Aquarium is becoming the Aquarium for Wildlife Conservation.
Why the multisyllabic mayhem?
The society believes that it has outgrown its old names.
Like a butterfly bursting from its cocoon, it has become an international wildlife conservation organization, whose projects in 41 countries go far beyond anything implied by the word "zoo." So now the public must be clued in to the wider horizons -- by robbing the city's zoological landmarks of names used for generations.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The productivity of American workers shot up by 4 percent in the fourth quarter.
Along with big gains in January retail sales and record-breaking activity on the stock market, the data suggest that a full-fledged recovery might be under way.  [ Page D1. ]
The Dow surged 42.95 points, to a record close of 3,416.74.
Most other market averages reached new highs and Big Board volume was the seventh highest in history.  [ D1. ]


Dance and Lectures On Sex and Spirituality
A conference on "The Union of Sex and Spirit," a daylong program of dance performances and lectures on the link between sexuality and spirituality in Eastern and Western myths and religions, is to take place tomorrow at St.
Peter's Church, Lexington Avenue and 54th Street, from 8:30 A.M. to 6 P.M.
The sponsor is Cauldron Productions, which presented similar events at the Asia Society.
Tickets are $80; $60 for students and the elderly.
Telephone: (212) 245-0445.


Christopher Plans Mideast Trip
Secretary of State Warren Christopher will travel to the Middle East this month in an effort to revive the moribund Arab-Israeli peace talks.
The Clinton Administration is hoping that by sending Mr.
Christopher to Israel and to Arab capitals on his first foreign trip as Secretary of State, it can shift the focus away from the issue of the more than 400 Palestinians deported by Israel to southern Lebanon and persuade the Palestinians to rejoin the peace talks.


Donohue reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mazda Said To Plan Shift In Top Roles
The Mazda Motor Corporation's American management is about to undergo a shake-up, with Mazda's top American executive relinquishing some of his power to his Japanese boss, Mazda managers said today.
The managers, who spoke only on condition of anonymity, said the changes would be announced next week.


A Worthy Bird Has an Unlikely Night
Rather than a laser show, Larry Bird surely would've preferred to have manufactured a few lightning bolts of his own from behind the 3-point line.
He would've wanted high-fives from sweaty men in shorts, not handshakes from well-groomed gents in Celtic warmup suits.
He would've liked to have dressed down a defender or two, not address thousands in the stands who wouldn't dare talk trash.
His choice would have been to go out with a spontaneous performance on the parquet floor, not in a planned extravaganza on a stage about six feet above it.
But his back still hurts, and Larry Bird Night was an inevitability, one way or another.


House Passes Voter Bill Over G.O.P. Opposition
House Democrats stood almost as one today and passed legislation fiercely denounced by Republicans that would make it easier to register new voters and harder to purge them from precinct rolls.
The legislation, the daylong debate over it and the party-line vote of 259 to 160 echoed an election-year battlewaged in Congress last spring and summer over voter registration.
The Senate, which now gets the bill, is expected to pass it and send it to the White House, just as it did last year.


Datamarine International reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Investors Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


No Headline
"I ceased to be. -- BARBARA J. SABOL, on her voyage through New York City's welfare system.  [ A1:5. ]


Art in Review
Mary Kelly
Postmasters Gallery
80 Greene Street (near Broome Street)
SoHo
Through tomorrow
Mary Kelly's ambitious multi-part installation "Interim," exhibited at the New Museum in 1990, remains vivid in the memory.
Many of its 30 silk-screened panels carried the words of conversations among women whose bodies, relationships and identities were changing as they entered middle age.
Ms.
Kelly's visual means were bone-dry, but the casual and intimate language of the speakers was mesmerizing, and this avowedly feminist work had a feeling of empathetic tenderness.


Watts Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fischer Imaging (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Oscar Dombrow, 86, New York Educator
Oscar Dombrow, a retired New York City educator who developed innovative school programs, died on Tuesday at Boca Raton Community Hospital in Florida.
He was 86 and lived in Boca Raton and Westport, Conn.
Pneumonia was the cause of death, his family said.


NUI Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day on Jan. 19 about an appointment at the North American Reinsurance Corporation misstated the position of William E. Thiele.
He was named president and chief operating officer.
N.
David Thompson remains chairman and chief executive.


Travelers Sets a Charge for Its Real Estate
In a move that analysts say may become widespread in the insurance industry, the Travelers Corporation said yesterday that it would take a fourth-quarter charge against earnings of $485 million to increase its reserves for real estate losses.
The company also said it would speed up the sale of foreclosed properties.
In addition to the real estate charge, the company said it would take a $59 million charge against after-tax earnings for losses related to Hurricane Andrew, and $79 million in other charges.


Taking Shelter Where It Can Be Found


CONGRESS PASSES MEASURE PROVIDING EMERGENCY LEAVES
Congress gave President Clinton his first legislative victory tonight, passing the family-leave bill to guarantee workers up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave for medical emergencies.
The Senate passed the bill 71 to 27, and the House followed on a 247 to 152 vote, just minutes before midnight.


Avon Products Inc. (N)
Avon Products' 12 percent net income gain in the fourth quarter reflected a 7 percent gain in international sales, particularly in the Western Hemisphere and the Pacific Rim.
Sales in the United States declined 1 percent, although pretax income rose by the same margin.
Increased sales of skin care products, jewelry and accessories were offset by a drop in sales of men's gift items.


PSI Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


PHAR-MOR HIRES PRESIDENT AND PROMOTES TWO OFFICIALS
Phar-Mor Inc., the discount drug retailer that is in bankruptcy protection, said yesterday that it had named David Schwartz president and chief operating officer.
Mr.
Schwartz, who is 47, joins Phar-Mor from Smitty's Super Valu Inc., a closely held grocery and department store chain based in Phoenix, where he had served as president and chief operating officer since August 1991.
Antonio Alvarez, Phar-Mor's president and chief operating officer since Sept. 16, has been named chief executive.
David Shapira, chief executive, was named chairman.


3 and Out: Bills' General Manager Exits Stage Left
Bill Polian, the bold and highly regarded general manager of the Buffalo Bills, was dismissed yesterday, only four days after his team became the first one to lose three straight Super Bowl games.
But this was not a case of an unhappy owner with a winning-is-everything philosophy.
Rather, there were long-standing differences between the 50-year-old Polian and the people who worked for 74-year-old Ralph Wilson, the Bills' owner.


National Fuel Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Just Another Swing and a Miss
Marge Schott, the censured owner of the Cincinnati Reds, a woman who is apparently given to spewing enough racial and ethnic garbage to fill a toxic waste dump, is about to go to school.
Multicultural training school.
That's the one good idea that came from the wrist slap her fellow baseball owners delivered to Schott on Wednesday.
It would have been even better if the powers that be admitted that precious few of the 28 major league clubs have yet to approach anything hinting at racial and ethnic understanding themselves.
It would have been a miracle if they had decided that it would be in the best interest of baseball if all club owners, and their senior officials in charge of hiring, also marched off to school right alongside Schott.


Bosnia Mediators Urging U.S. to Join Peace Force
The international mediators trying to solve the Balkan crisis are suggesting that the Clinton Administration contribute troops to the new peacekeeping force needed for Bosnia and Herzegovina under their peace plan as a way of putting its stamp on American policy toward the crisis, diplomats here say.
Former United States Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance, who represents the United Nations, and Lord Owen, who represents the European Community, have also suggested that the Clinton Administration take a lead in asking the Security Council to set up a special tribunal to judge accusations of war crimes in Bosnia and Herzegovina and to create a special human rights commission to monitor conditions there.


Corrections
Articles on Tuesday and in some editions yesterday about Federal District Judge Kimba M. Wood of New York, the likely nominee for United States Attorney General, misstated her age.
She is 49.


Money Fund Assets Are Up
The total assets of the nation's 610 retail money market mutual funds increased $436.2 million, to $383.63 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 380 taxable retail money market funds fell $211.7 million, to $301.90 billion.
The assets of the 230 retail tax-exempt funds increased $647.9 million, to $81.73 billion.


Lamonts Apparel (NSC) reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


Blockbuster Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Canadian Padicic reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Woodard Is Honored
Receiving the award named for her role model brought back poignant Olympic memories for the basketball star LYNETTE WOODARD.
The leading career scorer in the history of women's college basketball yesterday received the Flo Hyman Award, presented annually to the woman who "exemplifies the dignity, spirit and commitment to excellence" demonstrated by Hyman, captain of the 1984 United States Olympic women's volleyball team.
Two years after leading that team to a gold medal, Hyman died of Marfan's syndrome.


Girl's Report Of Her Rape Was Ignored
In a poignant plea for help, a fourth-grade student at a Harlem school wrote a classroom essay telling her teacher: "When I was 8 years old my father raped me."
The teacher passed the essay along to the principal, and the principal passed it along to a physician's assistant at a neighborhood hospital.
Apparently, no one talked to the girl about her essay for weeks.
No one at the school called the police.
No one called the state's emergency hot line, despite state reporting requirements.


Ewing Sits, But Smith Is Standout Stand-In
Patrick Ewing wore a tasteful olive-gold suit, a white shirt and a patterned silk tie.
He sat at the end of the bench.
People kept glancing his way, it was such an odd sight.
His right knee sore from an on-court collision Tuesday night against the Washington Bullets, Ewing did something last night he doesn't do often.
He decided he was in too much pain to play basketball, for only the fourth time in more than five years.


Koo Koo Roo reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Teradyne Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lindros on 'Beer Fight'
ERIC LINDROS, the standout Philadelphia Flyers rookie, testified at an assault trial in Oshawa, Ontario, yesterday that he splashed beer on a woman at a bar, but only after she did the same to him.
A subdued Lindros, his hands clasped in front of him, denied that he ever spat beer at LYNN NUNNEY, a factory worker, last November at a nightclub in nearby Whitby. (AP)


Fossil Belongs Not Just to the Ages But to the U.S., a Judge Declares
A fossil Tyrannosaurus rex that was seized by the F.B.I. last May from a South Dakota dealer belongs to the Federal Government, a United States district judge has ruled.
The case, which centers on the most complete and best preserved tyrannosaur fossil ever found, is being closely watched by paleontologists, fossil dealers, museum officials and lawyers.


Black History
Here is a sampling of events celebrating Black History Month that are to be held in the metropolitan region this weekend:
Today
"THE CIRCLE UNBROKEN IS A HARD BOP," Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street, East Village.
A theater piece by Sekou Sundiata, a poet, and Craig S. Harris, a musician, about three black American artists who come of age during the 1960's.
The piece, in the form of letters, features Mr.
Sundiata, Mr.
Harris and the actress Stephanie Alston; the director is Rome Neal.
Tonight and tomorrow at 7:30 P.M. and Sunday at 4 P.M.
Also Feb. 11 through 14.
Admission: $10.
Reservations: (212) 465-3167.


Where Jewish and Black Victimizations Differ
To the Editor:
J.
J.
Goldberg is to be congratulated for "Love Divides Us, Not Hatred" (Op-Ed, Jan. 13), a thoughtful article on black-Jewish relations.
But he misses one crucial point.


Secret Kennedy Tapes May Be Made Public
After years of frustration for scholars, audio tapes made in President John F. Kennedy's White House office may finally be made public.
The tapes may become available if new sound equipment that the Kennedy Library here is buying improves the quality of the recordings enough for the National Security Council to understand and declassify them, library officials say.


Underfunded Pension Plans Raise Benefits, G.A.O. Says
Some of America's largest corporations are expanding their pension benefits, even though their current plans are already underfunded, with the knowledge that if the plans fail the Federal Government will pay the bills, Congressional auditors said today.
The General Accounting Office, an arm of Congress, found that 18 of 35 underfunded pension plans in the tire, automobile, airline and steel industries increased employee benefits by almost $2.2 billion in 1991.
As a result of this change and continuing neglect of existing benefits, the companies' underfunding in the 35 pension plans more than doubled, from $5.1 billion to $10.7 billion.


Fearing the Ax, Vermont Public Defenders Want to Unionize
Vermont's public defenders, concerned that Gov.
Howard Dean might try to cut back their services, are seeking the right to join a union.
The lawyers, who work for the Vermont Defender General's office, have petitioned the Vermont Labor Relations Board for the right to conduct a union election.
They want to be represented by the National Organization of Legal Services Workers, an affiliate of the United Automobile Workers, which represents Legal Aid lawyers in New York City.


FlightSafety International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Glimpse of Spring Shows Up Early in Washington


Albert R. Erskine, 81, an Editor For Faulkner and Other Authors
Albert Russel Erskine Jr., a retired Random House editor who worked with James A. Michener, William Faulkner, John O'Hara and Robert Penn Warren, died on Wednesday at Norwalk Hospital in Norwalk, Conn.
He was 81 and lived in Westport, Conn.
His family said he had had a long illness.


Feathered Dinosaur or a Real Bird?
A new study of Archeopteryx, the earliest established birdlike fossil, has cast serious doubt on the widely held theory that this feathered creature and presumably all birds are direct descendants of dinosaurs.
In a detailed comparison of the fossil's claws with those of modern birds, the ornithologist who did the study observed that the curvature of its foot claws must have enabled Archeopteryx to perch on tree limbs and that claws at the end of its wings apparently allowed it to climb tree trunks.


For Neediest Cases Fund, Late Is Better Than Never
The end of the 81st annual appeal of The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund is fast approaching, prompting a flurry of last-minute check writing by contributors who sheepishly admitted that they had procrastinated their way through the last few months.
In a letter with her $25 donation, Dorothy Sluter of Hillsdale, N.J., referred to an unofficial motto of the fund.
" 'To delay may mean to forget,' and that is exactly what happened in my case," she wrote.
"I have belatedly found the enclosed check, which I meant to send before New Year's. Still, better late than never!"


Review/Film; In a Futuristic Tale of 2042, Abortion Is Outlawed
"Rain Without Thunder," a dreary, nondramatic tract envisioning an America in which abortion is outlawed, deserves special notice for its unfortunate timing.
Two weeks into the Clinton Administration, here is a film set in a 2042 where pictures of young Dan Quayle still adorn the walls of government offices.
And women who have had abortions are imprisoned at Walker Point, a correctional facility presumably imagined in honor of Walker's Point, George Bush's summer home.
To be fair, "Rain Without Thunder" would be hopeless even if its foot were not so clearly in its mouth.
As written and directed by Gary Bennett, "Rain Without Thunder" is all talk.
Endless subjects are supposedly interviewed by a television reporter (Carolyn McCormick), who is trying to reconstruct the story of Allison Goldring (Ali Thomas).
Allison and her mother (Betty Buckley) have been jailed for trying to go to Sweden in the early weeks of Allison's pregnancy, under the provisions of a new Unborn Child Kidnaping Act.
The film dwells portentously on this and other imaginary legal developments, like a 28th Amendment giving full Constitutional rights to fertilized eggs.


Hillary Clinton Visits Capitol In Vivid Display of Her Clout
Demonstrating in unmistakable terms her intent to serve as the Administration's chief lobbyist and negotiator on health care, Hillary Rodham Clinton went to Capitol Hill today for closed-door policy discussions with leaders from both parties.
Mrs.
Clinton's lobbying trip, extraordinary for a First Lady, was the latest manifestation of her influence.
An unpaid volunteer with no official Government job, Mrs.
Clinton has nevertheless emerged as the most important White House adviser on domestic issues.


At the Bar; For a crusader whose time of glory has come, even AIDS fails to dampen the spirit.
The Dickensian line about "the best of times and the worst of times" has become the tiredest of cliches.
But when it comes to capturing the state of Thomas B. Stoddard, there is simply no better description.
His is a tale of two psyches.
These days, Mr.
Stoddard is feeling the kind of exhilaration that Frederick Douglass must have felt in the 1860's or Martin Luther King Jr. felt a century later: the high of someone whose time has come.
With the debate now raging over homosexuals in the military, Mr.
Stoddard has seen his life's work move from a neglected backwater to the epicenter of American consciousness.


Zero Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Market Place; A chip maker shuns big markets and finds growth in small places.
THE Dallas Semiconductor Corporation has ridden the same wave since October that has carried several semiconductor stocks to new highs, or their highest price levels in years.
Yet this is one chip maker that has cast itself in a markedly different mold.
Instead of taking broad leaps into huge, expanding markets like memory chips and microprocessors, Dallas Semiconductor has placed many bets in small places since it was organized nine years ago.


Restaurants
Brasserie Pascal
Brasseries are made for midwinter days, especially those when the wind makes a wool coat feel as porous as a screen door and when it seems that nothing short of a hearty meal and a glass of red wine could thaw your bone marrow.


Lilly Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


TVWeekend; Back to the Prairies With Tall Sarah
Original plans didn't include a sequel, but CBS's "Sarah, Plain and Tall" proved so popular, ending up the highest-rated television movie of the 1990-91 season, that a continuation of the Kansas prairie story could hardly be avoided.
So on Sunday at 9 P.M., the Witting family returns in still another "Hallmark Hall of Fame" presentation.
This one is called "Skylark." Once again Sarah, the mail-order bride from Maine, and her husband, Jacob, are played by Glenn Close and Christopher Walken; their children, Anna and Caleb, by Lexi Randall and Christopher Bell.
The time has jumped two years to 1912.
Out of hesitant beginnings, a family has taken shape.
The dour, tortured Jacob is no longer obsessed with the death of his first wife.
His children have come fully to accept Sarah as their new mother.
She is very much in love with all of them.
But now the land itself turns against the family as a severe drought threatens crops and livestock.
Electric storms trigger dangerous fires across the prairie.
Neighbors begin moving away.
After the Witting barn is destroyed in a fire, Jacob persuades a reluctant Sarah to go to Maine with the children.


Review/Art; Serrano Focuses On Death
It's not hard to figure out why big crowds have been going to see Andres Serrano's latest photographs at the Paula Cooper Gallery in SoHo.
Mr.
Serrano has been a fashionable figure since right-wing protests against government financing of his art several years ago catapulted him onto the national stage as a martyr to freedom of expression.
Moreover, he has seemed especially eager to push the sorts of hot buttons that give his art an air of urgency and risk.
Having made works involving homelessness, the Ku Klux Klan, body fluids and the Roman Catholic Church, he has now turned his camera on a subject that, while timeless, could not be trendier or more sensationalistic in this era of AIDS and rampant street crime: death.
His new larger-than-life, glitzy photographs, taken in a morgue, offer close-ups of corpses -- a decomposed head here, a charred torso there, each belonging to some unidentified victim of disease or violence.
With black backdrops and the hyped-up coloration of Cibachrome, the photos are at once calculated in their artsy presentation and also poorly carried out, promising an emotional impact without delivering more than an occasional shiver.
They seem big not because the images demand it but because bigness is de rigueur nowadays for ambitious photography.


L.I. to Remain Census Entity, Ackerman Says
After a public outcry from Long Island officials and civic leaders, the Federal Government has agreed to reverse a decision that would have lumped Nassau and Suffolk Counties with New York and northern New Jersey in the same census tract, a Long Island Representative said tonight.
Long Island officials had argued that the decision to eliminate Long Island's status in the census as a separate Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area would have cost Nassau and Suffolk Counties millions of dollars in Federal aid.
It also would have made it more difficult to attract businesses to the region, because statistics about the Island's economy would have been less readily available, they said.


Corrections
A table in Business Day yesterday with a brief report about the earnings of Allied Signal Inc. misstated its stock price in some copies.
Allied Signal closed on Wednesday at $61.875, up $2.875.


The beer industry is moving to capitalize on consumers' desire for more hefty brews.
FOR a quick read on the direction of the beer industry, consider the somewhat contradictory tagline for a new Coors beer to be introduced in April: "Coors Extra Gold Light -- the rich, smooth, darker light beer."
A bit confused?
A rival, the Guinness Import Company, hopes so and believes a new advertising campaign for its Guinness stout will, in no uncertain terms, exploit beer drinkers' apparent desire for more heft in their brews.


Treasury Bond Yield Falls Again
The yield on the 30-year Treasury bond fell to 7.18 percent yesterday, its lowest level since August 1986, and traders began to focus on today's January unemployment report for clues to the rally's fate.
The price of the 30-year bond finished up 10/32 , pushing the yield down from 7.21 percent on Wednesday and 1 basis point below the 7.19 percent reached last Friday.


COMPANY BRIEFS
IMPERIAL CHEMICAL INDUSTRIES P.L.C., said it was negotiating to sell its powder coatings unit in Europe and North America, which generates about $100 million in annual income, to the Ferro Corporation of Cleveland.
MOBIL CORP., Fairfax, Va., announced that capital and exploration expenditures in 1993 would probably be unchanged from the 1992 level of $4.4 billion.
PROCTER &amp; GAMBLE CO., has bought about 40 acres in Warsaw for a plant to make Pampers diapers for distribution throughout Central and Eastern Europe.
The company said it would invest $50 million to $60 million to acquire the site, develop it and install manufacturing lines.
UNITED AIR LINES, Chicago, said it would offer 10 percent discounts on excursion fares to people 62 and older and one traveling companion.


Sheffield Gets a Pot of Gold Gary Sheffield, who nearly won the Triple Crown of hitting in the National League last season, yesterday received a raise of $2,385,000 for his effort. Sheffield and the San Diego Padres averted an arbitration hearing next week by reaching agreement on a $3.11 million salary.   The new salary is $5,000 above the midpoint between the figures the two sides had submitted. The third baseman, who earned $725,000 last year, had sought $3.45 million while the Padres wanted to keep his salary to $2.76 million.


National Study Finds Insurance Industry Bias
A nonprofit community development group says that it has found evidence in a national study that homeowners in inner-city neighborhoods are severely underinsured and that it is harder for poor members of minorities to buy insurance than it is for poor whites.
The study of 13 cities was conducted by Acorn, an activist group that has prodded the banking industry on lending practices in poor areas.
It described its research as the first national study in a decade of whether insurance companies practice redlining.


Colgate-Palmolive Co. (N)
The Colgate-Palmolive Company reported an increase of nearly 27 percent in fourth-quarter profits, as the big consumer-products marketer was helped by strong growth in foreign markets and its Mennen unit, which the company acquired last year.
The company is shifting its product mix toward high-margin products, like the Mennen line of men's personal-care products.
Colgate acquired Mennen for $670 million last March.
"The integration of Mennen into the business is going very smoothly, very quickly," said Brenda Landry, an analyst for Morgan Stanley.


Potomac Electric Power reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First of Michigan reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Clinton Seeking Negotiated Path To Bosnia Pact
The Clinton Administration has set aside for now the use of military force to resolve the Balkan crisis and is preparing instead a diplomatic effort to modify the peace plan for Bosnia to make it acceptable to the Muslims, Administration officials said today.
The officials declined to specify what changes they would seek in the partition of Bosnian territory envisioned by the current plan, fashioned in recent months by former Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance and Lord Owen, a former British Foreign Secretary, under the authority of the United Nations and the European Community.
Washington has refused to endorse the plan because it sees it as unfair to the Bosnian Muslims.


No Headline
Msgr.
Joseph P. Moore, a priest of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York and longtime chaplain at the United States Military Academy, died on Wednesday at the residence of St.
Augustine's Rectory in Ossining, N.Y.
He was 87.
Msgr.
Robert F. McCormick, the pastor of St.
Augustine's, said he had been ill for a long time.


Strong January Sales Signal Good Quarter for Retailers
Retail sales roared ahead at a surprising pace in January, with almost every major store chain posting eye-popping gains.
What's more, because most merchants managed their inventory so carefully during the holiday season, they were not just getting rid of clearance merchandise last month, a trend that bodes well for their first-quarter profitability.


Corrections
A caption on Jan. 25 with a photograph by Brett Weston that appeared with his obituary omitted a credit.
It should have read, "The Voyage of the Eye," $; 1975 Aperture Inc.


Productivity Increases 4% In a Surge Without Hiring
The productivity of American workers shot up 4 percent in the fourth quarter, the Labor Department reported yesterday -- fresh evidence that corporate America is helping to generate a new surge in the American economy without hiring many new workers.
The productivity numbers issued by the Labor Department's Bureau of Labor Statistics were startling.
The 4 percent rise in last year's fourth quarter was the highest increase for a single quarter since the early 1970's.
And the 2.6 percent rise in productivity for all of 1992 was the best improvement since 1972.


Democrats Stung by Weicker Rebuke On Passing Bill to Cut Income Taxes
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s impromptu imitation of Dolly Parton, singing "Here You Come Again," may go down as one of the more lasting images of his budget address on Wednesday, not for the quality of the singing, but for the stinging 10-minute rebuke of the Democratic Party that followed when the laughter died.
Less than 90 minutes before the speech, the Democrats, who control the General Assembly, had passed a bill to cut income taxes for the middle class.
The vote fulfilled a central campaign promise for many lawmakers, and addressed, they said, the elements of unfairness in the law.


Sounds Around Town
Voices Amid the Noise
Th' Faith Healers, and Velocity Girl, CBGB's, 315 Bowery, at Bleecker Street, East Village, (212) 982-4052.
In today's rock sound, voices survive within the anarchy of noise.
The classic singer's stance, pushed up to the mike, overriding the guitars' dominance with wit and vigor, gives way to a deeply articulate quietism.
Singers like Roxanne Stephen of Th' Faith Healers and Sarah Shannon of Velocity Girl never force their way to center stage, preferring to ride the junk-filled stream of their bands' music, their voices sometimes bobbing to the surface like lost treasure.
Th' Faith Healers, who come from England, claim influence from outlaw progressive rockers like Can; the group's cacophony resolves into rich tones that pique the imagination.
Velocity Girl is part of the newest wave of American independents, and brews a gentle storm of dreamy melodies and feedback.
The bands appear together tonight, sharing the bill with fellow groundbreakers Fuse and Prison Shake.
Tickets are $9, and the first band goes on at 10 P.M.
Bob Marley's Birthday
Bob Marley Day Celebration, the Ritz, 54th Street and Broadway, (212) 541-8900.
Bob Marley remains a hero to progressive music lovers of all stripes, and his physical absence, now in its 12th year, hasn't shaken the power of his influence.
Like many spiritual movements, Rastafarianism knows how to honor its holy ones.
This year's birthday party for Marley includes an appearance by his mother, Cedella Marley Booker; a set by the majestic singer Judy Mowatt, spins by the disk jockey Tony Rebel, a set featuring the old-time reggae star Denroy Morgan and his children, and a special all-star band organized by the Black Rock Coalition.
Also not to be missed is new video of Marley, collected by Roger Steffens.
It should be a righteous night of jamming, which reggae lovers will dedicate to a friend and leader whom they'll never forget.
Tickets are $20 for general admission or $27 for reserved seating, available at the Ritz box office or through Ticketmaster.
The festivities begin at 9 P.M. tomorrow; doors open at 8.


Politicians Ride the Rails In Annual Campaign Rite
Cary Edwards was only up to the fourth car of the 18-car train when he ran into a woman wearing a lapel sticker that said, "Hire Me -- I'm Legal."
Mr.
Edwards, who is nothing if not quick on his feet, said, "Make sure you have a green card; I'm checking."


United Water Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Dance; Noel Coward's Poems As a Jumping Off Point
The Ohio Ballet is a company for dancegoers who like their pleasures civilized.
The 19 dancers have a carefully hand-picked look.
The troupe's style and repertory bear the mark of one vision, that of Heinz Poll, the German-born choreographer who founded the company in 1968.
Mr.
Poll bows to the conventions of the modular and romantic ballet genres in "Planes/Configurations," a group dance set to a score by Steve Reich, and "Andante Sostenuto," a pas de deux danced to Mendelssohn.
Those pieces opened the program on Wednesday night at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea), where the Ohio Ballet performs through Sunday night.
But what came afterward broke gently with convention.


Many Doubts, Few Answers In Kenya Vote
After suffering two strokes, Kenneth Matiba has trouble walking, even shaking hands.
His conversation, extremely sharp one moment, often wanders into yarns about attempts against his life.
But at 60 Mr.
Matiba, wealthy, forceful and stubborn, could a new political force in Kenya if his party's showing in elections just over a month ago is a barometer of this nation's will.


Diversified Communications Industries Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Winking at Baseball's Racism
Baseball claims a special place in America's sporting heart.
It also claims special dispensations, including exemptions from the antitrust laws.
By any rule of reason, it therefore has a special obligation to behave in the national interest.
In the case of Marge Schott, it has failed to do so.
Ms.
Schott, the owner of of the Cincinnati Reds, has long engaged in racist behavior.
Under pressure, but only after months of dithering, her fellow owners suspended her for one year from day-to-day decisions involving her team.
The punishment is feeble, the message far short of the declaration of racial justice the nation deserves to hear.


Clinton's National Service Program Will Have Modest Start
The White House said today that the ambitious national service program Bill Clinton proposed in the Presidential campaign would begin as a more modest and economical effort to encourage volunteerism.
George Stephanopoulos, the White House communications director, said President Clinton "intends to fulfill his commitment to build a national service plan" but acknowledged that it would be costly to do immediately.


Boxing; The Dokes Diet Program: Eat, Eat, Eat
Maybe all that linguine and clam sauce actually helped Michael Dokes lose a few pounds this week.
Dokes, who appeared to live it up while training only occasionally for Saturday night's heavyweight title fight against the champion, Riddick Bowe, surprised himself and his camp when he stepped on the scales at yesterday's weigh-in.


The Rebels Lose Leaders, but Give Peru No Peace
Hopes for eventual peace soared in September with the arrest of Abimael Guzman and most of the central committee of the Shining Path revolutionary group.
But almost five months later, Peru's Maoist rebellion seems to have barely skipped a beat.
Few thought the arrest of Mr.
Guzman would lead to the immediate collapse of Shining Path, but many officials declared the end was in sight.
"By 1995 we will eliminate the Path's genocidal terrorism," President Alberto K. Fujimori vowed two weeks ago.


Dravo Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Vote on Pay-Toilet Bids
The New York City Council voted overwhelmingly yesterday to authorize the city to grant a franchise for providing public toilets on city streets.
The resolution, which passed 47 to 1, instructs the city to favor companies that can provide a single toilet for both handicapped and nonhandicapped users, though it does not rule out companies that build systems with separate toilets for the disabled.
The vote paves the way for the Transportation Department to request proposals from several companies and evaluate the bids using the Council's guidelines, a process that will take months.


On Stage, and Off
Identity Crisis in Chicago
CHICAGO, Feb. 2 -- This is a particularly fecund moment for the nexus between America's first and second theater cities.
"The Goodbye Girl," Neil Simon's Broadway-bound musical, closed up shop last weekend after six weeks at the Shubert Theater here -- the city's first pre-Broadway tryout in three decades.
And "The Song of Jacob Zulu," the Steppenwolf Theater Company's play about apartheid, featuring the music of Ladysmith Black Mambazo, is also on its way to New York.
On Saturday, it opened a two-week reprise engagement of a production that had its world premiere last year.


CHRONICLE
They were often a formidable team in the international political arena, so despite the fact that they're now both out of office, there's no reason to expect that RONALD REAGAN and MARGARET THATCHER will stop attending one another's parties.
Lady Thatcher will be among the 500-or-so people who will help celebrate the former President's 82d birthday tomorrow at a black-tie dinner at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library and Center for Public Affairs in Simi Valley, Calif.
To wish the former President a happy birthday is costing each guest $500, with proceeds benefiting the library's educational programs.
But that is no barrier: tickets are sold out.


IMPROVEMENT IN BRINKER'S CONDITION AFTER ACCIDENT
Norman E. Brinker, former chairman of Brinker International Inc., who was severely injured in a freak sports accident two weeks ago, has regained some consciousness, occasionally opening his eyes and moving some muscles.
"We know he's improving right now," said Ron A. McDougall, who was named to succeed Mr.
Brinker after the executive's fall during a polo match in Florida on Jan. 21.
"We don't know at what rate, but it's definitely a good sign." Mr.
Brinker, 61, had been unconscious with a swollen brain stem after a collision that threw him to the ground.
Mr.
McDougall said Mr.
Brinker's physician was "pleased with the progress to date."


Books of The Times; Behind the Scenes With Bush and Gorbachev
At the Highest Levels The Inside Story of the End of the Cold War By Michael R. Beschloss and Strobe Talbott 498 pages.
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $24.95
During the years 1989 through 1991, history leaped into fast forward as events overtook expectations and the cold war came sliding to a dramatic end.
In these three short years, there came in mind-boggling succession the liberation of Eastern Europe, the reunification of Germany, the disbanding of the Warsaw Pact, the Persian Gulf war, the collapse of a hard-line Soviet coup and the formal dissolution of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics


National Media Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Strange Is Out Of the Woods
A fresh start might not seem like a good idea when the recent past includes consecutive United States Open victories, but that is exactly Curtis Strange's intention coming into 1993.
Strange hasn't had a victory since he won his second United States Open at Oak Hill in 1989, and he is coming off a career-worst year that saw him finish 99th on the money list.
It was a nightmare season filled with talk about the end of a career as Strange lost his legendary fighting spirit and, for a disturbing period, his health.


Luxottica Group SpA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


G.M. IS HELD LIABLE OVER FUEL TANKS IN PICKUP TRUCKS
A state court jury today held the General Motors Corporation responsible for the death of a Georgia teen-ager in the fiery crash of one of its pickups, finding that the company had known that the trucks had a defective fuel-tank design but that it had failed to correct the problem.
The case has been closely watched by the car industry and safety experts.
Already reeling from more than $10 billion in losses in the last seven quarters and the resignation last year of its chairman, Robert C. Stempel, G.M. now faces negative publicity and possible economic fallout from the Georgia case.
A former G.M. safety expert testified at the trial that the company had intentionally misled the public about a dangerous safety problem.
Besieged by Problems
G.M.'s stock closed today at $37.75, down $1.375, as the Dow Jones Industrial Average gained almost 43 points.
The news of the jury's award came a day after the auto maker announced disappointing January car sales and saw its credit rating lowered because of huge pension obligations.


In High Gear
With both rail and airline stocks zooming higher yesterday, the Dow Jones transportation average leaped 2.4 percent, setting a new record for the second consecutive session.
The old record had been set way back on Sept. 5, 1989, at the height of speculation about a takeover of UAL, which peaked then at $294 per share, far above the current $126.25.


Changing Times? Perez Lowers Price
Melido Perez was so adamant about wanting to remain in New York and pitch for the Yankees that he defied the advice of his agent.
He decreased his original contract demand by about $3 million in the hope that the team would sign him and they would both avert arbitration.
It worked.
After watching other pitchers snub their lucrative offers during the off season, the Yankees were quite pleased yesterday when Perez, their ace last season, agreed to a four-year, $14 million deal, one day before his scheduled arbitration hearing.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  WHITE HOUSE EFFORT ON BOSNIA
The Clinton Administration has set aside for now the use of military force to resolve the Balkan crisis and is preparing instead a diplomatic effort to modify the peace plan for Bosnia to make it acceptable to the Muslims, U.S. officials said.
A1  Mediators want the U.S. to send troops to Bosnia.
A8


Frederick H. Amendola; Surgeon, 89
Dr.
Frederick H. Amendola, a retired chief of surgery at Roosevelt Hospital, died at his home in Manhattan on Friday.
He was 89.
Dr.
Amendola, a Phi Beta Kappa graduate of the City University of New York, received his medical degree from Cornell University Medical College and joined the Roosevelt staff in 1927.


Oklahoma Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ingalls, Quinn Loses Big Account
Ingalls, Quinn &amp; Johnson in Boston announced the loss of a large account yesterday and high-level management changes.
Ocean Spray Cranberries Inc. in Lakeville, Mass., consolidated all its beverage advertising at Rotando Lerch &amp; Iafeliece in Stamford, Conn., which had shared that account with Ingalls, Quinn.


Woman Reported Raped
A 40-year-old woman was raped on a sidewalk in midtown Manhattan early yesterday morning as she walked to work, a police spokesman said.
A man startled the rapist by jumping out of his red car, shouted for help, and after scaring the rapist, sped away, said Lieut.
Raymond O'Donnell, a police spokesman.
The woman was walking east on 51st Street between Madison and Park Avenues about 6 A.M. when she was approached from behind by the attacker, Lieutenant O'Donnell said.


Jerusalem Journal; Try to Honor a Jeremiah, and All Israel Kvetches
Prof.
Yeshayahu Leibowitz of Hebrew University is a man of years and accomplishment.
No one ever said he is easy to take, though, least of all Professor Leibowitz himself.
Israeli emotions about him run deep.
And when he was nominated recently for the Israel Prize, the nation's most prestigious award, those emotions became a cascade, sweeping past Professor Leibowitz to brush against Israelis' perceptions of their own society.


Esco Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Enhanced Mastercard Introduced by G.M.
The General Motors Corporation, basking in the budding popularity of its five-month-old credit card, introduced a gold G.M.
Mastercard for more affluent customers.
Unlike G.M.'s original Mastercard, which offered relatively small lines of credit with no annual fee, the enhanced version will cost $39 annually and offer a credit line of up to $25,000.
Customers of the gold card can earn a rebate equal to 5 percent of their outlays toward the purchase of a G.M. car, to a limit of $7,000 at the end of seven years.


Abroad at Home; Lord Owen's Argument
Lord Owen got a bristling reception when he came to New York this week to sell his and Cyrus Vance's peace plan for Bosnia.
There was criticism from the Clinton Administration, Congress, the press.
I decided to hear his case for the plan.
Denying suggestions that he and Mr.
Vance were soft on Serbian aggression, Lord Owen said in an interview that he was "seething" about the situation before the European Community appointed him as mediator last summer.
He wrote to Prime Minister John Major comparing what was going on in Bosnia to Nazi atrocities and urging him to "consider using air power."


Japan's Growing Trade Surplus Is a Minus in U.S. Equation
After years of negotiations to reduce Japan's huge trade imbalances with the United States, Japanese exports are once again rising dramatically and Japanese corporations appear to be backsliding on their commitments to purchase more goods overseas.
As a result, Japanese leaders fear that their first efforts to build a relationship with the new Clinton Administration will be undercut even before they begin.
In recent weeks, the United States Ambassador, Michael H. Armacost, is said to have warned Japan that it should come up with concrete proposals to improve the trade picture before meeting President Clinton or other officials.


Damark International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Health Care &amp; Retirement Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cipsco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mentally Ill Man Who Abused Drugs Is Freed
For the second time in three days, a judge in New York City yesterday ordered a mentally ill homeless man with a history of substance abuse and repeated arrests freed from a mental hospital.
Francis Stuart, 38 years old, was released from South Beach Psychiatric Center on Staten Island, despite a record of 26 arrests, most of them in Manhattan, for charges that include weapons offenses and assault.


Interstate Power reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


How to Market a Film Full of Misery: Smile!
Let's say your plane had just gone down in the Andes, forcing you to eat the pilot and spend 70-odd days braving the freezing cold.
Would that be any reason for looking downbeat?
Of course not, if you're a movie distributor determined to see the bright side, as movie distributors so often are.
Observe the current ads and posters for films about fatal disease or would-be suicide, featuring vicious thugs or quarrelsome families or sex-obsessed adulterers, and you will see a remarkable wave of sunny, feel-good images.
Only if you're familiar with the films themselves will you ask the obvious question: Why are these people smiling?
Well, we certainly know the answer.
They're smiling to put the best faces forward for their respective films, even if those faces in truth aren't so happy.
Ads for "Lorenzo's Oil," the film about parents who learn their son has a fatal disease, show the three principals beaming lovingly at one another, even though there is hardly a moment in the film when these worried, anxious characters are able to smile at all.


Wisconsin Energy Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


American General Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Press Harder on Deficit Reduction
The Clinton Administration is headed in the right direction with two of its major plans for reducing the Federal budget deficit -- a sharp cut in defense spending and a reduction in the cost of Social Security.
But the Administration can't afford to flinch as it confronts two of the nation's most powerful interest groups, the military and the elderly.
Secretary of Defense Les Aspin's proposals to cut the military budget are fine as far as they go, but they don't go far enough.
As Senator Everett Dirksen once observed in another context, a billion here, a billion there, and pretty soon you're talking about real money.
Mr.
Clinton needs to add some more real money to Mr.
Aspin's unnecessarily modest proposals.


Interactive Network (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon: Cosing This Weekend
"THE GOOD NATUR'D MAN," Pearl Theater, 125 West 22d Street, Chelsea.
An 18th-century comedy by Oliver Goldsmith about an extravagant man who stays out of trouble with help from his well-to-do friends.
Through tomorrow.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 5 and 9 P.M.; Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $14 and $16.
Information: (212) 645-7708.
"JACQUES BREL IS ALIVE AND WELL AND LIVING IN PARIS," Village Gate, Bleecker Street at Thompson Street, Greenwich Village.
A 25th anniversary production of the Eric Blau/Mort Shuman music, with songs by Jacques Brel; directed by Elly Stone.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow and Sunday at 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $32.50 and $37.50.
Information: (212) 307-4100.


Time to Get Politics Out of Justice
To the Editor:
The inauguration eve attack by the outgoing Attorney General, William P. Barr, on William S. Sessions, Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (front page, Jan. 20), is a chilling reminder of the need for constant vigilance to protect the independence of the F.B.I. from interference by political appointees.


Edward Myers, Dancer And Troupe Head, 42
Edward Myers, the director of the Nashville Ballet and a former principal dancer with the Pennsylvania Ballet, died on Monday at Vanderbilt University Medical Center in Nashville, Tenn.
He was 42 and lived in Nashville.
His companion, Richard Steinhart, said the cause of death was AIDS.


Index Jumps 2.6% in 2 Days; Other Averages at Highs
The stock market surged again yesterday, as a headstrong rally in the bond market and exuberant corporate earnings propelled the Dow Jones industrial average to a record closing.
The index has risen 2.6 percent in the last two days.
Most other market averages reached new highs as well, on emphatic Big Board volume of 351.14 million shares, the seventh highest in history.
But until yesterday, the Dow was the only major market indicator not to set a record this year.


Nets Return From Land Of the Big Blown Lead
If the Nets want to be respected as contenders this season, they must beat elite teams like the Seattle SuperSonics, who came into tonight's game tied for the league's third-best record.
And in order for New Jersey to enter that class, their prime-time players -- Drazen Petrovic, Derrick Coleman and Kenny Anderson -- have to step up.
It doesn't matter when, but it has to happen.


Ladd Furniture Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Fresh Questions on Iraqgate
Two well-connected arms merchants have a long lunch in a foreign capital.
As they wait for the check, Merchant X turns to Merchant Y and says, "I'm confident that the Banca Nazionale del Lavoro in Rome knew about the illegal loans to Iraq from its Atlanta branch."
Merchant Y smiles and responds, "Really?"
Merchant X's comment eventually reaches a U.S. intelligence agency.
The agency, however, never distributes the report, because it is suggested that Merchant X had too much wine at lunch and that his statement was speculative.


New Jersey Politicians Pay $325 a Person to Do Some Moving and Shaking


Chubb Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In Florida, Family Bill Wins Converts
When the Dade County Commission was considering a family-leave ordinance in 1991, Malone &amp; Hyde Food Distributors was among the many companies that testified against the idea, arguing that the legislation would impose an unnecessary and disruptive burden on them.
But nearly a year after the law took effect in Florida's most populous county, the company has a new attitude.
"We had reservations about being told what we could and couldn't do, but it hasn't really had any affect on us," said Janet Blair, the personnel director.
None of the 600 employees have yet asked for a family leave "even though they are aware of it," she added.


Viking Office Products (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


German Citizen Law Predates Nazi Racism
To the Editor:
A Jan. 25 report that Germany is planning to make it easier for longtime foreign residents to become citizens terms the German citizen law of 1913 "an embarrassing relic of an era when Germans sought to protect their supposed racial purity."


Largest-Ever Toxic-Waste Suit Opens in California
It has taken eight years of pretrial planning and maneuvering, millions of dollars in expenses and the screening of almost 2,000 potential jurors to get what may be the nation's largest civil lawsuit over toxic waste into court.
After countless motions, countermotions and rulings, the first expert witness took the stand on Monday in the case of the Stringfellow hazardous waste site.
The case involves about 4,000 plaintiffs, all of them residents of this rural community 50 miles east of Los Angeles.
Sheer numbers make it larger than the case involving Love Canal, the upstate New York town that became synonymous with toxic chemicals after 710 families were evacuated from there in 1978; larger even than the case involving Times Beach, Mo., which was abandoned by its more than 2,000 residents in 1982-83 after being contaminated by dioxin.


Rangers' Bourque Out With Injury 3-4 Weeks
The Rangers announced yesterday that left wing PHIL BOURQUE will miss three to four weeks with a sprained left knee, making him the eighth player on the team's injury list.
Bourque, who has 5 goals and 12 assists in 38 games, sprained his medial collateral ligament when he collided with his teammate SERGEI NEMCHINOV in the second period of Wednesday night's 2-2 tie with the Philadelphia Flyers.


New Jersey Retaliates for New York Taxi Fee
In the latest skirmish in the trans-Hudson wars, officials in New Jersey said yesterday that they would begin charging New York City limousines and taxis $200 a year per vehicle for the right to bring passengers from New Jersey to New York.
Members of the Bergen County legislature, which enacted the law Wednesday evening, described it as a tit-for-tat action intended to encourage New York's Taxi and Limousine Commission to rescind regulations for out-of-town hired cars that went into effect last week.


Scientific-Atlanta reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Exodus Into the Arms of Fistiana
Imagine a small, dangerous, fragmented city-state without an elected central government.
Warlords make deals with outside powers to develop the country's one natural resource.
Coups are always violent.
Yet there is a romance to the place: Brave warriors and outrageous buccaneers and slimy henchmen abound.
Libel and slander are nearly impossible.
It is Beirut without the horror, Wall Street without the heavy math.
Call it Fistiana.


Looking Beneath Its Oddest Character, a Town Finds Its Soul
IN big cities, tramps and vagrants have no faces.
There are so many that they are glimpsed fleetingly, like scratched frames in a movie, or they are dismissed anonymously as a social problem.
In this tidy village in Westchester County, almost everyone knows Smitty and looks out for him.
Tony Ameiro, the mechanic at the Mobil station, fixes the wheels of the shopping cart that Smitty uses to transport the tools and trophies of his deposit bottle trade.
Chris Yuhas and Aaron Liebson at Hartsdale Liquors leave their lunchtime soda cans for him to scavenge and they cash his personal checks, which are always for $12.50.
Robert Feferman at Hartsdale Office Supplies sells him the key chains with miniature flashlights and other knicknacks that so beguile him.


Posing as Welfare Recipient, Agency Head Finds Indignity
Disguised in a sweat shirt, jeans and scarf or wig, Barbara J. Sabol, the head of the city's Human Resources Administration, posed as a welfare applicant over the course of last year to experience firsthand the huge bureaucracy she administers.
On her occasional journey, she said she suffered numerous indignities: She said she handed over a set of personal documents, only to have them lost.
She was sent more than once to the wrong office.
She waited in long and sometimes fruitless lines.
She sat in seedy waiting rooms with cockroaches, broken chairs and broken telephones.


Fernandez And Backers Seek to Sway Swing Vote
Joseph A. Fernandez's supporters sought to rally political backing for the Schools Chancellor yesterday before a meeting today of the New York City Board of Education, a majority of whose members have said they are unwilling to renew his contract.
More than 100 political, business, labor and academic leaders gave Mr.
Fernandez a prolonged ovation at a breakfast of supporters yesterday, and later several of the Chancellor's allies, led by Stanley S. Litow, the Deputy Chancellor for operations, worked behind the scenes to influence the four-member majority that opposes Mr.
Fernandez on the seven-member board, according to board members and others involved.


Fallout From Sessions Case
The F.B.I. has halted all proceedings against agents accused of breaking rules that the bureau's Director was found to have violated.
Page A13.


The Art Market
More goes on in loan exhibitions than meets the public eye.
When a museum's galleries are closed, curators and conservators often take a very close look at the works assembled from different collections, lately with the help of such high-tech equipment as infrared video cameras.
What is found beneath the skin of a painting can often surprise even the experts.
Take the giant Matisse retrospective that ended last month at the Museum of Modern Art.
The show's curator, John Elderfield, and the museum's team of conservators, headed by Jim Coddington, put certain paintings side by side that had never been seen together.
They also went through the rooms with the infrared equipment, recording images of the paintings, displaying them on a monitor and then isolating and enlargingcertain detailed areas that experts thought might show something that hadn't been seen before.


Kidnapper Killed in Trap Set by Victims' Relatives
It began as a kidnapping and armed robbery on a Chinatown street, an increasingly common crime in communities with large Asian-American populations.
But for the kidnappers, it went terribly wrong when a witness called relatives of the victims, who set up an ambush.
When the kidnappers arrived at the victims' home in Manhasset, L.I., Wednesday night, one of the kidnappers was killed by an uncle of the victims, the Nassau County police said yesterday.


Albert R. Erskine, 81, an Editor For Faulkner and Other Authors
Albert Russel Erskine Jr., a retired Random House editor who worked with James A. Michener, William Faulkner, John O'Hara and Robert Penn Warren, died on Wednesday at Norwalk Hospital in Norwalk, Conn.
He was 81 and lived in Westport, Conn.
His family said he had had a long illness.


Guardsman Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Zaire Opposition Seeks Foreign Troops to Restore Order; Capital Is Calm but Nervous
Adding a potentially explosive element to Zaire's political crisis, Prime Minister Etienne Tshisekedi called today for foreign military intervention to help restore order after a week of civil disorders.
"What we need is foreign pressure, whatever it is, be it moral or physical," Mr.
Tshisekedi said at a news conference, his first public appearance since marauding soldiers went on a rampage a week ago.


Leinsdorf Cancels
Erich Leinsdorf, who was scheduled to conduct a series of New York Philharmonic subscription concerts and a Young People's Concert at Avery Fisher Hall this weekend, has canceled his appearances because of back trouble.
Richard Westerfield, making his Philharmonic debut, will conduct the scheduled programs.
The subscription concerts are today at 2 P.M., tomorrow at 8 P.M. and Tuesday at 7:30 P.M.; the Young People's Concert is tomorrow at 2 P.M., preceded by a Children's Promenade at 1.
Information: (212) 875-5030.


Earl J. McGrath, Education Chief Under 2 Presidents, Dies at 90
Earl James McGrath, a Commissioner of Education under two Presidents, died on Jan. 14 in Tucson, Ariz.
He was 90.
Dr.
McGrath's death was reported to The New York Times yesterday by Dr.
Robert S. Webber, a friend of Dr.
McGrath's and the president of Western International University in Phoenix.
Dr.
Webber had just returned from a trip to the Far East.


Review/Film; The Americanization of a Mystery
Thanks to the peculiar lily-gilding process that yields the Hollywood remake, "The Vanishing" is one of two haunting European films that open today in newly Americanized form.
The other one, "Sommersby," reworks "The Return of Martin Guerre," the story of a man who is reunited with his wife and neighbors after a long, mysterious absence.
He looks and sounds recognizable, yet something essential seems to have changed.
His fellow citizens regard him with a mixture of warmth, bewilderment and unease, much the same response moviegoers might have to a structurally familiar, spiritually different version of a favorite story.
"The Vanishing" is a fascinating case in point, since it has been made twice by the same director, and since its original version is so dangerously unsuited to mainstream American tastes.
As directed by George Sluizer, the Dutch film maker who once worked as an assistant director on "Around the World in 80 Days," "The Vanishing" (released in 1991) told of an ordinary man thrown into limbo by the disappearance of his girlfriend.
When these vacationers stopped at a rest area beside a highway, she went off to get them cold drinks and simply did not return.


Analysis &amp; Technology (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Research Panel Concludes AIDS Has Small Impact on Most of U.S.
The AIDS epidemic has had little impact on the lives of most Americans or on the way society functions, largely because it has struck most fiercely among "marginalized" groups, the National Research Council said in a study released today.
But the disease has had a major impact in areas where those groups -- homosexuals, drug users, the poor and the undereducated -- are concentrated, like New York City, the study said.
Strikes the Powerless
The study said groups with greater power remain relatively unaffected while AIDS "is burrowing into socially disadvantaged segments of our society that may be ignored by the general population and by public policy." As a result, it said, there is the danger that attention may wane and that "the disease may become accepted as one of the 'synergy of plagues' endemic in vulnerable communities."
AIDS "will 'disappear," the council concluded, not because, like smallpox, it will have been eliminated, but because those who continue to be affected by it are "socially invisible."
Thomas Brandt, an official of the National Commission on AIDS, said the report was "on the mark" because "there has not been an appropriate level of response" in America.
"Many segments of society have not changed, but they need to," he said.
"While America will never be the same, some of our core institutions are continuing to do business as usual."
Among the study's conclusions about the extent of the effect of AIDS on social structures were these:
*Initially, public-health officials set aside conventional containment practices, like quarantine and mandatory testing, and developed control methods involving education.
As the AIDS epidemic enters its second decade and settles firmly in minority groups, public-health officials are returning to more traditional practices, including screening to detect H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
Education efforts, the study said, have resulted in wider acceptance of "safe sex," including the use of condoms.
*Although AIDS has put a great strain on health-care resources in some communities, most areas have been able to absorb the new patients.
About 2 percent of the nation's health expenditures are consumed by AIDS, and the disease has caused two health-care changes -- increased efforts to protect the nation's blood supply and a reassessment of ethical concerns among health-care workers treating patients with lethal infectious diseases.
*AIDS has instilled a new sense of urgency in developing and testing drugs and has led to fewer restrictions on testing drugs developed to compbat lethal diseases.
*Widespread voluntary action arose from the gay male population, which was most severely affected early in the AIDS epidemic.
But as the epidemic becomes more centered in the poor communities, the resources of voluntary actions may grow smaller.
Panel of 11 Experts
The National Research Council is part of the National Academy of Sciences, a private organization chartered by Congress to provide scientific advice to the Federal Government.
The study was compiled by a committee of 11 experts and reviewed by organizations within the academy.
"In the panel's judgment," the study said, "the H.I.V.-AIDS epidemic has affected many transient changes in the institutes we studied and relatively few changes that we expect to be permanent."


Sounds Around Town
A Gillespie Tribute
Slide Hampton and the Jazzmasters, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 255-4037.
Slide Hampton's 12-piece orchestra, which provided many of the musicians for the United Nations Band led by Dizzy Gillespie last year, is presenting a memorial tribute to Gillespie this weekend.
It features Mr.
Hampton's arrangements of Gillespie's music, and the group includes one of the legendary trumpeter's most celebrated trumpet-playing followers, Jon Faddis, as well as the trumpeters Claudio Roditi and Roy Hargrove.
The trombonists are Steve Turre, Douglas Purviance and Mr.
Hampton; the saxophonists are Jimmy Heath, David Sanchez and Antonio Hart, and the rhythm section is made up of the pianist Danilo Perez, the bassist George Mraz and the drummer Lewis Nash.
The band will be recorded tomorrow and Sunday by Tel-Arc Records.
Sets are at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M. and 1 A.M.; there is a $15 music charge and a $10 minimum.
A New Sextet
The Warren Vache-Ken Peplowski-Howard Alden-Dan Barrett Sextet, Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, at Bleecker Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 242-1785.
The group, with its multi-barreled name, is led by four of the leading contemporary lights of mainstream jazz and is making its debut this weekend.
There is little doubt that Mr.
Vache's cornet, Mr.
Peplowski's clarinet and saxophone, Mr.
Alden's guitar and Mr.
Barrett's trombone give the group an unusually solid foundation for success, particularly with the support of Michael Moore on bass and Billy Hart on drums.
Their challenge will be to train audiences to remember all those names.
Sets tonight and tomorrow are at 9, 11 and 12:30; Sunday, 9 and 11 P.M. only.
On all three nights, the music charge is $15 and the minimum, $6.


Pope Meets Rivals in 'the Cradle of Voodoo'
The Rev.
Raymond Domas, a French Roman Catholic priest, has tended his flock at the Basilica of the Immaculate Conception here for about 10 years and does not seem troubled that he is not the only contender for souls in a town that calls itself "the cradle of voodoo."
Just across a muddy way from his church, a less imposing temple offers, in place of his God, sacred pythons to cure the sick, curses, spells, gongs to summon the spirits and other magic.
But Father Domas said: "The pythons don't worry us at all. In fact, sometimes they come visit us. And the man who looks after them is a Christian."


Art in Review
Richard Artschwager
Mary Boone Gallery
417 West Broadway (near Spring Street)
SoHo
Through Feb. 17
There is much to admire in Richard Artschwager's recent sculpture and painting, although on the whole they do not represent this artist at the top of his form.
Some of the work looks crabbed and fussy, as if Mr.
Artschwager were trying to keep his familiar deadpan energy alive through ingenuity rather than inspiration.


High-Tech Policy Major, With a Minor in Trade
When President Clinton announced the appointment of a supercomputer industry veteran, John A. Rollwagen, as Deputy Secretary of Commerce last Friday, the move alarmed at least one group: the Japanese.
The news media in Japan immediately seized on the appointment as fresh evidence of the new Administration's hard-line stance on trade issues.
As chief executive of Cray Research Inc., the dominant producer of supercomputers, Mr.
Rollwagen has spent several years jousting with the Japanese Government and with computer executives and the news media in Japan, as he has put pressure on that country to open its federal markets to his company's machines.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about arts education misidentified the Miami school at which Roxanna Torres worked on a drawing.
It is the Cutler Ridge Middle School.


Today's TV Listings
Television and radio news, listings and advertising appear today on pages B14-15.


Art in Review
Vik Muniz
Stux Gallery
163 Mercer Street (near Houston Street)
SoHo
Through Feb. 13
The Brazilian-born artist Vik Muniz continues to blur the edges between media.
Mr.
Muniz presents a series of black-and-white photographs, printed in the luscious tones of the platinum process and showing small sculptures made in Plasticine.
The sculptures are done in a smart but vague style, with some pieces recalling the globular, biomorphic forms of Louise Bourgeois or Saint Clair Cemin, and others having the cartoonish quality of a Kenny Scharf painting.


Weis Markets Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Washington Water Power reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


On My Mind; The Crime Of Vance And Owen
When everybody is screaming nobody is listening.
Rarely have so many American commentators, editorial writers and think-tankers screamed so loud and bitterly at any Western diplomats as they are doing at Cyrus Vance and Lord Owen.


Homeowners Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Danskin Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Zurn Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31





Cray Computer Seeks Investors as Losses Rise
Struggling with losses and looking for investors, the legendary supercomputer designer Seymour Cray is beginning to lift the veil of secrecy that has surrounded his efforts to build the world's fastest computer.
Today the Cray Computer Corporation announced that the computer maker had a loss of $50.4 million for 1992, following a $52.2 million loss for 1991.
Revenue for 1992 was $333,000 compared with $334,000 in 1991.


EnergyNorth Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Excuses Are Running Rampant at Millrose
The track is too short, too skinny.
The curves are not banked properly.
The meet is too early in the season.
The International Amateur Athletics Federation is too power hungry.
"I sprained my knee carrying a nativity scene up Mount Pico de Urbion before Christmas," said Fermin Cacho of Spain, the Olympic champion at 1,500 meters.
"And I have never run indoors on a board track."


Clinton Chooses New York Judge For Justice Post
President Clinton has settled on Kimba M. Wood, a Federal District judge in New York, as his nominee for Attorney General but will not announce her selection until background checks are completed, Administration officials said today.
With the White House still stung by Mr.
Clinton's embarrassing withdrawal of his first nominee for the job, Zoe Baird, after she admitted hiring illegal immigrants for household work, officials said the selection process was moving with extreme caution.


Sydelle Stephany Reisman; Researcher, 65
Sydelle Stephany Reisman, owner of the Westport (Conn.) Research Group and active in civic affairs in Westport, died on Wednesday in Norwalk Hospital.
She was 65 and had homes in Westport and Carefree, Ariz.
Her family said the cause was cancer.


Review/Film; Whatever Is Loaded, Laugh at It
The gags begin with the title of "National Lampoon's Loaded Weapon 1" and don't stop until the end, though the laughter that greets them is intermittent.
Supplementing the good gags are dozens of others, no one of which is too tired, too atrocious or too badly timed or executed to be left out.
This is the engagingly brazen method of the film, which, like a fast-food restaurant, emphasizes speed, filler material and functional glitz.
The movie's frame is a sendup of the "Lethal Weapon" movies with Emilio Estevez playing a loose-cannon cop, the role originated by Mel Gibson, and Samuel L. Jackson standing in for Danny Glover.
Their mission: to recover a microfilm containing a formula by which cocaine can be turned into cookies.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the Bombay riots referred incorrectly in some copies to the targets of the violence.
As the rest of the article noted, they were mostly Muslims, not Hindus.


Q-Med Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Supreme Court Began Assault on Privacy With Bank Records
To the Editor:
"Supreme Court No Longer Protects Privacy" (letter, Jan. 24), Ira Glasser's response to a William Safire column on the decline of privacy, should have noted that the demise of privacy has been the official policy of the Supreme Court since 1976, the year it held in Miller v.
United States that no one had an expectation of privacy in his or her canceled checks and personal bank records.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A Spurs Win Again, Dominating the Pacers  Sean Elliott scored 22 points and David Robinson added 20 as the Spurs won for the 13th time in 14 games, beating the Indiana Pacers, 133-115, last night in San Antonio.
The Spurs' starting lineup, which did not play in the fourth quarter, shot a combined 69 percent from the field.
The 133 points represented a season-high total for the Spurs and was also the most points allowed this season by the Pacers.
Dale Ellis scored 9 points in the final 4 minutes of the second quarter as San Antonio used an 18-8 run to take a 62-46 halftime lead.
The lead peaked at 33 late in the game as both teams emptied their benches.
Vern Fleming led the Pacers with 24 points. (AP) Lakers 114, Jazz 110: A. C. Green scored a season-high 23 points and grabbed 10 rebounds to lead Loss Angeles at the Great Western Forum.
After trailing by 52-33 in the second quarter, the Jazz rallied to tie the game, 76-76, late in the third period.
The Lakers took an 84-80 lead into the final period.
Karl Malone of the Jazz scored 15 of his 32 points in the third period.
James Worthy scored 18 points and Sam Perkins and Sedale Threatt 17 each for Los Angeles, which lost its three previous home games. (AP) TENNIS  Gilbert Defeats Rostagno in Three Sets  Brad Gilbert advanced to the quarterfinals of the Volvo-San Francisco tournament with a 3-6, 6-3, 7-6 (7-2) victory over Derrick Rostagno last night.
Gilbert, seeded second and the ranked No. 25, trailed by 5-0 in the first set before finding his touch.
Gilbert won the final-set tie breaker by ripping off six straight points after Rostagno, ranked No. 82, won the first. (AP) Lendl Is Upset: Top-seeded Ivan Lendl was upset in the second round of the Marseilles Open, falling to Gianluca Pozzi, 6-4, 5-7, 6-4, in the French indoor tournament.
It was the second early exit for the eighth-ranked Lendl, who lost in the first round of the Australian Open to Christian Bergstrom.
Lendl complained about line calls and the crowd and made unforced errors against Pozzi, a 27-year-old Italian ranked 68th.
Second-seeded Sergi Bruguera advanced to the quarterfinals by beating Guillaume Raoux, 6-4, 5-7, 7-4. (AP) Graf and Navratilova Advance: Steffi Graf and Martina Navratilova advanced to the quarterfinals of the Toray Pan Pacific Open in Yokohama, Japan.
Graf, seeded No. 1, needed just 45 minutes to trounce Natalya Zvereva of Belarus, 6-2, 6-0, in their second-round match.
Third-seeded Navratilova, competing in her first tournament in two months, made short work of Yayuk Basuki of Indonesia, winning, 6-2, 6-1. (AP)


Allegheny Ludlum reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3


Lincoln Telecomm (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lee Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


F.B.I. IS DELAYING DISCIPLINARY CASES
The Federal Bureau of Investigation has halted all disciplinary proceedings against agents accused of violating internal rules like those that the F.B.I.
Director, William S. Sessions, was found to have broken, the agency said today.
The action, which came without Mr.
Sessions's knowledge, appeared to be an attempt to ease mounting tensions within the agency over the perception of a double standard, with one code of conduct for the agency's rank and file and more permissive rules for the Director.


Centel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fisher Scientific International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Yale Names New Dean Of College
Yale University today named Richard Brodhead, the chairman of its English department, as dean of Yale College.
With Mr.
Brodhead's appointment, Yale has filled the second of three top positions vacated last spring amid controversy over budget cuts and reorganization plans.
The university named Judith Rodin, the former dean of the graduate school, as provost last spring, and it is paring down a list of candidates for president.


Sports of The Times; Weigh-In Sometimes A Laugh-In
THEY all laughed when Michael Dokes, at a luncheon designed to show he was still alive, downed a prodigious meal of soup, Caesar salad, shrimp scampi, pasta and the entire garlic-bread basket.
The truth was, he was eating for two.
Dokes and Riddick Bowe had a great shot at the heaviest heavyweight championship match in history, but they fell a few garlic loaves short yesterday at the wonderfully goofy boxing tradition known as the weigh-in.


Baird's Replacement Wins High Praise
Federal Judge Kimba M. Wood, whom President Clinton plans to nominate to be Attorney General, has a reputation for toughness seemingly contradicted by a gracious demeanor.
Prosecutors, defense lawyers and her fellow judges in the Federal Courthouse in lower Manhattan were unanimous, almost exultant, in their praise yesterday.


INSIDE
The Dow Leads the Stock Market to Record Highs
Propelled by falling American interest rates and exuberant corporate earnings, the stock market surged again yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average gaining 42.95 points, to close at a record high of 3,416.74.
In just the last two days, the Dow has risen nearly 3 percent in value.
Page D1.
Germany Central Bank Cuts Key Interest Rate
Germany's powerful central bank lowered its major rates yesterday.
The surprising German move was meant to reinforce the battered European curency-exchange-rate system, rekindle growth in a flagging economy and silence critics.
Page D1.
Japan Trade Tally Up Again
Japan's exports are rising again, worrying Tokyo about relations with President Clinton.
Page A7.
Big Jump in Productivity
American workers' productivity surged 4 percent in the fourth quarter, the Government said.
Page D1.
New Pension Problems
Some corporations with underfunded pension plans are nonetheless expanding benefits, knowing that the Government will pay if the plans fail, Congressional auditors said.
Page D1.
From Orbit, a Beam of Light
In a Russian experiment, a mirror in space sent a narrow beam of reflected sunlight flashing down to the Earth's dark side, testing the feasibility for much larger mirrors.
Page A6.
A Cry for Help Unanswered
A fourth grader in Harlem wrote in a school essay, "My father raped me." But no action was taken to help her until she told her grandmother weeks later, an investigator said.
Page B1.
Rebels Keep Fighting in Peru
One Peruvian city sees little hope that the Shining Path guerrilla movement will soon be subdued.
Page A3.


A Clinton Aide's Farewell To Clients: Keep in Touch
Robert E. Rubin, a former co-chairman of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company who is President Clinton's top economics adviser, sent a letter in December to many of his clients urging them to continue doing business with the investment banking firm and to stay in touch with him at the White House.
A copy of one of the letters, on Goldman, Sachs stationery and signed by Mr.
Rubin, assures a Japanese client that Goldman, Sachs can continue to work closely with the client despite Mr.
Rubin's departure.
"I am confident that Goldman, Sachs will continue to work as well or even better with" the company, Mr.
Rubin wrote, "given the strength of trust and the bond of mutual respect between our organizations."


ILC Technology (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Vigoro Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reviews/Film; Husband Back From War: Too Good to Be True?
Jodie Foster has already won two Academy Awards, but nothing she has done to date is preparation for the romantic, resolute, elegant performance she gives in "Sommersby," a handsome period film set in the post-Civil War South of the Reconstruction.
As Laurel Sommersby, a Tennessee farm woman who welcomes home a long-lost husband who may or may not be hers, Ms.
Foster is so strong, passionate and mysterious that she seems almost to be a new actress or, at least, an actress of entirely new dynamism.
"Sommersby" is both about the cyclical nature of the universe, where matter can be neither created nor destroyed, only changed in state, and a demonstration of that law: the film is an updated Americanized adaptation of "The Return of Martin Guerre," Daniel Vigne's fine 1982 French film starring Gerard Depardieu.
Even "The Return of Martin Guerre" is something recycled, being a reworking of a true story that has long fascinated the French public in various novels, plays and even an operetta.


Hospitals and Bills
When New York State began regulating hospital rates in 1983, a mainstay of the system was the hospitals' ability to charge more for some patients to help keep down costs for others.
The extra charges were meant to advance the state's goal of helping nonprofit insurers like the Blue Cross plans, which did not have to pay the surcharges, compete more evenly with profit-making insurance companies, which were required to pay them.
They were also used as a way to channel more money into the state's ailing hospitals, already staggering under the weight of increased health costs.


MEDIATION EFFORT IN HAITI COLLAPSES
After three days of talks here, diplomatic efforts by the United Nations to restore Haiti's democratically elected Government collapsed today as the Haitian authorities rejected previously agreed upon plans for the deployment of hundreds of international human rights observers.
A special United Nations envoy to Haiti, Dante Caputo, left the country today after the Haitian authorities presented him with a long list of conditions they insisted must be fulfilled before cooperating with international efforts to settle the 16-month-old political crisis.


Schott Case: Both Sides Attained Goals
Marge Schott wanted to make sure she retained her position as general partner of the Cincinnati Reds and her right to attend Reds games.
The major league executive council wanted to make sure she would not be in a position to operate the Reds on a day-to-day basis during the 1993 season and didn't want to be sued for its action against Schott.
Both sides attained their goals.





Look Sharp, Viewers, It's the Garden
The fight may not be much, but at least there's a ton of tradition.
Unless Riddick Bowe encounters unexpected turbulence with Michael Dokes in their heavyweight championship bout tomorrow, HBO will have to rely on letting viewers soak in the sight of the new champion making his first defense in the once-sainted boxing mecca that is Madison Square Garden.
"The Garden is unlike any arena for boxing," said Ross Greenburg, the executive producer of HBO Sports.
"It's like being in Wrigley Field or Fenway Park. There are very knowledgeable fans, not just high rollers who happened to leave the casino for a fight. It's very loud and electric."


Longhorn Steaks (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fulbright Speaks Well of Clinton
To the Editor:
Having been in close contact with Senator J. W. Fulbright more than 30 years, first as a Foreign Relations Committee staffer and now as his biographer, I was taken aback by "Young Bill Clinton Didn't Impress Fulbright," an item in the Jan. 22 "Boomers' Ball." The thrust of it, based on an apparently chance encounter with Mr.
Fulbright at a postinaugural brunch, was that he did not discern great possibilities for the young Clinton, while speaking well of Orval Faubus, Arkansas governor in the 1957 Little Rock school crisis.


Islam Doesn't Sanction Female Circumcision
To the Editor:
In a report that France has jailed a Gambian woman for mutilating the genitals of two baby daughters (news article, Jan. 11), you characterize female circumcision as an "age-old Muslim ritual" that "was originally applied in Muslim countries to control women." Nothing in the sacred scriptures of Islam justifies this brutal operation, nor do most Muslims practice it.
It is found in parts of sub-Saharan Africa where Islam has combined with local custom, as well as in non-Muslim societies elsewhere.
A.
M.
Rosenthal (column, Dec. 29) rightly condemns this practice as "female mutilation" and calls for withholding aid to those who foster it.


Aquarion Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Criticism Of N.A.S.D.
By failing to vigorously monitor the sales practices of penny stockbrokers, the National Association of Securities Dealers has allowed "unscrupulous broker-dealers, who use fraudulent and abusive practices in dealing with the public, to go unchecked," the General Accounting Office said in a report released yesterday.
The report by the G.A.O., which is the investigative arm of Congress, singled out for criticism the N.A.S.D.'s practice of focusing its investigations on the head offices of brokerage firms.
It noted that some penny stock firms sell franchises for branch offices, creating essentially independent operations that are rarely investigated.


Media General reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Gilbert Associates (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Sensormatic Electronics Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wisconsin Public Service reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Symix Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Brass Elephants in Queens Warehouse Yield a Bonanza of Narcotics


Small Hotel, Large Weekend
THERE are some of us who know that big cities are best experienced from small hotels.
Can there be a more suitable base for exploring Paris, particularly for the first time, than one of those tiny Left Bank places with lumpy beds, shutters and Portuguese chambermaids laughing as they pass you on the stairs?
Is there a more restful sanctuary in London than one of those elegant hotels of a few rooms around Cadogan Square where the valet can make you believe he is your very own Jeeves?
But what of New York?
Are there any small hotels here?
Respectable hotels?
That is what I was wondering as I scanned the telephone book, looking without much hope for something on a modest scale, not necessarily luxurious, possibly adventurous, maybe even pioneering, ideally the kind of place full of charm and eccentrics that Ludwig Bemelmans used to write about in the 1940's and 50's.


Jack in the Box's Worst Nightmare
Since the outbreak of food-poisoning from hamburger sold at Jack in the Box outlets here in mid-January left two children dead, the stock of the chain's parent company, Foodmaker Inc., has dropped more than 30 percent.
The 60 Jack in the Box restaurants in the state have been barraged by anonymous telephone callers accusing them of being baby killers.
Customers are scarce.
And local newspapers have carried advertisements by lawyers offering to represent poisoning victims.
"In the last 10 years, we've sold 400 million pounds of hamburger safely and without incident," said Robert Nugent, president of Jack in the Box, the nation's fifth-largest hamburger chain, with 1,170 outlets in 13 states in the West.
"Then bang, it hits you. It's your worst, worst nightmare."


Cooper Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cuban Refugees Are Rescued at Sea


Cincinnati Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


British Air Shakes Up Management
Working to restore an image tarnished by a campaign to undermine its main competitor, British Airways announced several management changes today, including the resignation of its chairman and its public affairs director, who reportedly took part in the unethical practices.
The airline, which admitted last month that it had sought to undermine Virgin Atlantic Airways through what Virgin termed dirty tricks, said Lord King, the chairman, had stepped down five months earlier than planned and had been succeeded by Sir Colin Marshall, the airline's chief executive.


Despite a Few Bad Putts, Ogle Leads by a Stroke
Brett Ogle, despite four-putting for a triple bogey on his next-to-last hole, took the lead today after two rounds of the A.T.&amp;T.
Pebble Beach National Pro-Am.
On a bright and windswept day when Donald Trump enriched the huge amateur field with a hole-in-one, Ogle, who is from Australia, shot a three-under-par 68 at Poppy Hills for a 36-hole total of seven-under-par 137.


Fed Adopted Neutral Stance At December Policy Meeting
The Federal Reserve said in a report today that its chief policy-making committee abandoned its slight tilt toward lower interest rates in December and adopted a neutral policy, a move that will probably disappoint politicians who want further rate cuts.
Such a neutral policy generally indicates that the Fed remains as worried about slow growth as about a possible increase in inflationary pressures.
And the report, describing the Dec. 22 meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, said the central bankers had not totally ruled out changing interest rates.


All-Stars Skate Around Rumors
On the banks of the icy St.
Lawrence, the hockey world has come together this weekend, and rumors are flying like snow flurries on Ste.
Catherine Street.
The occasion is the All-Star weekend, with the old-timers playing tonight, the current stars playing Saturday afternoon and the businessmen gathering behind closed doors on Sunday morning.
The game site is the Forum, an ancient, soon-to-be-replaced temple of a sport that everyone here will tell you, again and again, is "like a religion."


Brenco Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Expert Links Mandatory Desegregation to 'White Flight'
Large numbers of whites have removed their children from public schools wherever mandatory integration plans have been imposed, an expert testified today in the state's defense against a suit challenging the racial and economic segregation in Hartford's schools.
In the Hartford area, said the expert, Prof.
Christine Rossell of Boston University, a survey done for the state found that 51 percent of the whites questioned said they would move or resort to private schools if a desegregation plan assigned their children to a city school.


Tuition Reimbursement A Confusing Situation
PEOPLE who have been attending school at their employers' expense should take a careful look at the 1992 W-2 income tax statement just arriving in the mail.
Some of them could get a rude shock when they find out how the tuition was handled for tax purposes.
Many tuition reimbursements and other educational payments that used to be tax-free should be reported this year as income to the student.
And because notices to employers explaining the situation arrived late in the year, the taxes may or may not have been withheld on that income.


Amax Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Case of Double Jeopardy; Clinton's 2d Setback Over Attorney General Is Calling His Political Savvy Into Question
Casey Stengel asked it about the 1962 New York Mets -- "Can't anybody here play this game?" -- and politicians in the capital, including many Democrats, are starting to ask it about the Clinton Administration in the wake of a second, painfully public, politically devastating failure to find an acceptable candidate for Attorney General.
The new President now desperately needs a victory, as quickly as possible, on more of a test than the family-leave bill he signed today.


The Top Soldier Is Torn Between 2 Loyalties
In his waning months as America's senior soldier, Gen.
Colin L. Powell is struggling to balance loyalties to a new Commander in Chief whose ideas clash with his, and to a tightly knit military culture he feels bound to protect.
Challenges to these fealties are piling up fast.
General Powell's sharp criticism last week of President Clinton's plan to allow homosexuals in the armed forces prompted some Administration officials to suggest that his behavior had bordered on insubordination, a notion he vehemently rejects.


Knicks Stop Miami Cold At the End
The Knicks won the hard way tonight, which made the victory both gratifying and impressive.
They trailed almost the entire game.
They were down by 12 points in the third quarter, and they were down by 7 with three and a half minutes to play.


Public Hospital Chief Picked To Lead Public Health Agency
Dr.
James J. Mongan, director of the Truman Medical Center in Kansas City, Mo., will be named Assistant Secretary for health in the Clinton Administration, in charge of the Public Health Service, Administration officials say.
The appointment is expected to be announced next week bythe Secretary of Health and Human Services, Donna E. Shalala.
Department officials said the fact that Dr.
Mongan is the head of a large public hospital indicated the importance Dr.
Shalala places on these institutions.


The Community College Route to a Lower-Cost Bachelor's Degree
When Adrian Tubero, of Albertson, L.I., graduated from high school, she knew she wanted a college education, but she was uncertain about the specifics.
Her major, her career plans, even her choice of school were undecided.
Her high school record wasn't bad - she had a B average - but it was unlikely to merit a substantial scholarship.
So, she reasoned, spending two years at a public community college would not only reduce her total college costs by nearly half, but it would also let her improve her academic credentials and find a suitable major.
After two years she would transfer to a four-year college and complete her work toward a bachelor's degree.


Beliefs
Joyce Davis, the foreign desk editor at National Public Radio, says the subject of women and Islam is one that has long puzzled her.
A former reporter at The New Orleans Times-Picayune, she has lived in Athens, traveled frequently in the Middle East and written about the Palestinian Liberation Organization.
She found it hard to reconcile the news media's depiction of Islam as totally hostile to women with the many intelligent, articulate and independent women she met who considered themselves loyal Muslims.


200 Somali Youths Stone American Troops
More than 200 youths hurled stones at United States troops and burned tires at the Mogadishu port today after a rumor spread that marines had shot and killed six Somalis.
Military spokesmen said there had been no gunfire from American forces.
The demonstration, in which two marines were injured, followed a morning clash by the seaport in which one clan faction tried to reclaim houses that a rival faction had seized.


Clinton and Mulroney Fault Balkan Peace Plan
President Clinton and Prime Minister Brian Mulroney of Canada today both criticized a plan to end the crisis in the Balkans negotiated by international mediators.
Mr.
Mulroney suggested that both Russia and the United States should assume more active roles in working out a diplomatic solution.
Mr.
Clinton, in his first public criticism of the agreement negotiated by former Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance and Lord Owen, a former British Foreign Secretary who represents the European Community, said the plan could put Bosnian Muslims at a disadvantage.


King Again Puts Himself Among the Heavyweights
Just as the surging tide of prefight hype seemed to be reaching full froth for tonight's heavyweight championship bout between Riddick Bowe and Michael Dokes at Madison Square Garden, along comes the undertow.
Or to put it another way, Don King was in town yesterday to throw some cold water on the Bowe-Dokes bout while stirring the pot for the "real" heavyweight championship fight, the one he is promoting between Lennox Lewis and Tony Tucker in Las Vegas on May 8.


FHP International Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Shlomo Mintz Recital
The violinist Shlomo Mintz is to give his only New York recital of the season tomorrow at 8 P.M. at the 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
Mr.
Mintz, accompanied by Itamar Golan, will perform Bartok's Rhapsody No. 2, Shostakovich's Op. 134 Sonata, and Schumann's rarely played Sonata No. 2 in D minor.
Tickets are $25.
Information: (212) 996-1100.


Review/Dance; The Diverse Jazz Idiom, With Unifying Elements
No wonder jazz dance is diverse.
It has been influenced by tap, ballroom dancing, vaudeville, modern dance, musical comedy and the riches of black culture and history.
The sheer variety of this dance form was celebrated on Sunday afternoon in "Jazz Music in Motion" at the Evolving Arts Theater at Dance Space Inc.
Lynn Simonson, the choreographer who introduced the performance, says all manifestations of jazz dance have in common a concern for swing, rhythm and syncopation.
The program proved her right.


Advantage, Ball Club
JERRY BROWNE and the Oakland Athletics went into salary arbitration with the largest spread among the 100 players and their clubs on the arbitration list.
WILLIAM GOULD, the arbitrator, was asked yesterday to rule on a difference of $1,325,000.
Gould, who earlier in the week ruled in favor of ANDY BENES over the San Diego Padres, gave the Athletics their choice of $625,000 over Browne's $1.95 million.
The multiposition player earned $375,000 last year.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Named Matt Keough special assignment scout.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Agreed to terms with Carlton Fisk, catcher, on a one-year contract.


One Mean Substitute
HOWIE LONG of the Los Angeles Raiders was added to the American Football Conference Pro Bowl team for Sunday's game in Honolulu, replacing BRUCE SMITH of the Buffalo Bills at defensive end.
Smith, who played in the Super Bowl and three previous playoff games with injured ribs, practiced with the A.F.C. team in Honolulu but decided to withdraw yesterday.


Marriott Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


They Appreciate Herbal Remedies Outside U.S.
To the Editor:
The American Botanical Council appreciates that Jane E. Brody, in her Jan. 20 Personal Health column on cold remedies, mentions ephedra as a decongestant and elm bark as a soother of irritating coughs; also the plant-derived camphor, menthol and eucalyptol for nasal congestion.


Corrections
The "On Stage, and Off" column in Weekend on Jan. 29 misidentified a producer of the play "Jeffrey" at the WPA Theater in Manhattan.
He is Richard Frankel.


Judge Upholds the Right Of Artist to Use Billboard
A Federal judge ruled yesterday that Amtrak must permit an artist to display a montage criticizing the owners of the Coors Brewing Company on a giant billboard in Pennsylvania Station in Manhattan.
The unusual case involves an artist with a fondness for political parody, Michael A. Lebron, who sued Amtrak because it refused to lease the billboard to him.
Amtrak rejected the artist's montage of pictures and text on the ground that it had a policy of barring political advertising from the billboard.


Raspy but Democratic, Kazoos Corner Market; A Company in Eden, N.Y., Hums Along
It is said that a kazoo is to music what a full body cast is to ballet.
But in this one-stoplight town, the rasp of the kazoo is a sweet serenade, the Magna Carta and Constitution of musical democracy.
That's because Eden is the home of "The One and Only, Original Kazoo Company Inc.," the world's only remaining factory for metal kazoos -- the Stradivarius of kazoos.


CHRONICLE
PIERRE BERGE, president of the Paris Opera and the chief business associate of Yves Saint Laurent, was removed Thursday from his 20-year post as president of the ready-to-wear division of the Chambre Syndicale, the quasi-official body governing the fashion industry in France.
The reason for the ouster, which came amid much jockeying in Paris fashion circles, may have been his opposition to changes in the schedule for forthcoming shows of fall collections.
The shows are usually held in March, and he had fended off a move to push them back to February.


Automotive Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Corrections
An article on Thursday about a record book deal for Allan R. Folsom, a first-time novelist, misidentified the publisher of the previous record holder, Sally Beauman's book "Destiny." It was published by Bantam, not Doubleday.


Some Regions Fear the Price As Pollution Rights Are Sold
When Congress passed the Clean Air Act of 1990, it created something never before seen in the annals of capitalism: a free market in pollution.
If a company could clean up its emissions more than required under the new law, it could sell the right to pollute to another company.
The freedom to trade pollution rights like pork bellies, and even make a profit, would give companies an incentive to upgrade dirty plants, the thinking went.


U.S. Jobless Rate Falls As Labor Force Shrinks
The labor market showed further spotty improvement in January as the nation's unemployment rate eased two-tenths of a point, to 7.1 percent, and businesses expanded payrolls by 106,000, the Labor Department said today.
But the latest survey, representing the first broad view of the economy's performance last month, showed that the unemployment rate dropped only because the number of people in the labor force fell.
And job growth has yet to rise at anything near the pace of overall economic activity.


Blair Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


8 Tons of Marijuana Seized in Raid


After Nearly 4 Years, Rushdie Has Hope
As he approaches the fourth anniversary of the edict that drove him into a life of nomadic secrecy and lethal hide-and-seek, Salman Rushdie is beginning to see a ray of hope.
The 45-year-old author whose writing so offended Iran that he was publicly sentenced to death says he now sees more aggressive support for his case at high levels in a number of Western governments.
It is causing them to take a tougher line in pressing Iran to lift the fatwa, or death edict, he said.


Germans' Apprentice System Supports Economic Vitality
When Michel Sorgatz finished school last year, he did not have to read classified ads to find a job in his chosen field.
Instead he entered an apprentice program at one of Germany's largest companies that will teach him a profession and virtually guarantee him a job.
On his way to a high-tech career working with metals, Mr.
Sorgatz, 19, spent three weeks learning on the job at Siemens and two more weeks at a specialized school.
At the end of his three-year apprenticeship he will take an examination, and if he does well, he will probably be offered a job at Siemens, an electronics and computer products manufacturer.


British Test 19-Year Ban On 'Clockwork Orange'
Two decades ago the director Stanley Kubrick and Warner Brothers abruptly withdrew Mr.
Kubrick's "Clockwork Orange" from theaters across Britain, an unusual act of self-censorship amid public protests that the movie had stirred a wave of violence.
This week a London court was asked to affirm the 19-year-old distribution ban on the film by punishing the manager of a London movie house who is accused of showing a bootleg copy to an audience last April.


Woman, 70, Is Hit By Cab and Killed
A 70-year-old woman died yesterday after she was struck by a yellow cab as she tried to cross the Avenue of the Americas at Bleecker Street in the West Village, the police said.
The woman, Mary Racioppi, of 25 Thompson Street, was crossing with the light at 4:20 P.M. when she was struck.
The cabdriver drove away, said Detective Joseph McConville, a police spokesman.
Ms.
Racioppi was taken to St.
Vincent's Hospital where she died, he said.


The Envelope, Please: A.P. Indy Nears Sweep
A.P.
Indy, who was voted North America's best 3-year-old colt earlier this week, stood at the brink of racing's ultimate honor tonight as the overwhelming favorite to be named Horse of the Year.
The colt was back at the Lane's End Farm in Kentucky awaiting his new career as a stallion.
But his owners had already converged on Los Angeles from as far away as Tokyo for the climactic moment at the Eclipse Awards dinner.
And to racing people across the country, it was considered a sure bet that the name inside the sealed envelope would be A.P.
Indy.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.81
3.08
3.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.90
2.91
3.72
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.08
3.08
3.75
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.86
5.96
6.76
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.15
7.18
7.75
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.30
8.30
8.84
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.22
6.25
6.74
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Russians Have Few Illusions About Progress
To the Editor:
Nathaniel Knight ("In Yeltsin's Russia, Glimmers of Hope Emerge," letter, Jan. 28) finds my speculations about the Russian future in "Russia Comes Apart" (Op-Ed, Jan. 10) "nothing short of irresponsible." I hope his supply of moral indignation is plentiful, because if he studies the Russian press, he will find that every day it carries similar speculations about fragmentation and incipient anarchy, written by public figures of every political viewpoint.
In reality, their aim is often constructive: to understand genuinely threatening trends and on that basis to propose measures that may reverse or mitigate them.


JOBLESS RATE HITS A 25-YEAR RECORD IN NEW YORK CITY
The unemployment rate for New York City soared to 13.4 percent in January from 11 percent in December, hitting the highest level in the 25 years that the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics has tracked the city labor market, the bureau reported yesterday.
There were 447,000 people out of work in January, excluding those who had dropped out of the city labor market and were not actively seeking jobs.
The number of jobless, which was up from 369,000 in December, was also the highest on record.
Seasonal Effect at Work
The data were not seasonally adjusted, meaning that they were not statistically smoothed out to account for seasonal variations like the hiring of temporary workers by retailers during the December holiday season who are then laid off in January.
Because of such practices, the unadjusted rate typically jumps in January, but even so this increase was unusually high.
It surpassed the previous unadjusted peak of 12.1 percent reached in July.


Hans Jacobson, 88, A Trader in Bonds Of Shaky Railroads
Hans Jacobson, a Wall Street specialist who traded the bonds of bankrupt railroads, died on Thursday in Cambridge, England.
He lived in Basking Ridge, N.J., and was 88.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, for which he was being treated at a Cambridge hospital, his family said.


Sports of The Times; Bobbing Amid Thugs And Bullies
IN a span of 48 hours this weekend, Madison Square Garden will have played host to two major sporting events.
Last night, the Chemical Bank Millrose Games were held, and tonight Riddick Bowe will make his first heavyweight championship defense, against Michael Dokes.
For all the drama, however, much greater battles are taking place off the track and out of the ring as a maverick and a renegade challenge the iron-fisted rules of order.


Cache Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


G. L. Monahan, 59, A General Who Led 'Star Wars' Program
George L. Monahan Jr., a former head of the "Star Wars" missile-defense program and a vice president of the Loral Corporation, died Thursday in San Jose, Calif., during a business trip.
He was 59 and lived in Falls Church, Va.
The cause of death was a heart attack, said Loral, a military electronics and space communications company in New York City.


Chemex Pharmaceuticals (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Philip J. Levens, Broadcasting Executive, 74
Philip J. Levens, a retired vice president of the American Broadcasting Companies, died on Tuesday at Massapequa (L.I.) General Hospital.
A Massapequa resident, he was 74.
His family said the cause was heart failure.


Bird Confronts the 24-Hour Clock
When the cheering stopped, and his final starring night had ended, Larry Bird returned to the reality of retirement.
"I'm pretty bored right now," he admitted after Larry Bird Night concluded late Thursday night at a sold-out Boston Garden.


Cisco Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 24


Dow Jumps To Gain 4% For Week
Global manufacturing stocks dominated the market again yesterday, pushing the Dow Jones industrial average to its second straight record high.
But the broader market slipped and Nasdaq stocks were routed yesterday, as many investors switched to buying the industrial behemoths that they had shunned for months.


A New Ferryboat's Maiden Voyage Between Hoboken and New York


Hans Jonas, Influential Philosopher, Is Dead at 89
Hans Jonas, who fled Nazi Germany and became an influential philosopher, died yesterday at his home in New Rochelle, N.Y.
He was 89.
Professor Jonas drew wide attention in 1964 when he repudiated an early mentor, the German thinker Martin Heidegger, for being pro-Hitler in the Nazi era.


Real Shock Radio to G.O.P.: Imus Likes Florio
Don Imus, the radio talk-show host who has been called "irreverent" so often it seems part of his name, is insinuating himself into the New Jersey race for governor, to the delight of Gov.
Jim Florio and the chagrin of his opponents.
Actually, Mr.
Imus doesn't have to push himself into campaigns in the region, since candidates for offices from President on down have repeatedly knocked on his door in the hope of appearing more human during a freewheeling conversation with the I-Man, as Mr.
Imus is called by his supporting cast.
After his first on-the-air meeting with Bill Clinton in April, when the Democrat's campaign was in trouble, Mr.
Imus said he had to give the "redneck bozo" credit for having a sense of humor.


The Top Soldier Is Torn Between 2 Loyalties
In his waning months as America's senior soldier, Gen.
Colin L. Powell is struggling to balance loyalties to a new Commander in Chief whose ideas clash with his, and to a tightly knit military culture he feels bound to protect.
Challenges to these fealties are piling up fast.
General Powell's sharp criticism last week of President Clinton's plan to allow homosexuals in the armed forces prompted some Administration officials to suggest that his behavior had bordered on insubordination, a notion he vehemently rejects.


Banyan Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A picture in some copies yesterday on the front page of The Metro Section, with a cross reference to a sports article, was published in error.
It showed Pascual Perez (in a dark jacket), formerly of the Yankees, not his brother, Melido, who signed a new contract with the team.


Displaced New Yorkers Remember the Neediest
They are exiles, former New Yorkers who are trying to adapt to locales where the pace is maddeningly slow or the civic life seems to revolve around strip malls or the bagels come frozen (the horror!).
They often long for a taste of their rough-and-tumble homeland, so they eagerly buy New York newspapers and phone friends who live there.
They rekindle their relationship with New York City by supporting a charity that has been fighting its ills -- from homelessness to illiteracy to hunger -- since the early years of this century.
The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund has received dozens of donations during the 81st annual appeal from one-time New Yorkers who would like nothing more than to see the city thrive.


Pro-Democracy? Start With Haiti.
Bill Clinton, as a candidate, promised a foreign policy based on support for America's democratic values.
He also denounced as cruel George Bush's Executive Order, probably illegal, that commanded the Coast Guard to intercept boatloads of Haitian refugees in international waters and ship them home without a hearing on their claims to refuge.
Fine words.
But Bill Clinton the President has yet to translate them into deeds.
In fact, one of his first acts as President was to reaffirm the Bush refugee policy.
Now his hopes of an early diplomatic breakthrough have been thwarted by Haiti's ruling thugs, who have reneged on their agreement with an international mediator.
So Mr.
Clinton needs to strike out on a dramatically different course.


Proving That Art Sometimes Has a Practical Side


A Roman God Reappears at the Metropolitan Museum of Art


Malpractice Suit Fund Serves New York Well
To the Editor:
In "Regulate the Drug Monopolies" (Op-Ed, Jan. 16), Harvey F. Wachsman confuses the New York State excess liability program with the 1975 crisis in malpractice insurance.
Since 1985, the Medical Malpractice Insurance Association has collected some $800 million in excess premiums on about 100,000 policies.
The average doctor thus has as much as $1 million of insurance over primary coverage for a single occurrence.
More than $150 million of the $800 million has gone to the hospital excess liability pool as return premium.


Letterman Says on Air: No Decision on Moving
In an early segment of his television show last night, David Letterman denied a newspaper report that he planned to move the show to Los Angeles from New York City in the summer.
A report published yesterday in The New York Post said Mr.
Letterman had held a meeting on Thursday to tell his staff he was moving the show to Los Angeles.


Piggott Rained Out
Heavy rain delayed the return of the British jockey LESTER PIGGOTT to racing yesterday in a series of races in Dubai, United Arab Emirates.


General Signal reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


They Appreciate Herbal Remedies Outside U.S.; Acupuncture's Benefits
To the Editor:
As "U.S. Opens the Door Just a Crack to Alternative Forms of Medicine" (front page, Jan. 10) points out, the time to examine the benefits claimed for "alternative" forms of medicine has arrived in light of the escalation of health care costs.


Fisher-Price Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3


Classical Music in Review
"Absolut Concerto" Avery Fisher Hall


Review/Dance; How Being Still Is an Art, And Being Fidgety Isn't
If a choreographer demands it, standing still is as much a part of dancing as jumping and whirling.
Darci Kistler and Nilas Martins jumped and whirled charmingly enough in George Balanchine's "Duo Concertant," which the New York City Ballet offered last Saturday night at the New York State Theater.
But they had trouble standing still.
"Duo Concertant" pays tribute to the power of music.
A violinist and a pianist are on stage playing a score by Stravinsky.
Two dancers stand perfectly still listening them.
Then the music inspires a pas de deux.


Nicklaus and Watson Gain Open Exemptions
The former champions JACK NICKLAUS and TOM WATSON were among the 13 players granted special exemption for this year's United States Open by the United States Golf Association yesterday.
The tournament is scheduled for June 17-20 at the Baltusrol Golf Club in Springfield, N.J.


Clinton Promises Aid to the Nation's Mayors


A Film Maker in the Avant-Garde for 40 Years
Stan Brakhage is a living argument for the proposition that the avant-garde is good for your health.
In the last four decades, most of them spent in near-poverty, he has made more than 250 films, ranging in length from nine seconds to more than four hours.
Yet at 60, the grand old man of the American avant-garde cinema is smooth of face and unfurrowed of brow.
Mr.
Brakhage (pronounced BRACK-idge) floats placidly in a brightly colored, very strange cinematic universe of his own devising.
He has described his films as closer in spirit to the cave paintings of Lascaux than to Hollywood film, and few people would contest the point.
They dispense with narrative, character and in most instances sound, which Mr.
Brakhage at one point in his career dismissed as an esthetic mistake.
They bear titles like "Window Water Baby Moving," "The Text of Light," "Roman Numeral Series I-X" and more recently "Delicacies of Molten Horror Synapse," which Mr.
Brakhage describes helpfully as "four superimposed rolls of hand-painted and bi-packed television negative imagery edited so as to approximate the hypnagogic process whereby the optic nerves resist grotesque infusions of luminescent light."


Senate Panel Says C.I.A. Fumbled Iraq Loan Case
The nation's intelligence agencies badly mishandled their roles in the prosecution of a bank that secretly financed Iraq's arms buildup, a Senate report issued today said.
In the report, the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence found a pattern of bureaucratic clumsiness, official finger pointing and running for cover among the senior Government officials involved.


U.S. Officially Pleased at Foreign Rate Cuts
American officials welcomed this week's interest rate cuts by Germany's and Japan's central banks, but they were reluctant to say in public what many express privately -- that the two nations should do more to stimulate their languishing economies.
Not only do Mr.
Clinton's economic aides fear starting off wrong in relations with the world's two other industrial superpowers, but Secretary of the Treasury Lloyd Bentsen has said he prefers private persuasion to public badgering when Washington wants to put pressure on its partners.


Judge Kaye for Chief Judge
For the vacant post of Chief Judge of New York's highest court, the state's nominating commission has offered Gov.
Mario Cuomo seven names.
With all respect to the six men on the list, they are no match for Judge Judith Kaye, the slate's only woman.
Judge Kaye has led the field since last fall, when Sol Wachtler, the former Chief Judge, resigned after his shocking arrest on Federal extortion charges.
All seven candidates have strengths that could help the court recover from the stunning setback of the Wachtler prosecution.
Some of them may be worthy candidates for future high court vacancies.


F.T.C. Takes No Action On Microsoft
After meeting behind closed doors all morning, the Federal Trade Commission refrained today from taking disciplinary action against the Microsoft Corporation, which had been accused of unfair competition in the market for personal computer software, where it dominates.
But the agency indicated that Microsoft was not yet off the hook.
In an oblique announcement that did not even mention the company by name, the agency said it had not reached a "final decision" but would "reconvene in the near future."


58 New York Choices for Tax-Free Income
No doubt President Clinton's talk of raising taxes is weighing heavily on people's minds as April 15 draws near.
Here is some good news for New Yorkers -- state residents can earn triple tax-free income from 58 New York tax-free bond funds that already hold $16.1 billion.
Only Californians own more.
Single-state municipal bond funds invest mainly in the issues of states and municipalities, which use the money to finance public projects.
The chief appeal of these funds, of course, is that their interest income is free of Federal income taxes (although you owe taxes on any capital gains) and, for New York State residents, free of state and local taxes as well.


Not Enough for Domestic Partners
In moving to grant them some of the benefits enjoyed by married couples, Mayor David Dinkins makes a welcome gesture of recognition and respect to the non-marital relationships that constitute "family" for millions of New Yorkers.
Yet he continues to dodge the most urgent issue facing non-traditional families -- health care benefits.
The Mayor will create a city registry in which residents or nonresident city workers can file as "domestic partners." Homosexuals or unmarried heterosexual registrants will have the same standing as married couples in qualifying for city apartments, the same visiting rights at city jails and hospitals.
Those who work for the city may also take unpaid leave to care for newborn children.


Amgen Shares Fall as Income Data Are Released
Shares in Amgen Inc., the biotechnology company, plummeted today after the company released earnings and two analysts lowered their recommendations on the stock.
Amgen shares fell $5.875 today to close at $53.875 in over-the-counter trading.


BRINKER'S FORMER CHAIRMAN ON WAY TO RECOVERY
The health of Norman E. Brinker, former chairman of Brinker International Inc., has improved so much in recent days that one of his physicians said yesterday that Mr.
Brinker might eventually be able to return to his job as head of the restaurant company.


Ametek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A picture yesterday with an obituary of the book editor Albert Russel Erskine Jr. was published in error.
It showed Donald S. Klopfer, co-founder of Random House, who died in 1986.


METRO DIGEST
FEARS OVER FREE-MARKET POLLUTION
Under the Clean Air Act of 1990, if a company could clean up its emissions more than required, it could sell the right to pollute to another company.
But an announcement this week that the Long Island Lighting Company was selling some of its pollution rights to another company has raised fears in New York's environmental community.
Because the law does not regulate the sales or require companies to provide any public information about them, at least until 1995, pollution could be quietly shifted from one region to another, critics say.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY
JANUARY JOBLESS RATE HIGHEST ON RECORD
The unemployment rate for New York City soared to 13.4 percent in January from 11 percent in December, hitting the highest level on record in the 25 years that the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics has tracked the city labor market.
There were 447,000 people out of work in January, excluding those who have dropped out of the labor market and are not actively seeking jobs.
That number, up from 369,000 in December, was also the highest on record.
Page 1.
AMTRAK ORDERED TO ALLOW BILLBOARD
A Federal judge ruled that Amtrak must permit an artist to display a montage criticizing the owners of the Coors Brewing Company on a giant billboard in Pennsylvania Station in Manhattan.
Amtrak had rejected the artist's montage of pictures and text on the ground that it had a policy of barring political advertising.
Page 25.
EX-BLACKBURNE ADVISER PLEADS GUILTY
The former top tenant adviser to the New York City Housing Authority pleaded guilty in Federal Court in Manhattan to embezzling $32,000 in a case that law-enforcement officials said the authority's former chairwoman, Laura D. Blackburne, tried to keep quiet.
Page 25.
REGION
FALSE ALARM ON INSURANCE
Although there were dire predictions last year that commercial insurance companies would cancel health coverage for thousands of small businesses and individuals if New York State changed its rules governing rates, the outlook now seems far less grim.
Page 26.
NEW JERSEY HATS IN IMUS'S THREE RINGS
Don Imus, the radio talk-show host, is insinuating himself into the New Jersey race for Governor, to the delight of Gov.
Jim Florio and the chagrin of his opponents.
Candidates for offices from President on down have repeatedly knocked on his door in the hope of appearing more human during a freewheeling conversation with Mr.
Imus.
Page 26.  'WHITE FLIGHT' TESTIMONY IN SCHOOLS CASE
Large numbers of whites have removed their children from public schools wherever mandatory integration plans have been imposed, an expert testified in the state's defense against a suit challenging the racial and economic segregation in Hartford's schools.
Page 26.
VOTE NEARS ON SECOND WEAPONS BILL
Faced with uncertain prospects of overriding Governor Florio's veto of a bill that would have ended a ban nearly all two semiautomatic guns, the New Jersey Senate is expected to vote Tuesday on an plan that would allow some 200,000 current owners to keep their guns.
Page 27.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 25
Neediest Cases 27


All Sides Get Message: Haiti Is a Top U.S. Priority
In an acknowledgement that it will have to take more action on Haiti, the Clinton Administration sent a variety of signals today on the crisis there.
Explicitly and implicitly, the Administration told the ousted Haitian President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, that it still supported his restoration as President.
It also signaled Haiti's military-backed leaders that it understood their fear of retribution by Father Aristide, and informed Florida lawmakers, nervous over the possibility of a new wave of refugees, that it was giving the crisis in Haiti a higher priority.


CPC International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Classical Music in Review
Atlanta Symphony Orchestra Carnegie Hall


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Faldo Shares Lead  Nick Faldo and Colin Montgomerie of Scotland were tied for the lead at 135 after two rounds of the Johnnie Walker Classic yesterday in Singapore.
Montgomerie grabbed a share of the lead by shooting a three-under-par 67 in the second round of the P.G.A.
European event, while Faldo had a 68.
One stroke behind were Ernie Els of South Africa and Choi Sang Hoi of South Korea.
Els had a 65 and Choi shot 67. (AP)
Geiberger and Colbert Share Lead: Al Geiberger and Jim Colbert shared the lead at six-under-par 65 and hometown favorite Ray Floyd shot 67 but it was the the Links at Key Biscayne, Fla., course that stole the show in the first round of the Royal Caribbean Classic, the opening event of the 1993 Senior PGA Tour.
The bayside public course near downtown Miami was ravaged by Hurricane Andrew less than six months ago. (AP)


Valenzuela Redux
FERNANDO VALENZUELA was happy with his first outing in more than two weeks yesterday as he helped pitch the Mazatlan (Mexico) Deer to victory in their first game of the Caribbean Baseball Series in Mazatlan.
Mazatlan beat the Dominican Republic, 3-2, on Thursday.
Valenzuela, the former Los Angeles Dodger who is hoping to pitch his way back to the major leagues, allowed five hits in six and two-thirds innings.


Baker to Write of Years as Diplomat for Putnam's
James A. Baker 3d has agreed to write the memoirs of his years as Secretary of State for G.P.
Putnam's Sons in a deal that could earn Mr.
Baker more than a million dollars if the book is successful.
The publisher bought North American rights only for the book, leaving Mr.
Baker's agent, Robert Barnett, a partner in the Washington law firm Williams &amp; Connolly, to pursue independently the potentially lucrative foreign-rights market.
Such a deal means that Mr.
Baker does not have to share any money earned abroad with the publisher, but it also reduces the advance that Putnam has to pay to Mr.
Baker.


Game, Set, Match
PHILIPPE CHATRIER, who steered tennis through boycott and hot pants controversies and then back into the Olympics, steps down today after having served for 24 years as president of the French Tennis Federation.
Chatrier was president of the International Tennis Federation from 1977 to 1991.
He also was president of the Men's International Pro Tennis Council from 1979 to 1985 before pro tennis was taken over by the players.


Maytag Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kennedy Library Acts Properly on Archives
To the Editor:
In "A Plea to the Kennedys" (Op-Ed, Jan. 22), Nigel Hamilton, author of "J.F.K.: Reckless Youth," reiterates unsubstantiated allegations about the John Fitzgerald Kennedy Library.


Balkan Mediators Ask U.S. Assent For NATO Planes to Keep Peace
The international mediators trying to solve the Balkan crisis want the United States to support the use of NATO war planes to enforce provisions of their peace plan for ending the civil war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, arguing that this would reassure Muslims and deter Serbs from further aggression.
The co-chairmen of the United Nations and European Community effort to bring peace to Bosnia, Cyrus R. Vance, a former American Secretary of State, and Lord Owen, a former British Foreign Secretary, also want the United States to provide modern satellite communications for the expanded 25,000-member peacekeeping force that the United Nations will be asked to send to Bosnia if all three factions agree to their proposals, officials close to the negotiations here say.


Joseph L. Mankiewicz, Literate Skeptic of the Cinema, Dies at 83
Joseph L. Mankiewicz, a writer, director and producer who was one of Hollywood's most literate and intelligent film makers, died yesterday at Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
He was 83 and lived in Bedford, N.Y.
Robert Vincent, a friend of the family, said the cause of death was heart failure.


American Water Works reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mobutu Spurns West and Ousts Premier
President Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire today rejected Western demands that he give up power and said he was dismissing his main political rival, Etienne Tshisekedi, as Prime Minister.
The move not only rejects the man chosen in August 1992 by Zaire's National Conference, the legislative body, but also rebuffs the country's main creditors, France, Belgium and the United States, who early this week called upon Mr.
Mobutu to yield all power to the Prime Minister and his interim Government.


Fire Kills 4 Family Members in Philadelphia


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic Avery Fisher Hall


INSIDE
Zairian Refuses to Yield
President Mobutu Sese Seko rejected Western demands that he yield power and said he was ousting his main rival, the Prime Minister.
Page 3.
Overtures Hearten Rushdie
As the fourth anniversary of the Iranian death sentence that drove him into hiding nears, Salman Rushdie is beginning to see a ray of hope.
Page 4.
Support for Schools Chief
Joseph A. Fernandez, the New York City Schools Chancellor, received support from an unexpected quarter in his effort to keep his job.
Page 23.
Baboon-Liver Patient Dies
The world's second recipient of a baboon liver died of an infection without ever regaining consciousness after the Jan. 10 operation.
Page 6.
Joseph L. Mankiewicz Dies
The meticulous and acerbic writer and director of "All About Eve" and other film classics died at 83.
Page 10.


Second Baboon-Liver Recipient Dies of Infection
The world's second recipient of a baboon liver died last night without having regained consciousness since the experimental transplant operation was performed Jan. 10 at the University of Pittsburgh.
The patient, a 62-year-old man whose name was not disclosed because he had requested confidentiality, died from an infection of the membrane that surrounds the intestines.
The infection, peritonitis, is often fatal.
It was particularly dangerous for the patient because his immune system was being suppressed by drugs designed to prevent rejection of the baboon liver.


For Stock Newsletters, Crash Is Finally History
SOME investment newsletter writers got a big break this week when, just by the passage of time, their abysmal 1987 stock market crash performances were erased from their important five-year track records.
Stay tuned for the advertisements that now can boast of good "long term" performance where only months ago, when October 1987 was still figured in the five-year record, it was not so good.
And don't be surprised to see some letter writers fail to update their five-year records if they did well during the crash.


Classical Music in Review
The Vogler Quartet 92d Street Y


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5 INVESTING IN APPRENTICES
A major reason for Germany's long economic boom is its career training system, in which the state invests heavily to turn out highly productive workers.
Some say the system rewards training over talent, but few dispute that the country profits from the quality of its workers.  1


JUDGE WITHDRAWS FROM CLINTON LIST FOR JUSTICE POST
Judge Kimba M. Wood withdrew today from consideration for Attorney General after the White House learned she had employed an illegal immigrant as a baby sitter before it became illegal to do so.
That stunning setback left President Clinton scrambling for the third time to fill the post.


Hanga Roa Journal; As World Crowds In, an Island Shields Its Culture
The topography is like the political climate in this speck of land with its Polynesian people isolated in the South Pacific.
At first, Easter Island appears to be a pleasant and even breathtaking place, with undulating pastures carpeted in pale green that spike up to rounded peaks and then plummet into blue Pacific.
But just under the surface are sharp volcanic rocks that make walking painful.


Q &amp; A
Kinds of Coins
Q What is the difference between bullion and numismatic coins?
JEANNIE AARON, MANHATTAN
A "A bullion coin is a coin that has either silver or gold content and is usually 90 percent pure," said Harvey Stack, a partner of Stack's Coin Company.
"The value of the coin is determined by its weight in relation to the current bullion prices on the commodity exchanges." Examples are dimes, quarters and half dollars dated 1964 or earlier.


Chemed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


American Air May Retire Planes and Hubs
American Airlines is considering a retreat from its strategy of having major operations in all parts of the nation and may cut the number of its hubs and retire several planes, top executives of the airline said yesterday.
Michael J. Durham, the company's senior vice president of finance and chief financial officer for the airline, said yesterday at a transportation industry conference sponsored by Lehman Brothers in New York that the airline was considering closing or cutting back two money-losing hubs, one serving Raleigh and Durham, N.C., and the other at San Jose, Calif.
May Return Airbuses
The hub at Raleigh-Durham was opened only five years ago and has a large new terminal with 25 gates.
It cost American about $120 million to set up.
San Jose was opened four years ago at a cost of $50 million and has 15 gates.
Both were opened with fanfare at a time when most airlines were pushing to expand as quickly as possible.


Howe Makes His First Appearance of 1993
The cameras were rolling and Steve Howe was clowning for them.
While a crew from "60 Minutes" was taping the relief pitcher at the Yankee Fan Festival yesterday, he was waving anxious fans over to his booth, joking with children and scribbling his autograph and No. 57 on baseball cards, pennants and caps for three hours at the Javits Center.
In his first appearance in New York since an arbitrator ruled almost three months ago that his lifetime suspension from baseball for pleading guilty to a Federal drug charge should be rescinded, Howe looked fit and happy.
He also appeared capable of throwing his blazing fastball by tomorrow, which had to hearten the Yankees, who will need him if they are to challenge in the American League East this season.
Void in Bullpen
After Howe was indefinitely suspended from baseball for a seventh time last June, the Yankees crumbled.
Without Howe, who was 3-0 with 6 saves and a 2.45 earned run average, Manager Buck Showalter did not have a reliable left-hander.
The Yankees lost 59 of the 107 games the reliever missed.
Now Howe is back.


Kenneth H. Lundmark, Lawyer, 76
Kenneth H. Lundmark, the retired chief lawyer of Conrail, died on Thursday at a nursing home in Nashua, N.H., at the age of 76.
He was a resident of Stamford, Conn.
His family said heart failure was the cause.


Cutting the Costs of Going to College
Two years of community college saved about $29,000 for Adrian Tubero in her quest for a bachelor's degree.
How They Do It, Page 34.


California Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Marian W. Freedman, Civic Leader, 86
Marian W. Freedman, a civic leader in central New Jersey, died on Tuesday at the Applewood Estates retirement community in Freehold Township.
A resident of Freehold, she was 86.
A graduate of the Middlesex General Hospital School of Nursing, Mrs.
Freedman was a volunteer in World War II, teaching nurses' aides at the Jersey Shore Medical Center and the Monmouth Medical Center.
She was a past member of the Central Jersey Blood Bank, the Monmouth County Mental Health Board, the Monmouth County Juvenile Conference Committee and many other organizations.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Hillary Rodham Clinton's policy discussions with leaders of both parties referred incorrectly to Senator Bob Dole in some editions.
He leads the Senate minority, not the majority.


3 Reputed Gotti Associates Charged With Murder
In another blow against the crime family headed by the imprisoned John Gotti, three men identified by prosecutors as a captain and two soldiers in the family were charged yesterday with participating in one of the murders Mr.
Gotti was convicted of.
The three were named in an indictment in Federal court in Brooklyn stemming from the slaying of Louis DiBono, a construction contractor and reputed Gambino family member whose bullet-riddled body was found in a World Trade Center parking garage in October 1990.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
New York City's unemployment rate soared to 13.4 percent in January, the highest level in 25 years.
Officials said the data were evidence that the city's anemic job recovery had stalled.  [ Page 1. ]
The nation's unemployment rate eased two-tenths of a point in January, to 7.1 percent, but the rate dropped only because the number of people in the labor force fell.  [ 47. ]
Consumers borrowed heavily in December, driving up their debt at the fastest rate in nearly two years.  [ 34. ]
The Fed said it abandoned its tilt toward lower interest rates in December and adopted a neutral policy.  [ 35. ]  Companies
British Airways' chairman resigned amid other management changes taken to restore the airline's image after reports of a dirty tricks campaign against Virgin Atlantic Airways.  [ 35. ]
American Airlines may close two hubs and retire several planes in a retreat from its strategy to operate nationwide.  [ 35. ]
Analysts wonder whether Jack in the Box will be able to recover from the crisis created when two children died from infections linked to tainted food at some of its restaurants.  [ 35. ]
Barr Laboratories was ordered to recall batches of some of its medicines and stop distributing others until it studies its manufacturing process.
Its stock price dropped 30 percent.  [ 37. ]
Amgen shares plummeted after earnings were released and analysts lowered their recommendations on the stock.  [ 37. ]
Microsoft was not disciplined by the F.T.C. over accusations of unfair competition in personal computer software.  [ 37. ]
Adidas formed a new U.S. subsidiary to be headed by the founder of an Oregon sports marketing company it bought.  [ 37. ]
Long Island Lighting's plan to sell some of its rights to pollute to another company -- a feature of the Clean Air Act of 1990 -- has raised fears that the law will not help improve air quality.  [ 1. ]
A $105 million jury verdict against General Motors, holding it liable for the death of a teen-ager in one of its trucks said to be prone to catch fire in accidents, has renewed calls to curb punitive damage awards.  [ 6. ] International
Interest rate cuts by Japan and Germany were welcomed by American officials, many of whom want the two nations to do more to stimulate their languishing economies.  [ 34. ] Markets
The Dow hit a second straight record high, rising 25.40 points to 3,310.03.
Its gain for the week was the third-best ever.  [ 35. ]
Treasury bond prices advanced, with the yield on the 30-year bond falling to 7.15 percent.  [ 44. ]
Lumber futures took a wild ride, with the March contract up the $10 limit while subsequent months closed $10 lower.  [ 46. ]
The dollar finished stronger against the German mark but mixed against other major currencies.
Gold was mostly lower.  [ 46. ]  Your Money
A home office presents pitfalls in taking tax deductions unless strict Internal Revenue Service guidelines are followed.  [ 33. ]
Many stock newsletters will now boast of good "long term" performance because the effects of the October 1987 crash are gone from their five-year track records.  [ 33. ]
The few extra dollars that began showing up in weekly paychecks after withholding taxes were cut last year means that refunds will be skimpier and that some will owe taxes.  [ 33. ]
Many recipients of employer-provided tuition benefits do not know the benefits are taxable.
They may get a rude shock when they find out how the tuition was handled for tax purposes.  [ 34. ]
A college student cut her education costs in half by going to a community college for two years before transferring.  [ 34. ]


Clinton Ponders, Then Drops Plan to Cut Science Projects
Eager to find more ways to cut the Federal budget, the Clinton Administration today considered scrapping two of the nation's premier science projects, the space station and the superconducting super collider, but decided to keep them for now after encountering intense opposition.
Administration officials said the White House still was considering scaling back one or both projects to save money.


Judge's Hiring of Illegal Alien in 80's Did Not Violate Immigration Law
Judge Kimba M. Wood was right when she said tonight that she violated no law in hiring an illegal immigrant to work as her baby sitter in March 1986.
Congress outlawed the practice eight months later.
On Nov. 6, 1986, President Ronald Reagan signed the Immigration Reform and Control Act, which prohibits the hiring of illegal aliens.


Medco Containment Service (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Why Teachers Must Maintain Seniority Rules
To the Editor:
Your report on a new teacher assignment for a class at Public School 145 in Manhattan (news article, Jan. 19) demonstrates the hardship of changing teachers in midyear, but you wrongly place the blame for the disruption on the teachers' contract.


Nets Are Close To Signing Bernard King
The Nets are on the verge of signing Bernard King to a contract for the remainder of the season, his lawyer, Bob Woolf, said last night.
The contract, which would be for the National Basketball Association's minimum salary of $140,000, should be done, according to a very optimistic Woolf, "by the end of the weekend." The Nets, hoping to use King as instant offense off the bench, next play tomorrow night against the Bucks in Milwaukee.


Observer; Laundry And Debt
I am trying to worry about the deficit but make no headway.
Driving shirts to the laundry, I am worrying about the American laundry situation when a radio yakmeister insinuates himself into my ear.
He is worrying about the deficit.
He asks people to phone him.
I think he is in Seattle, but may be wrong because the laundry problem has my mind by the throat.


Mattel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Courts Grow Wary on Science Testimony
To the Editor:
The Supreme Court has agreed to review Daubert v.
Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals (front page, Jan. 2), which turns on what kind of scientific evidence is admissible in Federal courts.
"Scientific Evidence Doesn't Tell Whole Story," a Jan. 29 letter from Margaret G. Farrell, responds by attacking me and my book "Galileo's Revenge: Junk Science in the Courtroom." Your article is accurate; the letter is not.


G.M. Verdict Intensifies Debate on Jury Awards
The mammoth judgment handed down by a Georgia jury on Thursday against the General Motors Corporation has already renewed calls to curb runaway verdicts by placing caps on punitive damage awards.
But opponents of such limits maintain that the verdict is justified, because of both the message it sends and the near-certainty that in the end only a small fraction of that money will ever enter the plaintiffs' pockets.
Federal Legislation Blocked
The verdict shows how far a jury will go when it is convinced that a giant corporation has recklessly or deceitfully endangered lives for a long time.
Of the $105.2 million the jury awarded Thomas and Elaine Moseley, whose 17-year-old son died when his 1985 GMC Sierra pickup burst into flames in a collission, $101 million was in punitive damages.


Engelhard Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Classical Music in Review
Philadelphia Orchestra Carnegie Hall


Review/Opera; A Comic-Book 'Magic Flute' From Peter Hall
If "Die Zauberflote" has "the metabolism of a child," as the director Sir Peter Hall has said, how active should that metabolism be?
How much fantasy and whimsy and invention can Mozart's opera take?
There are limits, as Mr.
Hall's new production at the Los Angeles Music Center Opera proves.
This was a "Magic Flute" in which Sarastro, with a head of purple hair and a gold medallion on his chest, looked as though he had just stepped out of a Marvel Comics strip.
His evil servant Monostatos was padded to look like a Sumo wrestler, with elephantine thighs and a quivering belly that made him waddle.
And every scene involved the sliding about of a giant pyramid, split in half (to represent a world gone awry) and illuminated with projections that included an array of naked women and paisley swirls.


Fisk Not Through Yet
CARLTON FISK, 45, signed last night to play his 22d major league season, the Chicago White Sox said.
Terms of the catcher's one-year contract were not available.
Injuries limited him to 188 times at bat last season, and he batted .229 with 3 homers and 21 runs batted in.
He ranks second behind BOB BOONE in career games behind the plate. (AP)


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMERIHOST PROPERTIES INC., Des Plaines, Ill., said its Amerihost Management Inc. unit had contracted to manage the Beach Resort in Daytona Beach, Fla.


Corrections
A roll-call listing of the votes by Senators from the New York area on the family leave bill misstated the vote of Senator Christopher J. Dodd of Connecticut in some editions yesterday.
He voted for it.


Big Weeks
Euphoria reigned in the only two weeks that the Dow Jones industrial average gained more points than it did this week.
In the last full week of 1991, the Federal Reserve cut interest rates so decisively that a strong recovery seemed imminent.
And in January 1991, allied troops swept into Iraq.


Pyongyang Balks on Nuclear Visits
North Korea has rebuffed a request to allow international inspectors to visit two sites suspected of contributing to its nuclear arms program.
The International Atomic Energy Agency is right to insist on the inspections and Pyongyang would be wise to invite the inspectors.
By dispelling doubts about its nuclear intentions, the North can open the way to wider political and economic ties.
The inspections are needed to clear up discrepancies between what Pyongyang told the I.A.E.A. about its production of plutonium and what the agency discovered in its recent inspections.
By searching through the North's nuclear plants and waste, inspectors can determine how long its research reactors have been running and how much plutonium they could have produced.
That would help determine whether the discrepancy is a minor one or whether the North has produced enough nuclear material for bomb-making.


Cremation Ashes in 16 Urns Found in Lot
It was a bizarre discovery even to hardened investigators accustomed to grisly sights: 16 urns containing the ashes of dead people dating back to 1958 scattered among weeds, broken bottles, car parts and old furniture in a vacant lot.
"I don't know how the ashes of someone cremated in 1958 ends up like this," said Sgt.
Michael McFarlane, who works in the patrol division of the 40th Precinct in the Mott Haven section of the Bronx.
"It's bizarre. I can tell this is going to be one of those investigations that you don't know where it's going to turn."


CHRONICLE
Gov.
MARIO M. CUOMO had the ball and was driving toward the basket Wednesday evening in a tournament at the State Police Academy when, he said, "I felt a little pop, like a little balloon exploding."
"It was as though someone had hit me with a BB gun or a hard-thrown handball in my left leg," he said.


Real Help for the Everglades
In her hearings for confirmation as Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, Carol Browner spoke of the need for a "new era of communication" between environmentalists and business.
As one of her first moves, she has a rare opportunity to work to the benefit of the environment and the economy, resolving a dispute with which she is keenly familiar.
As head of the Florida Department of Environmental Regulation, she led the state into an agreement with the U.S.
Justice Department aimed at preserving the Everglades, one of the world's great wetlands.
The pact between Florida and the Federal Government called for protecting the area by reducing phosphorus runoff from farmland.
The phosphorus, thought to harm native plant species, comes from soil, fertilizer, sugar mills, rain and irrigation water.


Trenton to Vote on Bill Easing Semiautomatic Ban
Faced with uncertain prospects of overriding Gov.
Jim Florio's veto of a bill last year that would have ended a ban on all but two semiautomatic weapons, the New Jersey Senate is expected to vote Tuesday on an alternative that would allow some 200,000 current owners to keep their guns.
The legislation, which was introduced by Senator Gerald Cardinale, would exempt or "grandfather" people who bought semiautomatic guns before the ban, while retaining a ban on future sales and possession.


Former Tenant Advisory Chief Admits Misusing $32,000
The former top tenant adviser to the New York City Housing Authority pleaded guilty in Federal Court in Manhattan yesterday to embezzling $32,000 in a case that law-enforcement officials said the authority's former chairwoman, Laura D. Blackburne, tried to keep quiet.
The defendant, Violet B. Hamilton, the former chairwoman of the authority's Tenant Advisory Council, admitted she billed the authority for official transportation that actually was for her personal use.


Despite New Rate Limits, Health Insurers Stay Put
Although there were dire predictions last year that commercial insurance companies would cancel health coverage for thousands of small businesses and individuals if New York State changed its rules governing rates, the outlook now seems far less grim.
At least nine large commercial insurance companies have notified their small-group customers that they are eliminating their traditional fee-for-service coverage.
But at least a dozen other companies are preparing to live with the new rules.
And the state's five Blue Cross plans and 31 health maintenance organizations plan to push hard to recruit individuals and small group members.


Albany G.O.P. Grappling With Gay Rights
The State Senate's decision on what action to take on a gay-rights bill is shaping up as a particularly difficult test for the Republican majority -- one that could define the direction of party politics in New York through the 1994 elections.
Both supporters and opponents of the bill believe the choice confronting 35 Republican senators reflects the divisions in the national party after the loss of the White House.


Bridge
The North American College Bridge Contest, played in November, was won by Sam Ehrlichman of Flushing, Queens, and Dave Seligman of Falls Church, Va.
They represented Swarthmore College and headed a field of 180 pairs on 24 campuses.
The winners were two of 10 players to receive $500 scholarships toward college tuition, awarded by the American Contract Bridge League's Educational Foundation.
All the players played the same deals, with match-point scoring predetermined by play in an earlier event.
On the diagramed deal it was normal for North-South to reach four spades, and the official commentator pointed out that three no-trump would be easy and might make an overtrick.


Now, a Coach. Next, a Running Game.
The Jets, under a mandate by General Manager Dick Steinberg to revive the ground game and lessen the pressure on quarterback Browning Nagle, hired Johnny Roland yesterday as the running backs coach.
Roland, a former running back, was the National Football League rookie of the year in 1966 and had been the Bears' running backs coach for the last 10 seasons.
Chicago's staff was scattered with the dismissal of Coach Mike Ditka.


S.I. Official Gives Support To Fernandez
In a significant shift as the Board of Education prepared to vote on the fate of Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez, he received support from an unexpected quarter yesterday when the Staten Island Borough President praised his leadership.
Borough President Guy V. Molinari also warned that to remove Mr.
Fernandez now would throw the schools into "directionless chaos."


Hortense Freezer Kobrin, Volunteer, 87
Hortense Freezer Kobrin, who was a leader in charitable causes, died on Thursday while on vacation in Miami Beach.
She was 87 and lived in Manhattan.
Her family said heart failure was the cause of death.


Tyson's 'Dear Riddick' Letter
Mike Tyson, the imprisoned former heavyweight champion who is from the same Brooklyn neighborhood as Riddick Bowe, sent Bowe a message yesterday, and it wasn't to wish him good luck.
In comments dictated on the telephone to his assistant trainer, Rory Holloway, and then released to the news media, Tyson called Bowe "obese." Tyson, who grew up in Brownsville and now is serving a prison term in Indiana after a rape conviction, learned that Bowe weighed in at 243 pounds for tonight's heavyweight title fight with Michael Dokes.
That was eight pounds more than Bowe weighed when he defeated Evander Holyfield for the title Nov. 13.


Central La. Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Century Telephone Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Jew, a Woman and Still a Scientist
AS befits a scientist, Salome Waelsch has cultivated meticulous habits.
Each morning she rises at exactly 5:55 in her Morningside Heights apartment, makes breakfast, reads the paper and walks to meet colleagues who drive her to her laboratory at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx.
At 8:30 she begins checking to see which of her mutant mice gave birth overnight.
She is 85 years old, far older than the science of molecular genetics that she pursues.
For 50 years she has been examining mouse embryos and for longer than that she has held to the rigors of a life in science in the face first of prejudices against Jews in Germany and always against women everywhere.


Dokes May Not Be Ready, but He Is Well Rested
Michael Dokes said he needed some rest, so he spent most of yesterday afternoon lying in bed, watching game shows on television.
Was it a dress rehearsal?
If tonight's heavyweight championship goes as anticipated, Dokes will be lying on his back before the first round ends at Madison Square Garden.
It could be over that quickly.


Joseph L. Mankiewicz, Literate Skeptic of the Cinema, Dies at 83
Joseph L. Mankiewicz, a writer, director and producer who was one of Hollywood's most literate and intelligent film makers, died yesterday at Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
He was 83 and lived in Bedford, N.Y.
Robert Vincent, a friend of the family, said the cause of death was heart failure.


F.B.I. Director Overrules Decision To Put Off Disciplining of Agents
The Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, William S. Sessions, today abruptly overruled a decision by senior aides to delay action against agents accused of violating bureau rules that the Director was found to have broken.
Mr.
Sessions's decision followed a fiery hourlong meeting he held this morning with his senior aides, who pleaded with him to allow their initial decision to stand.
They hoped to quell rising dissension over the perception that a double standard of discipline exists at the F.B.I., with lower standards for the Director than for agents.


A Touch of the Irish, a Dash of the Algerian
There had been a stirring rendition of the Irish national anthem, and then Eamonn Coghlan, a 40-year-old runner from Dublin with ageless springs for legs, had set a new standard in the masters indoor mile.
Now, Noureddine Morceli of Algeria, the best middle-distance racer in the world, was being passed three-quarters of the way into the Wanamaker Mile by another Irishman with his own emerald dreams at the Chemical Bank Millrose Games.


When a Home Also Shelters a Business
Steven Dworman, a 38-year-old West Los Angeles consultant and publisher of the Infomercial Marketing Report, started his business from his home in 1986.
It is still being run there, even though half of his house is now being used as an office.
"We weren't sure how successful it was going to be and wanted to keep the overhead as low as possible," he said.
"But our home-based business has been effective."


Classical Music in Review
Gloria Cheng Pianist Weill Recital Hall


Clinton Signs His First Legislation


American Barrick Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


No Headline
I have fulfilled every legal requirement with respect to the employment of our babysitter.
Nevertheless, and after further consultations, I have concluded that in the current political environment, proceeding further with the possibility of my nomination would be inappropriate. -- KIMBA WOOD, withdrawing as a prospect for Attorney General.  [ 8:5. ]


Union Prepares For Long Strike At Coal Mines
Along the mountainous roads that wind through southern West Virginia's coal fields, miners in camouflage strike gear built shacks of weathered wood panels at a half-dozen mine entrances here today in grim anticipation of a long strike against the nation's largest coal producer.
"It's going to be our home away from home until we get a contract," one member of the United Mine Workers said.
He paused while tacking hand-lettered "On Strike" signs to spindly gray trees and pointed to the makeshift shelter near the Harris 1 mine.
He and his fellow strikers plan to outfit it with a heater, citizen- and police-band radios and maybe even a television set, he said.


Israel Lists Arabs Who May, but Don't, Return
Israel today released a list of 101 deported Palestinians in southern Lebanon who it says may return immediately to Israeli-occupied territories as part of an agreement that it reached this week with the Clinton Administration.
The names were handed to the International Committee of the Red Cross, and also relayed to families of the 101 men through town and village leaders in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.


RECORD BRIEF
Ciconia: Instrumental and Vocal Works
Ensemble Project Ars Nova. New Albion NA048; CD.


Kathleen Purcell and Gregory Rush
Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick J. Purcell of Weston, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kathleen Bridget Purcell to Gregory Rush, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Rush of Pembroke, N.H.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Purcell, 21, is a senior at Dartmouth College.
Her father is the president and publisher of The Boston Herald.


Ashe, a Champion in Sport and Life
From the somber tolling of a bell at Madison Square Garden to a moment of saddened silence at a tennis tournament in San Francisco and in many private, heart-wrenching moments in between, Arthur Ashe was mourned last night as a champion of quiet dignity and fierce determination whose greatest victories were off-court triumphs of character.
In New York, where the news of Ashe's death circulated through the crowd gathered at Madison Square Garden for last night's heavyweight bout between Riddick Bowe and Michael Dokes, the bell was rung 10 times in Ashe's memory before the fight.


No Tee-Off Time for the '96 Games in Atlanta
Juan Antonio Samaranch, the president of the International Olympic Committee, yesterday praised the Atlanta organizers' decision not to pursue golf for the 1996 Summer Olympics and also expressed no worries about the Atlanta group's financial status.
The Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games withdrew a petition to add golf as an Olympic sport several days after Samaranch told an Italian newspaper that it may be too late to add a new sport to the 1996 Summer Games.
The withdrawal, Samaranch said, "was a surprise, a quick decision. But wise."


Obsessed


Hilary Frisby, Kees Bruggen
Hilary Ruth Frisby, a daughter of Mark Dryer of Huntington, L.I., and Anne Dryer of Sayville, L.I., was married yesterday to Cornelius Frederick Willem Bruggen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cornelius T. A. Bruggen of Bussum, the Netherlands.
Marjolaine Warmink-DeBloois, a civil registrar, performed the ceremony in the city hall of Naarden, the Netherlands.
Mrs.
Bruggen, 31, is the associate director of international public relations in Amsterdam for KPMG Peat Marwick, the accounting concern.
She graduated magna cum laude from Mary Washington College.
Her father is a senior patent counsel at Pfizer Inc., the pharmaceutical company in New York.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Airline Pillows
To the Editor: I was surprised to read in the Practical Traveler ("That Airline Pillow May Be Well Traveled," by Betsy Wade, Jan. 3) the information given by the airline spokesmen concerning the pillows and headsets on the planes.
I believe Dr.
Gary M. Kohn, the medical director of United Airlines, is incorrect when he states that disease or infections caused by contact with either headsets or headrest covers or pillows cannot be transmitted in a normal environment.


JAN. 31-FEB. 6: Out of the Park; Baseball Owners Censure Their Own
Marge Schott, the owner of the Cincinnati Reds, may not sit in the stands at Riverfront Stadium and root and do the Wave for her team.
Instead she will be required to complete a "multicultural training program." This edict came Wednesday from major league baseball's ruling executive council.
The group, which represents owners, also suspended Mrs.
Schott from operations of the club for a year and fined her the maximum -- $25,000 -- all as punishment for her use of racially insensitive language.
Mrs.
Schott had called some of her players "dumb, lazy niggers," made references to "Jew bastards" and used the pejorative term "Japs," among other remarks.
Her language came to light a year ago in a deposition from a suit by a dismissed employee.


Mormon Tradition and Zeal Inspire Growth in Northeast
The Andersons and the Jacksons, two families with 16 children between them, sat near each other at the Mormon congregation here for seven years.
But one day last fall, their meeting house was split in two and they now belong to different congregations under the same roof.
Rather than a sign of malaise or dissension, the splitting was a sign of health.
When a Mormon congregation grows too big -- usually larger than 600 families -- it divides and members go where church leaders tell them.
It is often hardest for the children, the families say, but they follow their parents and the laws of their church.


Outdoor Events In Spring
The longest of the 43 bridges that are part of the Florida Keys' Overseas Highway (U.S. 1) will be the site of the 12th Seven-Mile Bridge Run on April 17.
Applications should be made by early next month to take part in the event.
The bridge connects the town of Marathon to the Mid Keys and Lower Keys.
The run, organized by the Marathon Runners' Club, benefits local youth groups.
Information, (305) 743-8513.


Handguns Aren't Sexy
To the Editor:
I take offense at your focus for 1993.
For the first Sunday in the new year, you placed the possibility of death, filled with style, at our feet ("Arming the Armani Set," Jan. 3).


A Rape Conviction And a Controversy
The news in this usually quiet town is full of big-city headlines: rape, harassment and abuse, and all in a housing complex for the elderly and disabled.
The furor surrounds the rape of a 60-year-old woman at the Edward K. Gill Apartments 18 months ago.
The authorities say that the building's janitor, a 39-year-old twice-convicted drug offender, had entered the woman's apartment in the middle of the night using his master key.


Dried Cherry Valentine Dishes, in Servings for Two
NEXT Sunday, Valentine's Day, offers an excuse to devise dishes and menus with foods that are heart-shaped, pink or red, sweet, prepared for two people and endowed with supposed aphrodisiac properties.
Some of those goals can be achieved by using dried cherries, an ingredient that is a fairly recent addition to the pantry.
Dried cherries are plumper than the typical raisins sold in boxes.
While not quite as sweet as raisins, they do add both a note of color and a tart sweetness when substituted for raisins in a dish.
They can be used in savory recipes, with poultry, game meats and even fish like salmon.
A dried-cherry relish or vinegar-based chutney is excellent to accompany a pate or, for a luxurious Valentine dinner, some foie gras served cold or freshly sauteed.


Disney World
To the Editor: Having spent the past Thanksgiving week at Dixie Landings, my wife and I were pleased to read "Days and Nights in Disney World." We agree with nearly all of your observations.
However, we do take issue with one assertion: "At Disney World, a guest at any hotel can use the facilities of any other hotel."


Q and A
Late-Paying Shareholder Question: I am the secretary of a co-op, and for the last five years we have had one homeowner who has never paid his maintenance on time.
He falls behind three months, and our attorney sues for back maintenance.
Then he pays up, including late charges and attorney fees.


For '93, Sunbird Takes a Smaller Peck
EXCEPT when you're talking about computers or that house that you're trying to unload, the notion that something will have a lower price in 1993 than it did in years past is a novel one indeed.
It is particularly odd, as we of the sticker-shock generation know, when applied to automobiles.
But it is a happy truth in the case of the new Sunbird, Pontiac's sporty subcompact.


CRIME
How long can Jon A. Jackson remain the best-kept secret of hard-boiled crime fiction connoisseurs?
With HIT ON THE HOUSE (Atlantic Monthly, $20) just out, and earlier career adventures of Sgt.
Fang Mulheisen about to be reissued, the gravelly voice of this dark, droll chronicler of the Detroit underworld is bound to make itself heard.
Mr.
Jackson's latest bedtime story finds Fang in a typical moral quandary, torn between his inconvenient love for the wife of a minor mobster and his assignment to track down the hit man who has been wiping out some of the city's most powerful gang leaders.
While Fang's attention is distracted by these tender matters, rubout artists like Hal Good (the mob's "ace, the stopper, the hammerman") and Joe Service (the brilliant freelance "finder" who finds "whatever needs finding") roam free, putting the scare into such major crime bosses as Frosty Tupman and the Fat Man.


THE MORNING-AFTER PILL
In your article, a gynecologist states: "I don't like the name 'morning after.' It implies regret, or that you made a decision you didn't intend. . . ." Well, isn't this exactly what has happened?
If the woman didn't regret what had happened, she wouldn't want the morning-after pill, would she?
KRISTEN CORELLI
South Salem, N.Y.


Some Dos and Don'ts for a Clinton Public-Works Policy
TWO years ago, the Harvard professor who is President Clinton's top economic adviser, Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich, was calling for a Marshall Plan's worth of government investment in worker training and infrastructure -- $2 trillion in the 1990's to fire up the nation's productivity growth and get the economy moving again.
During the campaign, Mr.
Clinton promised to funnel $20 billion a year into the nation's infrastructure, everything from roads and bridges to water treatment plants, recycling plants, high-speed trains and an electronic "superhighway" to convey huge amounts of data.


SURFACING
REVIVALS --
White tennis balls:
From Ralph Lauren.
Wrong for professional tournaments, but all right for fashion victims.
Distinguished by the Polo insignia, the balls are also available in blue, red, green and canary yellow ($15 a can).
FAME --
Celebrity Tattoos:
A new magazine that focuses on celebrity worship from a "skin art" perspective.
It features the famous and tattooed, (Cher is on the cover), as well as ordinary people who have famous faces inked onto their bodies.
TECHNOLOGY --
Microwavable hair remover:
There are versions of both Zip and Nair hot-wax treatments that can be prepared more easily in the microwave than on the stove.
The process of removing the wax, though, remains the same.


Otto Fenn, 79, Dies; Photographed Fashion
Otto Fenn, a fashion photographer and landmarks preservationist in Sag Harbor, L.I., died on Friday at his home there.
He was 79.
Heart failure was the cause of death, said John Krug, his companion for 34 years.


Results Plus
TENNIS Navratilova Beats Graf Martina Navratilova beat Steffi Graf, 4-6, 6-3, 6-3, yesterday to advance to the final of the Pan Pacific Open in Yokohama, Japan, where she will play Larisa Savchenko-Neiland of Latvia.
Savchenko-Neiland, ranked 74th, upset fourth-seeded Jana Novotna of the Czech Republic, 7-5, 6-3, in the semifinals at the Yokohama Arena, southwest of Tokyo.
The match between the No. 3-seeded Navratilova and the No. 1-seeded Graf had the feel of a final as the two struggled for 1 1/2 hours.
Graf, hitting ground strokes from the baseline, played serve and volley consistently.
Navratilova broke serve in the fifth game of the third set with a forehand passing shot at 40-30.
Leading by 40-15 in the ninth game, Navratilova came to the net for the winning shot.
Navratilova is 9-8 in her career against Graf.
Savchenko-Neiland, 1-7 against Navratilova, had an easy time against Novotna.  (AP)


Corrections
An air fare listing in the Travel Watch column on Jan. 24 included an outdated entry under the heading "Discount Fare." The $228 round-trip fare offered by United Airlines between New York and Miami expired on Jan. 21.
In addition, an entry for travel between New York and Zurich appeared under the wrong heading.
The round-trip fare of $1,086 should have been listed under "Unrestricted Fare"; the airline does not offer a discount fare of $398.


The Best Congress Our Money Can Buy
To the Editor:
"No Delays for Public Trust" (editorial, Jan. 24), which calls on President Clinton to make good his promise to back tough campaign finance reform, wisely rejects the argument that Americans wouldn't spend taxpayer dollars on politicians.
Of course, they may not want to, but they will do so when they realize what a bargain democratically financed elections would be.


New Orleans' Patchwork Boulevard of Furnishings
IF Magazine Street is not the quirkiest, most diverse shopping district in the country, it is surely a contender, a torrent of jewelry, antiques, pottery, clothing, silver, rugs, books, art galleries and cafes mixed with every other imaginable kind of wares, much of it displayed in small shops inside high-ceilinged 19th-century cottages.
Visitors seem most drawn to the shops that sell furnishings, antiques to postmodern.
The street stretches six miles from downtown New Orleans and the gentrified Warehouse District past the Garden District, the Irish Channel, and upscale, uptown New Orleans.
The shops are clustered in clumps of two or three blocks interspersed with residences, restaurants, coffee shops, supermarkets and drugstores.
The pattern is rather like a string of European villages -- appealing to shoppers who feel they've been malled to death.
The diversions include the street's architecture, fried oysters at Casamento's, 4330 Magazine, (504) 895-9761, an immaculately tiled cafe where lunch with a beer can be bought for under $10, and Joey K's Restaurant and Bar, 3001 Magazine, (504) 891-0997.
Joey K's is a neighborhood hangout that specializes in home-style cooking of the red beans and rice genre, $4.25 for a serving with smoked sausage.


Making a Difference; An Insurance Consortium Goes Beyond the Boys' Club
EIGHT minority insurance brokers, trying to overcome the truism of "it's who you know," which often keeps them from sharing in big contracts, are using "what they know" to compete against larger and more established brokerages for business once out of their reach.
Their organization, the New York Consortium of Minority Brokers, offers experience in brokerage and consulting, risk management, account administration, safety and loss control, among other areas.


Talking: Fire Detectors; Regular Checks Advisable
MAKING a regular fire-safety check is a task most homeowners overlook, according to fire-prevention experts.
Yet of all the hazards likely to wipe out a home, fire is at the top of the list.
Officials at the Federal Fire Administration estimate that residential fires caused more than $4.5 billion in property damage in 1991, the most recent year for which figures are available.
Much of the problem stems from the casual attitude of many homeowners, which is surprising, since most American homes are made of wood.
Most families don't even own an escape ladder (available for $30 and up at any home improvement store).


Tere Ramirez and Frank Ostroff
Mr. and Mrs.
Nelson Ramirez Mas of Guaynabo, P.R., have announced the engagement of their daughter Tere Ramirez Becerra to Frank Ostroff, a son of Irving Ostroff of Wayne, Pa., and the late Estelle M. Ostroff.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Ramirez is a sleepwear designer for the Christian Dior division of Carole Hochman Designs Inc. in New York.
She graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology.


FIRST HAT IN RING FOR MEXICO'S VOTE
Not five years after his quixotic campaign to lead Mexico threatened the grip of the powerful ruling party, Cuauhtemoc Cardenas has set out again after the Presidency with a better organization and somewhat more equitable rules in his favor but perhaps greater odds against him.
In announcing his candidacy on Friday in the 1994 presidential race, Mr.
Cardenas seemed to reach beyond his embattled leftist party to something like the movement that propelled the opposition in 1988 to its strongest electoral showing in 60 years.


But Can Arkansas Relate to Queens?
To the Editor:
David Balkan of Rockwood Park, Queens ("Mr. Chicken's Lean Pay Scales," Letters, Jan. 31) commented on the $8 per hour average pay (including fringe benefits) said to be paid by Don Tyson to his workers in Arkansas.


Q and A
Paris Apartment Rentals
Q.
Can you direct me to sources for renting a one-bedroom apartment for a week in Paris? -- Michael J. Bader, San Francisco


Don't Dump Those Used Computers
To the Editor:
Regarding "New Technology on One Hand Is Clutter on Another" (The Executive Computer, Jan. 3).
For most small nonprofit organizations, a two- or three-year-old computer system would be a tremendous boon.
And computer makers and dealers would do well to take note that pass-along machines increase the installed user base and build the total market.


Works on Paper Come Out of Hiding at the Met
A year or two ago, the metropolitan Museum went into the treasure hunt business.
The hunt is a model of its kind, in that everyone gets a prize of one sort or another.
We can't take the prize home, but it will become part of our being, never to be forgotten.
How to get started?
Nothing could be easier.
You walk up the main staircase.
At the top, you make a 90-degree turn to the left, and there before you is a long, narrow space, lately remodeled, that is called the Robert Wood Johnson Jr.
Gallery.
The arrival of this gallery signals a radical and welcome change in regard to what is sometimes thought of as a secretive, not to say clandestine, operation.


Baby Sitters' Boss Tells All
DEAR I.R.S.:
In all this flap over Zoe Baird and her illegal Peruvian couple, a few facts about what we parents owe the I.R.S. got clarified.
It turns out -- gosh, I really had no idea -- that I should have been filing a tax return for anyone who works in my house who earns more than $50 a quarter.
That doesn't include what you call Independent Contractors -- recognizable because they bring their own tools.
So I can skip the plumber, the exterminator and the guys from the Christian Brothers Cleaning Company, who shampoo the wall-to-wall carpet. (Christian, as in Born Again. They take prayer breaks.) But there are a lot of others.
Not because I'm in the big time, domestically speaking.
I'm no Zoe Baird with two full-time helpers.
Rather, like lots of Americans, I use a patchwork of sitters.
I just can't quite get this child-care thing streamlined.


No Headline
For every man who has ever been confirmed to a Cabinet position there has never been the notion of disclosure of his housekeeping arrangement, much less how much time he spent with his child.
KATHLEEN BROWN,  California's State Treasurer.  [ 22:2. ]


Builder's Motto: 'Move On, Clean House'
Packing is a pleasure for Vernon and Beverly Toulson, or so they say.
It is certainly a familiar experience.
They have moved 21 times in the last 23 years.
The most recent move was from Vero Beach, Fla., to Delaware, where they lived temporarily in Mr.
Toulson's parents' house before moving six months later into a new house in this high-end residential suburb half a dozen miles northwest of Wilmington.
They sold the house in Vero Beach after having lived in it a year and now their 6,400-square-foot French-country-style house here is on the market for $950,000.


THE COMPANY HE KEEPS
As a longtime Democrat and weekend breakfast eater, I believe the characterization of George Bush's breakfast ("oatmeal with a Butterfinger bar crumbled on top") as "disgusting" is a trifle excessive.
Actually, this combination is kind of interesting, ben'njerrywise.
Let's see now, is that coarsely, finely or gently crumbled?
RICHARD PANTANO
Manchester, N.H.


When Black Soldiers Were Hanged: a War's Footnote
As the role of black soldiers is documented in the history of World War II, J. Robert Lilly is trying to fathom one more distinction of that American fighting man: the fact that almost four times as many black soldiers as whites were executed in Europe after military courts-martial, even though blacks made up less than 10 percent of the troops.
"This needs to be sorted out and made right," Professor Lilly said in a recent interview at Northern Kentucky University, where he teaches sociology and criminology.
The professor, who is white, stumbled on to what he suspects is a little-known chapter of American racism in doing research in England on prison punishment.


A Trace of Pesticide, an Accepted Risk
CAROL M. BROWNER, the new Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, took a deep breath last week and publicly identified 35 pesticides commonly found in processed food that cause cancer in animals.
To her relief, the nation didn't panic.
Then Ms.
Browner took another breath and announced she would ask environmentalists and the farm industry to consider changes in Federal law that would safeguard public health without banning the 35 chemicals.


Sheryl L. Breslaw, Douglas T. Magid
Dr. and Mrs.
Jerome S. Breslaw of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Sheryl Lynn Breslaw to Douglas Todd Magid, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Maxwell J. Magid of Dix Hills, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Breslaw, 27, graduated from Syracuse University.
She is a kindergarten teacher at the Horace Mann School for Nursery Years in New York.
Her father, an internist and gastroenterologist, is an associate professor of medicine at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York.
Her mother, Madeline S. Breslaw, is the office manager for Dr.
Breslaw's private medical practice.


Some Win by Just a Nose, But A.P. Indy Gets a Yes!
A.P.
Indy, son of Seattle Slew and grandson of Secretariat, carried on the family tradition today when he was voted North America's Horse of the Year by a landslide over Best Pal and Sky Classic.
The election completed a sweep of honors for the colt, who was named the best 3-year-old horse last Monday when the 1992 Eclipse Awards were announced.
Late Friday night, when the sealed envelope was opened at the close of the annual awards dinner in Los Angeles, the name A.P.
Indy appeared on 237 of the 277 Horse of the Year ballots cast by racing officials and writers across the country for the sport's ultimate honor.


Filipinos Bury Some of the Victims of Volcano Eruption


Data Update
*4*BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
Dec. 92
Nov. 92
Dec. 91
New York
1,889
2,101
1,691
New Jersey
1,094
1,128
1,377
Connecticut
639
788
491
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.05
8.21
8.77
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.21
5.28
5.99
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.92
8.06
8.62
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.03
5.11
5.81
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.94
8.08
8.61
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.76
4.82
5.88
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.11
8.33
8.91
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.81
5.81
6.54
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.41
3.47
4.14
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.53
7.49
8.25
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


THE COMPANY HE KEEPS
Many of us voted for Billary because Al Gore was on the ticket.
If they (Billary) lose sight of this, they will witness "the incredible shrinking Presidency" in 1996.
PATRICIA HOWLEY
Bloomfield, N.J.


Admiring Beauty That's Only Skin Deep
FEBRUARY is the month when nearly everyone catches cabin fever.
The cure?
A long walk on a fine day.
During one of these walks, the birch trees were discovered.
Oh, they had been growing in the park for many years.
But they were never really seen until just a few days ago.
They had no leaves to block the view; they just stood there with their long, high trunks glistening white in the sunshine.
This group of white, or paper, birch trees was mature enough so that their trunks had that clean chalky quality.
The trees had several stems, which is a birch trait.
The view was dramatic.
And the tree count?
Maybe seven or more.


Aspin, in Europe, Seeks a New Balkan Accord
Seeking to reach accord on a new Balkan policy, Defense Secretary Les Aspin met today with Western defense ministers to discuss how to proceed in dealing with the former Yugoslavia.
Officials declined to give details about the options that the United States is favoring over an agreement negotiated by former Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance and Lord Owen, a former British Foreign Secretary who represents the European Community.
Clinton Administration officials said this week that they were setting aside for now the idea of using military force and were preparing an alternative diplomatic plan.
Officials also said they were considering naming a negotiator.


Clinton's Social Security Test: Selling Sacrifice to the Elderly
The new ethos of Washington is supposed to be "shared sacrifice," but constituent groups are already mounting pre-emptive defenses.
Probably none will be as formidable as Social Security recipients.
Selling sacrifice to the elderly, and the politicians who represent them, may be the first crucial test of President Clinton's deficit-reduction plan.


Lawsuit May Fix Rights on Dead Sea Scrolls
The heated dispute over publication of the Dead Sea Scrolls landed in court here this week as hearings began on a copyright lawsuit brought by an Israeli scholar.
The scholar, Dr.
Elisha Qimron of Ben-Gurion University in Beersheba, is seeking $200,000 in damages from the publisher of a book that included, without permission or credit, all sides agree, his deciphering of one of the most important of the 2,000-year-old manuscripts.


No Headline
THE whirligigs, weather vanes and bird decoys on display at the Donald E. Palmer Museum at the Springfield Library have their roots in the folk art of the past, yet they express timely themes -- often with humor.
Three woodcarvers, Janice Fenimore, Gary Giberson and Ken Olsen, studied the traditional techniques and subjects of their predecessors and then improvised their own solutions.
Visitors can expect to find the unexpected.


Secretive


Mutual Funds; Yes, a Manager Does Matter
HOW relevant is the manager -- celebrity or not -- to a mutual fund's performance?
Very, according to a recent study by CDA/Wiesenberger that contradicts the fund industry's assertion that managers are unimportant parts of the equation.
The study looked at 34 general equity growth funds over 10 years, measuring each one's performance relative to its peer group before and after the manager changed.
The relative performance figures were then averaged using 1.0 as the benchmark, so a fund that did 10 percent better than its group before or after a manager change would score 1.10.


A G.M. Loss Could Spur Health Reform
GENERAL MOTORS will report the largest annual loss in the history of corporate America this week -- about $23 billion, or around $3,000 for each car and truck G.M. sold last year.
When G.M. signaled that loss last week, it drew a big yawn on Wall Street.
That is because most of the loss -- $22.2 billion -- comes from a new accounting rule, the kind of thing that causes eyes to glaze over.
Much more attention was paid to the fall in interest rates around the world, a fact that caused stock indexes to spurt to records.


Rights Groups Attack German Plan on Refugees
Human rights groups are protesting plans by the German Government to reject people seeking asylum from countries where it says there is no political persecution.
The groups say that contrary to the Government's assurances, political repression is practiced in several of these countries.


Newcomers And an Ace
LAST Monday at a little past 8 P.M., the temperature was falling below 20 degrees, and Kitty Carlisle Hart, dressed in a voluminous pink satiny ball gown designed by her friend Pauline Trigere, rushed down the steps of the Plaza Hotel.
Mrs.
Hart was in the middle of one of her two-function evenings.
As a socialite, former television personality, arts ambassador and impeccably pleasant person, she is continually asked to make speeches and present awards.
Her first duty on Monday, at the Mother Hale Awards for Caring, had been to present an award to Laurie Tisch Sussman, who founded the Children's Museum of Manhattan.


Carter Wasn't At Top of Boxing
To the Sports Editor:
Ira Berkow's "Justice Delayed Is Bitter Justice for Carter" (The Times, Jan. 24) incorrectly states that Rubin Carter, the former middleweight contender, lost a controversial split decision to the reigning champion, Joey Giardello.
There was no controversy over that decision as I remember it nor was it a split decision.
Giardello gave Carter a boxing lesson that night in Philadelphia's Convention Hall to easily win a 15-round unanimous decision.


White Tablecloths Replace a Pub Setting
THE corner of Glen Head Road and Magnolia Place in Glen Head has come up in the world.
The Knotty Pine, a pub, has been replaced by the Northshore Cafe.
The old corner bar and grill is now a white-tablecloth restaurant with candlelight and fresh flowers, and its wood-paneled walls have been painted in coral.
The barroom, where neighborhood regulars once congregated, now boasts a baby grand piano and a wood mirror-backed Art Deco bar.


Janet Owens, Gregory Floor
Janet Weeks Owens, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George F. B. Owens Jr. of Pittsburgh, was married yesterday to Gregory William Floor, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William A. Floor of Camarillo, Calif.
The Rev.
Penny Vieregge, a minister of the Church of Divine Immortality, performed the ceremony at the Nunemaker Chapel at Westminster College in Salt Lake City.
Mrs.
Owens-Floor, 39, is an owner of Wellness Resources, a massage therapy service in Salt Lake City.
She and her husband graduated from Westminster.
Her father, now retired, was a partner and a director in Pittsburgh of Johnson &amp; Higgins, a New York insurance brokerage.


Croatia Offers A Grim Precedent For Bosnian Peace
CROATIA'S offensive to expel Serbian irregulars from its territory is now two weeks old and President Franjo Tudjman has won some victories that look good -- at least on paper.
On the ground, they are less convincing, but that is not the whole story.
The fighting offers an instant lesson in the indomitable power of psychology in warfare.
And that, in turn, offers new reason to doubt the chances for lasting success of the peace plan being offered by the United Nations and the European Community for neighboring Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Not a Gangster
To the Editor:
In his review of Barry Singer's "Black and Blue: The Life and Lyrics of Andy Razaf" (Jan. 3), Gene Lees implies that both Owney Madden and my great-uncle Connie Immerman were gangsters.
However, in Mr.
Singer's text it is made clear that, albeit within the context of the exploitative environment of the Harlem nightclubs, there was a significant difference between the two men: "Owney Madden was a businessman thug out to rape the new Harlem vogue. . . . Connie Immerman was a Harlem native who'd realized his dream of owning a Harlem nightclub."  MARIAN LOLLY LEWIS San Francisco


George W. Dudley, 41, Artist and Card Maker
George W. Dudley Jr., an artist who founded a greeting card company and was active in gay and AIDS causes, died on Wednesday at Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 41 and resided in Manhattan.
He died of complications of AIDS, said Norbert Sinski, his companion.


From Giorgio Armani, By Way of Marrakesh
The designer introduces his new perfume at a benefit for Women in Need, 9 West 57th Street, Feb. 4.


Douglas Resumes an Uphill Climb
Later, even just seven days later, Sherman Douglas, the shortest Boston Celtic player, one whose face often appears a mask of intensity and even gravity, could smile about the incident, which had been so painful at the time.
Someone in the news media had referred to him as Shoeless Sherm after he had seemingly lost his composure during a game, removing his shoes, then deciding to leave the team for a week.
His teammates, upon the return of their 6-foot, 185-pound guard, made jokes to ease the tension:


Leo the Lion Flunked Latin
To the Editor:
Jill Andresky Fraser's article "What's in a Symbol? Not the Statue of Liberty"  [ Jan. 17 ]  was interesting but not on the mark regarding M-G-M's logo.
The lordly lion was, perhaps, an expression of nostalgia for Columbia.
But the words "ars gratia artis" were not, as Ms.
Fraser says, "remembered from Latin class." They could not have been.


'Past Imperfect'
To the Editor:
In his review of "Past Imperfect: French Intellectuals, 1944-1956," by Tony Judt (Jan. 10), John Sturrock discusses Mr.
Judt's attempt to pin on Jean-Paul Sartre responsibility for his "endorsement of Communist malpractice."


Business Diary/January 31 - February 5
THE ECONOMY Data, Data Everywhere -- but Not Many Jobs in Sight


Looking for an Attorney General: The Search; In Looking for Attorney General, Clinton Now Wants a Sure Thing
Amid finger-pointing over their second failed effort at choosing an Attorney General, White House officials said today that they hoped to announce a new nominee quickly, possibly in the next two days.
President Clinton is now seeking an easily confirmable nominee, the officials said, and will not insist that the job go to a woman.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Jane Haney; Seeking Help (and Respect) for Truckers
JANE HANEY was recently elected to a two-year term as chairwoman of the Motor Transport Association of Connecticut, the first woman to head the state's trucking trade organization, one of the five largest in the nation, with 1,350 members.
She has been on the association's board for nearly 20 years.
Mrs.
Haney, who is 58 years old and a native of Bristol, owns C. C. Lounsbury, a trucking company in Willimantic founded by her father in 1924 to haul utility poles for the telephone company.
She took over the company when her father died in 1961, and today she has five trucks and employs five drivers to haul poles and lumber around the region.


Looking for an Attorney General: The Reaction; Women Are Frustrated By Failed Nominations
Women across the country yesterday reacted with immense frustration at what they perceived as a growing double standard for men and women being considered for the Clinton Cabinet.
Many said they understood and agreed with Mr.
Clinton's decision to accept the withdrawal of his first nominee for Attorney General, Zoe Baird, after it was learned that she had broken the law by employing an illegal alien.
But they said they were astounded that Kimba M. Wood, a strong candidate who had not violated the law, should also be forced out of competition because she once hired an illegal alien to care for her young son.
That hiring was legal, since it occurred before immigration laws were tightened, and Judge Wood insisted in a statement Friday that she "fulfilled every legal requirement" regarding that employee.


A Doll's Spell Brings a Night Of Sweet Dreams
This doll will really be magic if it keeps fearful little ones in their own beds at night.
Handmade by Sira Ann, this charmingly naive doll, intended to keep nightmares at bay, is made of homely cotton print fabric, with feathers for hair and buttons for eyes.
It's filled with sweet-smelling rosemary, sage and, according to the handwritten hangtag, secrets from the Catalan mountains, in Spain.
Slip it under a pillow, and dream on.
The price is $20, at Magickal Childe.


Sound Bytes; She Puts Up the Money for the Software Dreams
ANN WINBLAD, daughter of a high school football coach in rural Minnesota, recalls that her first toy was a stopwatch.
It apparently set her up for a career marked by rapid achievement and precise timing.
She became a computer programmer.
In 1976, she started a software company, Open Systems, then sold it several years later "for a pile of money." She moved to California; worked as a consultant for Microsoft, Apple and I.B.M.; wrote a book on object-oriented programming, and co-founded Hummer Winblad Venture Partners in Emeryville, Calif.
With her partner, John Hummer, a former professional basketball player ("which makes our average height six feet," the diminutive Ms. Winblad notes), she is one of the leading venture capitalists in the computer software industry.


Where's the Lit. in Lit. Crit.?
DOUBLE AGENT
The Critic and Society. By Morris Dickstein. 220 pp. New York: Oxford University Press.


Commercial Property: Deals With Foreigners; A Wrong Number, or Color, Can Terminate Talks
SINCE nearly a third of the 350 or so corporate tenants in the World Trade Center's four buildings are Asian, you'd think there would be a smattering of them in Building No. 4.
There's nary a one.
Why?


Two-Way Traffic on Victory Lap
The track and field community came together Friday night for an exuberant show at Madison Square Garden, but it left the Chemical Bank Millrose Games deeply divided about where it must go from here.
Clearly, the sport is still vibrant, and viable.
There were 18,176 fans present, and that sort of crowd is certain to come again, perhaps as soon as Feb. 26 for the USA/Mobil Championships.
The efforts Friday night of Eamonn Coghlan, who set a new masters record in the indoor mile, 4 minutes 5.95 seconds, and of Nourredine Morceli, who held off Marcus O'Sullivan in the Wanamaker Mile to win in 3:55.06, were wildly applauded by all.


Ogle Builds on Lead With Fancy Hitting
Hitting acrobatic shots and carrying a lean and hungry look, Australian Brett Ogle extended his lead today after three rounds of the A.T.&amp;T.
Pebble Beach National Pro-Am.
The 28-year-old Ogle, a rookie on the PGA Tour, shot a three-under-par 69 at Spyglass Hill for a 54-hole total of 11 under par 205, two shots ahead of Billy Ray Brown and three better than Dan Forsman, Trevor Dodds and Gil Morgan.


Elocution In 3 Minutes Or Thereabout
Extemporaneous remarks aren't Elizabeth Tilberis's style.
So the editor in chief of Harper's Bazaar retained the services of a speech consultant to prepare for her part of the Council of Fashion Designers of America awards ceremony last Monday.
Her preparation included three main elements:
*
Visualization.
"You go through presentations as much as you can, both verbally and mentally," said Laurie Chock of Chock &amp; Goldberg, who first worked with her last fall on a speech to the American Society of Magazine Editors.


O'Rourke Declares The County Tiptop
EVERY political speech comes with its own music.
The State of the County address that Andrew P. O'Rourke, the County Executive, delivered last week resonated with the renewed vigor of a leader undeterred by his failure to become a Federal judge and poised to make a bid for a third four-year term as Westchester's chief executive.
Democrats quickly dismissed Mr.
O'Rourke's listing of accomplishments as campaign rhetoric, calling several of his proposed study commissions attempts to sidetrack rather than solve problems and accusing the County Executive of omitting from his speech several of the county's most difficult problems.


LAUGHING OFF THE RECESSION
In "Laughing Off the Recession" (Jan. 3), Hilary de Vries correctly points out that Diane English has been charged with union-busting for firing a union crew hired to shoot the pilot of "Love and War." She says that English's company, Shukovsky English Entertainment, took this action because of a disagreement with the International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees over benefits and working conditions, including health insurance and camera staffing.
Quoting English's husband, Joel Shukovsky, the article leaves the mistaken impression that the alliance was unwilling to agree to meet the company's perfectly reasonable staffing requests.
"You don't need four guys to run a camera," says Shukovsky.
"You can do it with one person with the right equipment -- and do you know how much coffee and paper cups you could save that way?"


JAN. 31-FEB. 6: Tabloid City; News Raids Post! Post Is Shocked! And So On!
"It's War!" So thundered The New York Post last week in outrage over the body-snatching of its top editorial team by The Daily News, its archrival in the New York City tabloid punch-out.
When the Post's editor and headline whiz, Lou Colasuonno, along with its managing editor and metropolitan editor and the columnist Mike McAlary bolted for The News, the Post's new buyer, Steven Hoffenberg, branded the new owner of The News, Mortimer B. Zuckerman, "a vulture" bent on "gunning down" the competition.
Mr.
Zuckerman, a real estate developer and magazine publisher, denied any malign intent and portrayed his recruiting as a tribute to The Post.
To stem The Post's talent hemorrhage -- which by later in the week included a second columnist and a gossip writer -- Mr.
Hoffenberg fired back with a lawsuit that disclosed that Mr.
McAlary was already being paid $275,000 a year by The Post with a $25,000 raise in store, hardly a reason to quit.


Easy Ways to Put Wainscoting in Place
WAINSCOTING, wood paneling that covers walls from floor level to about three feet, can add charm and a look of warmth to a room or stairway while protecting the walls.
Kits containing precut wainscot materials are available.
Installation usually requires trimming pieces to size with a saw and nailing the wainscoting into place, but amateurs with moderate carpentry skills should not find the job too difficult.


Allison Holtzman, Charles Garcia
Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Holtzman of Boca Raton, Fla., and Kingston, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Allison Holtzman, to Charles Patrick Garcia, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Carlos Garcia of Daytona Beach, Fla.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Holtzman, 28, is a sales manager for the Gruen Watch Company in New York.
She graduated from American University.
Her father is the chief executive of Gruen and the chairman of Jewelcor Inc., a jewelry catalogue and retail chain based in Wilkes Barre, Pa.


Celebrating Fashion
Council of Fashion Designers of America Awards, New York State Theater, Feb. 1.


Finding Profit in Loss: For Abrams, $350,000
The spoils may go to the victor, but in last year's bitter campaign for the Senate from New York, the surplus went to the loser.
After complaining for weeks that Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato was outspending him 2 to 1, Attorney General Robert Abrams wound up his losing campaign with $355,384 in the bank, while Mr.
D'Amato is $349,155 in debt, according to their latest financial reports.


As AIDS Money Is Parceled Out, Political Questions
IN his Presidential campaign, Bill Clinton promised to increase spending for research on AIDS.
Scientists will hold him to his word, for they agree that the limits on worthwhile research are fiscal, not scientific.
More money, they say, would significantly increase the likelihood of finding a vaccine to prevent AIDS or drugs to repel its lethal assault on the human immune system.


Easy Ways to Put Wainscoting in Place
WAINSCOTING, wood paneling that covers walls from floor level to about three feet, can add charm and a look of warmth to a room or stairway while protecting the walls.
Kits containing precut wainscot materials are available.
Installation usually requires trimming pieces to size with a saw and nailing the wainscoting into place, but amateurs with moderate carpentry skills should not find the job too difficult.


Laura V. Farthing, David Berthiaume
Dr. and Mrs.
Winfield H. Farthing of Ashton, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Laura Vaught Farthing, to David Alan Berthiaume, a son of Adelaida F. Conover of Basking Ridge, N.J., and the late Paul W. Berthiaume.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Farthing is an associate at the Washington law firm of Sidley &amp; Austin.
She graduated from the University of Virginia.
She and her fiance received law degrees from Georgetown University.


Foreign Affairs; Sarajevo, Dead and Alive
Sarajevo delenda est.
Sarajevo is destroyed, but not its people.
More than half its 560,000 peacetime citizens still outlive the steel and concrete structures built to survive them.
People, in mysterious unity with the "crump, crump" of occasional mortars and "pings" of sniper fire, move along noontime sidewalks as if late to imaginary offices.
Sprinkled among them, clicking along in high heels and short, tight black skirts, are young women, slim, hair meticulously coiffed.
Heads twist appreciatively.


Spike's Gang
Spike Lee's movies are probably best known for their incendiary subject matter.
But they are also notable for having helped propel the careers of many fledgling actors.
"If you're a talented person," says Mr.
Lee, "all you need is the opportunity." In addition to helping Samuel L. Jackson achieve prominence, Mr.
Lee has given a number of entertainers their big break.
Halle Berry -- Before: Played a model in the ABC sitcom "Living Dolls." For Mr.
Lee: Played Vivian, a crack addict, in "Jungle Fever." After: Starred opposite Eddie Murphy in "Boomerang" and Bruce Willis in "The Last Boy Scout"; plays Alex Haley's grandmother in the forthcoming CBS mini-series "Queen," beginning next Sunday.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
124.35
124.65
125.28
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6591
1.6115
1.5584
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2616
1.2679
1.1778
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.4460
1.4865
1.8390
U.S. Dollar
per British Pound
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Update; Attention Shoppers: No More Parking Lot Tax Snoopers
When New York State's Commissioner of Taxation and Finance sent employees to northern New Jersey in December to write down the license plate numbers of New Yorkers shopping there and then sent them letters, he said the purpose was "educating people about their tax responsibility."
But many outraged consumers saw the snooping as a Big Brother-like invasion of privacy.
Surprised but chastened, Commissioner James W. Wetzler now is calling the mission "an experiment that hasn't worked." He promises not to do it again.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Inspiration at the Lab
A CAREER of tediously examining tissue cultures may help future generations, but in the here-and-now life of Sydell Lamb, it meant too much solitude.
"I needed some inspiration." said Ms.
Lamb, who is a biology associate at the Brookhaven National Laboratory in Upton.
"I wanted to get out my locked room and be with people."
On a lunch break, inspiration came to her.
"Hallelujah," sang voices from near the meatball heroes.
"Amen," she heard but a few feet from the diet sodas.
Ms.
Lamb joined the flock.
She became a member of the Brookhaven National Laboratory Gospel Choir.


Laura Douglas, Bart Peterson
Laura Simpson Douglas, the daughter of Barbara Gasser of North Attleboro, Mass., and Percy S. Douglas of New York, was married yesterday to Bart Allen Peterson, the son of Margaret and Richard Peterson of Springfield, Mo.
The Rev.
Winston B. Charles performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Peterson, 29, is the research coordinator in New York for Genesis Entertainment, a television-program syndicatorin Los Angeles.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is a senior partner in the New Producers Organization, a theatrical production firm in New York.
Her mother is the office manager for Micro Inc., a computer software manufacturer in Walpole, Mass.
The bride is the granddaughter of Katherine S. Douglas of New York and the late Percy L. Douglas, a chairman of the Otis Elevator Company.


Amy Jedlicka, Reed Krakoff
Mitsuko T. Jedlicka of Danby, Vt., and Frank E. Jedlicka of Boston have announced the engagement of their daughter, Amy Jedlicka, to Reed Douglas Krakoff, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Krakoff of Boston.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Jedlicka is an associate at the New York law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett.
She graduated magna cum laude from Yale University and received a law degree from New York University.
Her father is a vice president and a managing partner of Loomis, Sayles &amp; Company, an investment advisory firm in Boston.
Her mother is a counselor at the Stratton Mountain School in Stratton Mountain, Vt.


A 4-Year Death Sentence, and Counting
Four years.
It's been four years and I'm still here.
Strange how that feels simultaneously like a victory and a defeat.
Why a victory?


Gaudy News, With New Twists
Come off it.
The coverage of sensational Long Island stories demonstrates the baseness of tabloid journalism, not any deficiencies on Long Island.
Everyone, and I mean everyone, knows that the tabloid press prospers from stories about the odd, the deranged and the promiscuous.
In at least one of the stories you cite, opportunists involved in the story welcomed press coverage.
Heavy coverage makes rich book and film deals.
Finally, the story stayed "hot" because both the opportunists and the tabloids believed it was in their best interest to keep the story alive.
Hang in there, Long Island.
Tabloid elements will go away.
There will be a wretched development elsewhere, and they will move on.


Haitians March From City Hall to the United Nations


Where, Oh Where, Is Roar of the Athletes?
Now that Marge Schott has been punished for rapping without a record contract, it's time to scan her lyrics.
What exactly was it about that phrase "million-dollar niggers" that struck such a nerve?
Henry Aaron provided a clue when he called Schott's punishment -- a yearlong suspension, $25,000 fine and the kind of multicultural course everyone should take -- inadequate, "a message that we're still living in a captivity world."


Recent Sales
Bergenfield  $150,000
40 Queen Street
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 24-year-old split level; 1-car garage, c/a, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,700.
Jackson  $139,900
164-A4 Frankapple Gate Road
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 4-year-old ranch; fireplace, full basement, c/a; taxes $3,685.
Mahwah  $375,000
27 Malcolm Place  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 4-year-old contemporary; family room with fireplace, 2-car garage, cathedral ceiling; taxes $4,820.
Old Tappan  $1.16 million
79 Ogle Road
5-bedroom, 5 1/2-bath, 4-year-old contemporary; 3-car garage, fireplace, pool, exercise room; taxes $11,828.
Park Ridge  $177,000
77 Fifth Street 2-bedroom, 1-bath, 45-year-old colonial; deck, 1-car garage, country kitchen; taxes $2,719.
River Vale  $365,000
537 Baylor Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 22-year-old colonial; fireplace, 2-car garage, patio, c/a; taxes $6,872.
OTHER AREAS South Salem, N.Y.  $220,000
49 Smith Ridge Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 12-year-old contemporary; kitchen, pantry, computer room, stone fireplace, deck, 3.3 acres; taxes $6,444.
Branford, Conn.  $160,000
12 Midwood Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 39-year-old Cape Cod; skylights, new kitchen, in-ground pool, 0.5acre; taxes $2,719.
Bay Shore, L.I.  $370,000
35 South Ocean Avenue  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 100-year-old colonial; fireplace, deck, 1-bedroom, 1-bath guest cottage, 10 boat slips, 1.5 acres; taxes $10,200.


Don't Chip at Deficit With Social Security
To the Editor:
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan is right to oppose the proposal for eliminating this year's Social Security cost of living adjustment as a component of the deficit-reducing package (front page, Jan. 31).


Andrea Marcovicci, Daniel Reichert
THE torch singer Andrea Marcovicci, whose four-month engagement in the Oak Room at the Algonquin Hotel ended last weekend, describes herself as a "feminist hopeless romantic."
She never expected to marry, merely to have her heart broken often, as happens to most of the men and women she sings about.
Then, four years ago, she met Daniel Reichert, an actor.


Admiring Beauty That's Only Skin Deep
FEBRUARY is the month when nearly everyone catches cabin fever.
The cure?
A long walk on a fine day.
During one of these walks, the birch trees were discovered.
Oh, they had been growing in the park for many years.
But they were never really seen until just a few days ago.
They had no leaves to block the view; they just stood there with their long, high trunks glistening white in the sunshine.
This group of white, or paper, birch trees was mature enough so that their trunks had that clean chalky quality.
The trees had several stems, which is a birch trait.
The view was dramatic.
And the tree count?
Maybe seven or more.


Country With a Touch of Tasmania
Country music has long served as one of America's cultural emissaries, carrying the nation's rural myths around the globe.
But the meaning of "country" changes, depending on which country you're in.
Australian country fans, for example, made a corny traditionalist named Slim Dusty a national icon, while its aboriginal people play honky-tonk in the style of Lefty Frizell.
Simon Bonney, a latecomer to country music, knows this legacy intimately.
A 31-year-old native Australian, he's traveled from the rural landscape of his childhood to the dankest corners of Berlin's avant-garde underground and then to a new life in the American West.
During these restless years, his music has shifted from brutal, metallic noise to pastoral songcraft.
The sullen angst-rock of his group Crime and the City Solution first gained Mr.
Bonney fame in the international art-music scene.


Meandering in Burgundy by Barge
I HAD dreamed for so long of meandering aimlessly down some pastoral waterway in a small boat that I had a clear idea of how it would be.
There would be bicycles on board to fetch baguettes for breakfast.
There would be a deck for sunbathing, but also shade for reading.
There would be woods on both banks, with an occasional chateau looking on from afar.
And of course there would be tiny villages with exquisite restaurants and cheap local wine.
It was, need I say, a dream born of living in France.
Yet where better than France for a maiden voyage?
The country boasts 5,000 miles of navigable rivers and canals.
Away from cities and highways, it remains surprisingly empty.
Numerous companies rent pilot-yourself boats and barges to be picked up at "water stations" from Britanny to Alsace, from La Loire to Camargue.
And there is a fair chance of good weather in the summer.
The restaurants and wine can be taken for granted.


Hostages Mean Hard Lessons for Police
The bank holdup was over, and the patrol officers were told to look out for the gunmen trying to slip out of town in a light-colored Ford sedan.
Naturally, when the officers saw the car rounding a corner, they picked up the chase, their hearts racing, their fingers edging toward their revolvers.
What the officers did not know was that this was more than just an average getaway; the gunmen had dragged away four bank employees.
When the robbers jumped from the car, guns ablaze, the officers returned fire.


Anticipating Survival After General Motors
SQUARING his shoulders against the bitter wind that was coming off the Hudson River last week, Mayor Frank J. Rey looked down Beekman Avenue at the bustling village center.
"Everybody keeps asking me, 'Will there be life after G.M.?' " he said.
"Well, of course there will be," the Mayor said.
"And perhaps in the long run, it will be even better."


Growth of a New-Age Political Machine
In struggling neighborhoods from the northeast Bronx to southeast Queens, a new sort of political warlord is walking the ground that once belonged to the powerful Democratic county bosses in New York City.
And none is more successful than a Brooklyn Assemblyman who is scarcely known outside political circles or his own dilapidated Bushwick neighborhood: Vito J. Lopez.
Over 17 years of near obscurity, Mr.
Lopez has built the prototype of the modern inner-city political machine, one capable of generating thousands of votes and armies of volunteers, largely by exploiting its links to a social-service organization that Mr.
Lopez founded and that is now the largest employer and economic enterprise in his neighborhood.


Making Tennis History at Rumson
ON a fall day in 1875, United States Customs officials in New York must have scratched their heads in puzzlement when they unpacked a large crate containing a jumble of netting, sticks and iron bars that had just arrived on a ship from England.
The officials did not know what the apparatus was supposed to be called, and they did not know how much it was worth, so they just passed it through without imposing any duty fees.


Karen Lynn Sultz, Mitchell A. Kuflik
Mr. and Mrs.
Irving Sultz of Buffalo have announced the engagement of their daughter Karen Lynn Sultz to Mitchell Andrew Kuflik, the son of Sandra Kuflik-Peck of Roslyn, L.I., and the late Emanuel Kuflik.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Sultz, 29, is planning to join Nickelodeon, the children's cable television network, in New York next month as a writer in the on-air promotions department.
She graduated from Cornell University.


Conversations/Wael Abd al-Jawad; Constants of a Youth's Life in Gaza: A Stone and a Soldier to Throw At
WAEL ABD AL-JAWAD hurled his first stone at an Israeli soldier more than five years ago, when he was 12 years old.
The latest one was thrown this particular morning, although it didn't do much except bounce a few times in the dirt before landing ineffectually a few feet from a soldier's legs.
There were two soldiers standing guard this morning at the barbed-wire perimeter of an Israeli encampment placed in the heart of the Jabaliya refugee camp.


If We'd Let Drafted Gays Die for Their Country in Wartime; The Real, Real Men
To the Editor:
Having lived 50 female, straight, single years, I am all too aware that the more macho and homophobic a man is, the weaker and more insecure he is.
Real men who happen to be straight are not threatened by homosexuality.
Real men who happen to be gay should not have to feel threatened by heterosexuality.


Admiring Beauty That's Only Skin Deep
FEBRUARY is the month when nearly everyone catches cabin fever.
The cure?
A long walk on a fine day.
During one of these walks, the birch trees were discovered.
Oh, they had been growing in the park for many years.
But they were never really seen until just a few days ago.
They had no leaves to block the view; they just stood there with their long, high trunks glistening white in the sunshine.
This group of white, or paper, birch trees was mature enough so that their trunks had that clean chalky quality.
The trees had several stems, which is a birch trait.
The view was dramatic.
And the tree count?
Maybe seven or more.


As Ethnic Wars Multiply, U.S. Strives for a Policy
At the height of World War I, Woodrow Wilson argued that self-determination for Europe's myriad ethnic minorities, suddenly freed by the collapse of the Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman Empires, would provide stability in the postwar environment.
But even as the concept of self-determination was being born, President Wilson's own Secretary of State, Robert Lansing, worried that the idea might make the world more dangerous.
"Will it not breed discontent, disorder and rebellion?" Lansing wrote.
"The phrase is simply loaded with dynamite. It will raise hopes which can never be realized. It will, I fear, cost thousands of lives.


POSTINGS: Broadway Near Spring; Back to Beaux-Arts For a SoHo Eyesore
Down in the historic cast-iron district known as SoHo, not a few storefront facades might be characterized as miscast.
Take, for instance, the one at 546 Broadway, north of Spring Street and just a few steps south of Dean &amp; DeLuca.
The storefront, a combination of ugly metal, uglier signs and roll-down security gates that cover entrances to an electronics outlet and a wholesale clothing store, disfigures a building designated a landmark in 1973.
But the storefront it is a-changing.
The designer Guy Lindsay Kohn, in a plan approved by the Landmarks Preservation Commission, has created a new wood-and-glass street-level storefront to, in Mr.
Kohn's words, "try to fit in and also enhance the Beaux-Arts, cast-iron building itself."


There Is Life in Those Old Cars Yet
Dear Sir,
Your Jan. 17 column contained a letter from a gentleman who owns a 1974 Oldsmobile with dual air bags.
"After almost 20 years," the letter said, "G.M. refuses responsibility as to whether they will actually deploy." While it doesn't surprise me that General Motors would refuse to commit itself, I do think they could have pointed out to the owner that such old cars have been tested and the air bags work fine.


Emily Bickford, George Lansbury
Mr. and Mrs.
Nathaniel Judson Bickford of New York have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Emily Allen Bickford and George Winthrop Lansbury, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edgar Lansbury, also of New York.
Ms.
Bickford is a master's degree candidate in education at the Bank Street College of Education.
She and her fiance graduated from Skidmore College.


More Than Romance Colors 'Strictly Ballroom'
Festival audiences are notoriously undemanding, but a standing ovation?
That's what greeted "Strictly Ballroom," by the first-time film maker Baz Luhrmann, when it was screened last fall at the Toronto Film Festival.
So it's not the audience that worries the Australian director as he anticipates the film's opening in New York on Friday; it's the critics.
"Everywhere we go, there are critics who are absolutely, pathologically in love with the film," he says, "and then there are others who don't just dismiss it; they absolutely hate it, because it offends those things that they've come to believe define good film making. It doesn't have indicative symbols that this is art."
Janet Maslin, reviewing the film in The New York Times during the New York Film Festival last fall, called it "pure corn," adding, "but it's corn that has been overlaid with a buoyant veneer of spangles and marabou, and with a tireless sense of fun."


Attacks Make Journalism Perilous Work in Haiti
For Colson Dorme, a 26-year-old tape archivist at a local radio station here, a brief stint at street reporting may have proved the abortive ending to his dream of a career as a journalist, and perhaps to his life.
Pressed into service on Monday to cover the arrival of a special United Nations envoy sent to Haiti to arrange the deployment of hundreds of foreign human rights monitors here, Mr.
Dorme was last heard giving a distress call on the air as he was set upon by a crowd of Government supporters demonstrating against international efforts to restore democracy to this country.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: February 7, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor.
2
7
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A woman's death leads to an investigation involving the American-Japanese rivalry.
3
3
THE ROAD TO OMAHA, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $6.99.) A retired general and a lawyer scheme to take possession of Nebraska.
4
2
BLINDSIGHT, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $5.99.) A series of strange deaths of Manhattan yuppies.
5
29
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
6
1
BYGONES, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $5.99.) A dinner party attended by a woman, her former husband and their two grown children reveals family strains and love.
7
2
GUARDIAN ANGEL, by Sara Paretsky. (Dell, $5.99.) The private eye V. I. Warshawski probes a case involving pet dogs and Chicago scandals.
8 *
54
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A law firm is engaged in secret activities.
9
43
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during a trial.
10
3
LINE OF FIRE, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Jove, $5.99.) The fifth volume of the series "The Corps" tells of an attempt to rescue two marines in World War II.
11
4
BEYOND EDEN, by Catherine Coulter. (Onyx, $5.99.) A young woman trying to escape menaces from her past is aided by a private investigator.
12
6
MCNALLY'S SECRET, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.99.) A sleuth's pursuit of a stolen block of priceless stamps uncovers scandals.
13
20
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a farming family.
14
15
A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, by Norman Maclean. (Pocket, $4.99.) Three tales of the outdoors in western Montana.
15 *
1
DAMIA, by Anne McCaffrey. (Ace, $5.99.) A woman helps a besieged universe by exerting the power of love; a sequel to "The Rowan."
16 *
6
FUGITIVE NIGHTS, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Perigord/Bantam, $6.50.) Three people on the trail of a dangerous fugitive in Palm Springs.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
4
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a leading feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
2
15
THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF MALCOLM X, with the assistance of Alex Haley. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The life story of the black leader, originally published in 1965.
3
6
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Plume, $13.) The Vice President discusses factors affecting the environment and what must be done to save the earth.
4
483
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
5
17
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
6
90
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
7
18
ALIVE, by Piers Paul Read. (Avon, $5.99.) How some of the members of a rugby team survived a plane crash in the Andes in 1972.
8
1
WOMEN ON TOP, by Nancy Friday. (Pocket, $5.99.) The changes in social life during the past two decades that have affected the sexual fantasies of women.
9
76
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
10 *
14
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Vintage, $11.) Essays about the recent political and cultural scene.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
120
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
2
103
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
3
78
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
9
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1993. (World Almanac/Pharos, $7.95.) The latest edition of a standard reference work.
5
1
KEEPING THE LOVE YOU FIND, by Harville Hendrix. (Pocket, $12.) Ways to find and maintain a fulfilling relationship.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


The Game Plan According to Dan Reeves
Dan Reeves, who has just finished his first full week as the Giants' head coach, spoke for several hours with Samantha Stevenson for The New York Times last Sunday in Scottsdale, Ariz.
The conversation ranged over Reeves's childhood in Georgia, his college football career at South Carolina, his career as player and assistant coach with the Dallas Cowboys, his 12-season tenure as head coach of the Denver Broncos, whom he led to three Super Bowls, and his new job.
Here are some of the 49-year-old coach's comments: Early Days
I was raised six miles outside of Americus, Ga., on a 275-acre farm.
The early part of my life, all I can remember is working on the farm.
I have an older brother, Charles, an older sister, Joanne, and a younger brother, Butch.
When you're raised on a farm, you have an awful lot of chores.
We had hogs and cows, and we were also row-crop farmers: peanuts, cotton, corn, wheat and oats.
We had gardens and raised our own fruits and vegetables.
There was a lot of work, but it was a great way to be raised.
I would love to have raised my kids the same way, with those responsibilities.


THE COMPANY HE KEEPS
How refreshing to see that our new President and Vice President are men who are not afraid to express their humanity and speak honestly of life's experiences.


Saudi Woman Who Fled Predicts Crackdown
The Saudi woman just granted asylum in Canada because of her fears of persecution at home for her feminist beliefs predicts that there will be increasing repression of Saudi women because of the growing strength of religious fundamentalism in that country.
"The situation will become more and more unbearable, and then it will explode because the condition of repression of human beings can't continue forever," said the woman, who is 24 and has been in hiding for 21 months.
She spoke in a telephone interview from Montreal.


London Crossings
To the Editor: For years I have complained about how dangerous it can be for a pedestrian on the streets of New York.
However, as a recent trip to London reminded me, the Big Apple isn't the only city that can rattle a person's nerves.
At least New York has a traffic light on nearly every corner; London does not.
The result: not only does the American tourist in London have to keep reminding himself, as he steps into the street, that the traffic will be bearing down on him from the wrong side, but he also can't even count on a traffic light to tell him when to cross.
Any number of times, as I ventured off the curb, I narrowly avoided getting hit by an automobile that came sailing through the intersection. (To be fair, I must add that most drivers
did
slow down for me.)


Making a Difference; Is There A Doctor On the Set?
IT WAS probably inevitable that after putting himself through medical school by acting in films and commercials, Steven Arnold would find a way to use his medical practice to get himself back on the movie set.
Mr.
Arnold's four-year-old bicoastal medical service, Entertainment Medical Specialists Inc., provides makers of films and television shows with on-set doctors, risk and safety analysis, and insurance exams for cast members.
A subsidiary, Riskbusters, provides risk consulting for dangerous camera shots, such as those done underwater, in helicopters or involving fires.


Apartment Rentals Tightening
FUELED by a growing demand and a slowly shrinking supply, rents for New York City's unregulated apartments, which had declined significantly since the stock market crash in 1987, are starting to show signs of bottoming out.
To be sure, few brokers foresee a quick return to the days of the mid-80's when finding a decent rental -- at least by New York standards -- required a bribe called "key" money or a perusal of funeral notices for soon-to-be vacated apartments.


Our Original Sin in Vietnam
To the Editor:
In his review of Peter Macdonald's biography of Gen.
Vo Nguyen Giap (Jan. 10), Col.
Harry G. Summers Jr. states that "a 1954 Geneva conference divided Vietnam in two" and quotes the author of the book to the effect that the North Vietnamese could not accept "a capitalist Vietnamese half-brother state as their neighbor."


Gay Groups Regrouping For War on Military Ban
Despite weeks of pressuring Bill Clinton to end the ban on homosexuals in the military, gay-rights groups were caught off guard when the issue finally erupted two weeks ago, overwhelmed by the ferocity of opposition and slow to respond.
The confusion has set off anger and finger-pointing in gay political circles in Washington and elsewhere.
A new group, called the Campaign for Military Service, was hurriedly formed last week to take charge of the battle.


Most Favored Nation Is Not a Certainty
To the Editor:
"Why Asia-Pacific Holds the Cards" (Viewpoints, Jan. 17) suggests that if China is admitted to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade this year, the United States would be obligated to grant it most-favored-nation status.


Bowe Keeps Title in Just 2:19 of First Round
By the time Riddick Bowe had stopped throwing lefts and rights last night, Michael Dokes was barely standing.
The ropes kept him upright, but he was going down.
It was only a matter of when.
Riddick Bowe said later that he knew it would end like this.
He knew he would win his first defense of the heavyweight title he took from Evander Holyfield almost three months ago.
So he moved forward and punched.
Dokes bent forward, trying somehow to raise his arms.
But there was nothing left.


Keough Named a Scout
MATT KEOUGH, the Angels pitcher who was nearly killed when he was struck in the head with a foul ball during spring training last year, has been retained with the organization as a special assignment scout.


New &amp; Noteworthy
COWBOYS ARE MY WEAKNESS: Stories, by Pam Houston. (Washington Square/Pocket Books, $10.) Most of these stories take place in the wilder regions of the American West, where romance is as rough as the landscape.
But Pam Houston's heroines are never fools for love; though vulnerable, they depend on themselves.
"At her best, Ms. Houston snaps along in a sassy canter, her prose sharp and clean and full of sentences worth underlining," Sandra Scofield said here last year.
TWO NATIONS: Black and White, Separate, Hostile, Unequal, by Andrew Hacker. (Ballantine, $10.) Slavery continues to cast a pall over American race relations, argues Andrew Hacker.
Its legacy persists in the discriminatory treatment of black citizens by whites, which derives from the unspoken view that Africans could not have been enslaved if they were not somehow inferior.
Mr.
Hacker cites research and statistical evidence showing that blacks have never achieved full equality, and that indeed whites fear the consequences of allowing them to do so.
Last year our reviewer, Tom Wicker, praised Mr.
Hacker's "calm, analytical eye, his unblinking view of American history and his unwillingness to accept cant and 'common sense' as facts. Equally important is his compassion for the plight and sensibilities of those from whom white Americans ask 'an extra patience and perseverance' that the same whites 'have never required of themselves.' "


Public &amp; Private; Justice Is Blind
Three things to begin with:
The first is that I know Kimba Wood, which is my good fortune.
The second is that if I had to choose three words to describe her, they would be these: integrity, decency, and intelligence.


For African Art Treasures, a Place to Spread Out
The move last year by the Center for African Art from the Upper East Side to SoHo signified far more than a change of address.
When it opens on Saturday at 593 Broadway, the decade-old institution will occupy a site three times larger than its former home and will bear a new name: Museum for African Art.
"Our identity remains very much the same," said Susan Vogel, the founder and executive director.
"We've always been a museum, and our principle activity was and
is
art exhibitions."


Easy Ways to Put Wainscoting in Place
WAINSCOTING, wood paneling that covers walls from floor level to about three feet, can add charm and a look of warmth to a room or stairway while protecting the walls.
Kits containing precut wainscot materials are available.
Installation usually requires trimming pieces to size with a saw and nailing the wainscoting into place, but amateurs with moderate carpentry skills should not find the job too difficult.


Caroline Pasman, Richard Craig
Mr. and Mrs.
James S. Pasman Jr. of Pittsburgh have announced the engagement of their daughter Caroline Ellen Pasman to Richard Paul Craig, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul R. Craig of Lynnfield, Mass.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Pasman, 25, is an assistant account executive with Kamer/Singer &amp; Associates, a public relations agency in San Francisco.
She and her fiance graduated from Boston College.
Her father, now retired, was the chairman and chief executive of the Kaiser Aluminum and Chemical Corporation in Oakland, Calif.


Seasonal


A Primer On Pistols
To the Editor:
A hearty well done to Molly O'Neill.
"Arming the Armani Set" provided a revealing insight into yet another aspect of gun ownership: the elevation of handguns to "status symbol." Nevertheless, a couple of errors, perhaps typos, managed to creep into the text.


William P. du Bois Is Dead at 76; Author and Illustrator for Children
William Pene du Bois, the author and illustrator of popular children's books known for both whimsy and serious themes, died on Friday at a hospital in Nice, France, where he lived.
He was 76.
His death came after a stroke, his family said.


Dried Cherry Valentine Dishes, in Servings for Two
NEXT Sunday, Valentine's Day, offers an excuse to devise dishes and menus with foods that are heart-shaped, pink or red, sweet, prepared for two people and endowed with supposed aphrodisiac properties.
Some of those goals can be achieved by using dried cherries, an ingredient that is a fairly recent addition to the pantry.
Dried cherries are plumper than the typical raisins sold in boxes.
While not quite as sweet as raisins, they do add both a note of color and a tart sweetness when substituted for raisins in a dish.
They can be used in savory recipes, with poultry, game meats and even fish like salmon.
A dried-cherry relish or vinegar-based chutney is excellent to accompany a pate or, for a luxurious Valentine dinner, some foie gras served cold or freshly sauteed.


Disney World
To the Editor: Having visited Disney World on numerous occasions, most recently in November, we read with interest Nancy Sharkey's account.
While the article was generally fair, we take exception to her casual dismissal of Discovery Island as "unexceptional" and not worth the bother.


If We'd Let Drafted Gays Die for Their Country in Wartime
To the Editor:
Re "Military People Split Over Ban on Homosexuals" (news article, Jan. 28): One argument in favor of President Clinton's stand on lifting the ban on homosexuals in the military appears to have been overlooked.
There can be little doubt that in the event of a universal draft to meet a major war or threat of war, the opposition to accepting homosexuals into the services would quickly evaporate.
The argument would then be: Why should homosexuals be spared the risks and sacrifices of the rest of our young men and women?


THE MORNING-AFTER PILL
Although it is important that the morning-after pill is accessible to all, it is no substitute for RU-486 ("The Morning-After Pill: A Well-Kept Secret," by Jan Hoffman, Jan. 10.).
Commmonly, one month may elapse before a woman realizes that her birth-control method failed her.
If RU-486 were available in this country, women would have a nonsurgical, probably less expensive method of pregnancy termination long after the 72-hour deadline of morning-after pills.
FRAN OBEID New York State National Abortion Rights Action League New York, N.Y.


Dancers Give Youngsters Some Pointers on the Art
THE audience watched the grand pas de deux in silence, gasping as the ballerina leapt up to sit on her partner's shoulder.
Then came an excited "oooh" as he lifted her high overhead, her long legs gracefully outstretched.
Four dancers, including three members of the New York City Ballet and a former member of the Dutch National Ballet, visited Jefferson Elementary School here recently to demonstrate the art form and talk about its history.


Can't Get Enough Of Brooke Astor
To the Editor:
I was out of the country from Nov. 12 to Dec. 12, so I missed some Styles issues, but it seems that every one I've seen has had a picture of Brooke Astor.
Is it a rule?
SAM ABRAMS Rochester


Karen Kesmodel, Mason Brown
Mr. and Mrs.
John Martin Kesmodel of Darien, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Karen Ann Kesmodel to Mason Barnard Brown, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Meredith Mason Brown of New York.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Kesmodel, 25, is a marketing research coordinator for The Los Angeles Times.
She and her fiance graduated from Duke University.
Her father is a business operations manager for I.B.M.-Latin America in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Her mother, Carol Kesmodel, is a data systems manager at Pepperidge Farms Inc., the baking company in Norwalk, Conn.


JAN. 31-FEB. 6: 7,000 Stop Work; Coal Miners Strike; The Issue Is Union Mines
The strike that broke out in the coal fields last week began with all the signs of another of the industry's drawn-out brawls.
Negotiations on a new contract collapsed before the United Mine Workers and the 12 corporate members of the Bituminous Coal Operators' Association could even agree on who should come to the table.
With each side refusing the other's offer of a 60-day extension of the old contract's deadline, more than 7,000 miners in Virginia, West Virginia, Indiana and Illinois stopped work at all 22 mines of the Peabody Holding Company of St.
Louis, the country's biggest coal mining business.
Richard L. Trumka, president of the union, said he might soon take on several others.


Corrections
A picture caption with the Long Island Journal column last Sunday, about Antonino Provenzano, a translator and the owner of Anthony's Hair Salon, located his shop incorrectly.
It is at 445 Park Avenue in New York City, not in West Hempstead.


QE2 Face Lift Is Completed
The Queen Elizabeth 2, which is on the Pacific Ocean-Orient leg of a world cruise that ends May 11, will open a new health club and spa today as the last in a series of major renovations.
The liner underwent a face lift costing $8 million while it was in drydock in Hamburg last year after hitting a reef off Massachusetts.
When the work was completed the ship crossed the Atlantic to New York, went on a Carribean cruise and started the round-the-world voyage on Jan. 3.


Who Pulled the Big Five's Plug?
"You don't care 'bout the water till the well runs dry," goes an old blues refrain.
Classical-music fans who may have missed this bit of folk wisdom are discovering it for themselves, now that one of the luxuries of the radio landscape -- weekly national concert broadcasts of the best American orchestras -- is fast disappearing.
In the last five years, corporations pinched by the recession have been withdrawing sponsorship for these series, which cost up to $1 million a year to produce.
And many classical-radio programmers have come to see the concerts as a nuisance rather than a boon.
These broadcasts are important for many reasons.
They offer newcomers to classical music large samplings of repertory in unvarnished performances and a concert context.
They allow more devoted listeners to track the progress and programming of orchestras around the country, and with concert tickets selling for as much as $55, they give radio eavesdroppers something for nothing.
They introduce new conductors and soloists.
And they include new works, giving listeners quick access to pieces likely to cause a stir and granting a moment in the sun to scores that may never be commercially recorded.


West Rejoices As Snowfalls Set a Record
Record snowfalls on many Western ski slopes have skiers jubilant and hold promise for a longer than usual season.
The ski resorts around Lake Tahoe in California and Nevada have been inundated.
But the heavy snowfalls have also resulted in some difficulties: roads from Salt Lake City to the slopes have been closed at times, and some roofs in Durango, in southwest Colorado, have collapsed under the snow.
Ski operators in the West say they hope to remain open for one to three weeks longer than usual, but for just how long depends on how many skiers show up.
"Having surplus snow is one thing, but it's not cost-effective to keep the lifts and other facilities going if there are too few skiers," said an official at Keystone in Colorado.
Keystone, like Copper, Breckenridge and Arapahoe Basin, is in Summit County, Colorado's highest and, county officials say, snowiest county.
The resorts could keep lifts going until late April, and Arapahoe might continue into May, a spokesman said.
Mammoth Mountain in California also hopes to offer May skiing.


Crying Wolf Over Elephants
"In Kenya, there were 165,000 elephants just 15 years ago," the memorandum said.
"Today only 20,000 remain." Of the 30,000 elephants that had roamed Tsavo National Park in Kenya in the 1970's, "the remaining 5,000 will be dead in 17 months." In Tanzania, half the 50,000 elephants in the Selous Reserve had been killed in the last eight years.
In Uganda, 90 percent "of these beautiful animals have been wiped out." This "slaughter" was caused by the "insatiable greed of the ivory hunters." The memorandum concluded by declaring 1988 the "Year of the Elephant."


ENDPAPER: Public Stages; Eddie Haskel Wins Again
DAVID LETTERMAN and Jay Leno have now become the Road Runner and Wile E. Coyote of late-night television, locked in an endless slapstick race that doesn't wear out its welcome no matter how predictable its outcome.
No sooner had their latest face-off been resolved, with Letterman choosing to defect from NBC to CBS for his own 11:30 talk show at more than twice Leno's salary, than the handicapping of their direct competition, to take place in the fall, became a national pastime.
What is at stake in the Letterman-Leno race for public favor that has given it so long a shelf life?
Surely not the monotonously chronicled dichotomies that have defined the oddsmaking so far: Letterman's hostile post-modern comedy versus Leno's old-fashioned shtick, New York versus Los Angeles, hip 12:30 audiences versus doddering 11:30 audiences.


Cynthia Ahlbaum, Paul E. Winkler
Dr. and Mrs.
Neal Ahlbaum of Manhasset Hills, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Cynthia Hope Ahlbaum, to Paul Eric Winkler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Winkler of Austin, Tex.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Ahlbaum is a photographer and film maker in Roslyn, L.I.
She graduated from the Parsons School of Design.
Her father is an internist and a nephrologist in Garden City, L.I.


Martha A. Verrill, Ivan A. Schlager
Charles O. Verrill Jr. of Washington has announced the engagement of his daughter Martha Anne Verrill to Ivan Anthony Schlager, the son of Mark Schlager of Los Angeles.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Verrill, 31, is a senior associate, in Washington, for Korn/Ferry International, the executive search company.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father is a senior partner in the Washington law firm of Wiley, Rein &amp; Fielding.
The prospective bride is also a daughter of the late Mary Ann Verrill.


A Cellist Who Stands Out From the Orchestral Crowd
Most of the musicians in the ever-renewing pool of New York freelancers seem to be in their 30's or 40's.
Some may be younger, others a decade or two older.
And then there is Martin Ormandy.
Because of his longevity and high visibility as well as his durable skills as a cellist, the short, white-tufted, grandfatherly Mr.
Ormandy has become an institution on the New York musical scene.
Performing with the New York Chamber Orchestra of the 92d Street Y, the New York Pops and the Mostly Mozart Orchestra, he is clearly much older than the players around him, though given his vigor and stamina, few would guess his actual age, a subject about which he tends to be coy.
He is also, as both his name and his features suggest, a brother of the conductor Eugene Ormandy, who led the Philadelphia Orchestra for more than 40 years and died in 1985.


Spanish Fare With Flair and a Steady Hand
RESTAURANTS often do not improve with age but Meson Galicia in downtown Norwalk is an exception in many ways.
When it moved from U.S. 1 in 1990 to a handsomely converted trolley barn in Norwalk, it changed its old-fashioned atmosphere to that of a simple, stylish Spanish country inn -- and the restaurant moved from Good to Very Good in this reviewer's opinion.
Several dinners over a period of time and intensive visits in recent weeks lead one to move the rating once again -- to Excellent.
The Meson Galicia kitchen has shown a steady high consistency -- which is no easy feat -- a willingness to introduce new dishes and to tinker with old ones that didn't quite work.
Though not on the winter menu, paella valenciana is the most obvious example.
Formerly a somewhat mushy version of the Valencian classic, it now has the requisite chewy, almost nutty edge.
A new interest in the Spanish version of nouvelle cuisine affects the beautiful plate presentations, though not the ample portions.
Furthermore, the use of fresh, high quality ingredients shines through in each dish.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about television commentary on President Clinton's first 10 days in office referred incorrectly to "The McLaughlin Group." The program appears on some NBC and some PBS stations, not on CNN.


Rabbit Is Rich
THE DARK DAYS OF WINTER -- with its steely dawns and endless evenings -- tend to erode the conceits of modern civilization.
It is during the coldest months, for instance, that soft and fuzzy suddenly seem fair game.
"Deer" becomes venison and then becomes dinner.
Rabbit is served as "lapin a la moutarde," or "pappardelle et coniglio," or "conejo en mole" -- more elegant phrasing perhaps, but rabbit stew all the same.
While the consumption of deer and other game was once limited by hunting season to winter, rabbits have been domesticated for centuries.
And yet, in most cultures, rabbit remains a winter meat.
This habit, like many of the ways rabbit is prepared, may be leftover from the days when rabbits and hares ran wild.
Each has dark, gamy flesh that requires pungent marinades -- cinnamon and clove, garlic and mustard, heady red wines and dried fruits -- and long, slow cooking.
It's no coincidence, then, that the combination of the two are so aromatically in tune with the season.


A Rape Conviction And a Controversy
The news in this usually quiet town is full of big-city headlines: rape, harassment and abuse, and all in a housing complex for the elderly and disabled.
The furor surrounds the rape of a 60-year-old woman at the Edward K. Gill Apartments 18 months ago.
The authorities say that the building's janitor, a 39-year-old twice-convicted drug offender, had entered the woman's apartment in the middle of the night using his master key.


Flights of Lunacy on the Drawing Board
IN a classic image by George Booth, The New Yorker cartoonist, a portly man soaks in a claw-footed bathtub, proclaiming to 37 cats strewn about the room: "Like a duck. Calm and placid on the surface, but paddling like hell. That's me!"
The caption could describe its creator as well.
"George has the appearance of a country boy, but with his energy and wit, he can run rings around everybody," said a fellow New Yorker cartoonist, Sam Gross, Mr.
Booth's friend of 25 years.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about Justice Thurgood Marshall misidentified his college.
He graduated from Lincoln University in Pennsylvania.
The article also misstated the number of cases he argued before the Supreme Court.
He argued 16 as a private attorney, according to the Supreme Court, and 18 as Solicitor General of the United States.


Melinda Duryea, Alexander Draper
Mr. and Mrs.
James M. Duryea of Lattingtown, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Melinda Farnsworth Duryea to Alexander Yearley Draper, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank W. Draper of Atlanta.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Duryea, 23, and her fiance, 26, graduated from the University of Virginia.
Her father is a principal in J. M. Duryea Inc., a specialist firm on the New York Stock Exchange.
Her mother, Linda V. P. Duryea, is the owner and president of Min-Meg II, a retail and corporate stationery company in Lattingtown.


Kristine Simonfay, Edward Shadek
Kristine Simonfay, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Steven Simonfay of Chatham, N.J., was married yesterday to Edward Thomas Shadek Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Shadek of La Jolla, Calif.
The Rev.
William H. Strain performed the ceremony at Calvary Episcopal Church in Summit, N.J.
Mrs.
Shadek, 26, was until recently a development officer at Columbia Law School in New York.
She graduated from William Smith College.
Her father is a project executive with the Turner Construction Company in Somerset, N.J.


Karen Steinberg and Alan Kennedy
Harold I. Steinberg of McLean, Va., has announced the engagement of his daughter, Karen Elizabeth Steinberg, to Alan Sloan Kennedy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edgar S. Kennedy Jr. of Cos Cob, Conn.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Steinberg, 27, is an associate at the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison.
She graduated from Wesleyan University and received her law degree from Harvard University.
Her father is the deputy controller of the Office of Federal Financial Management in Washington.
She also is the daughter of the late Rosalie Steinberg.


Baby Sitters' Boss Tells All
DEAR I.R.S.:
In all this flap over Zoe Baird and her illegal Peruvian couple, a few facts about what we parents owe the I.R.S. got clarified.
It turns out -- gosh, I really had no idea -- that I should have been filing a tax return for anyone who works in my house who earns more than $50 a quarter.
That doesn't include what you call Independent Contractors -- recognizable because they bring their own tools.
So I can skip the plumber, the exterminator and the guys from the Christian Brothers Cleaning Company, who shampoo the wall-to-wall carpet. (Christian, as in Born Again. They take prayer breaks.) But there are a lot of others.
Not because I'm in the big time, domestically speaking.
I'm no Zoe Baird with two full-time helpers.
Rather, like lots of Americans, I use a patchwork of sitters.
I just can't quite get this child-care thing streamlined.


Lilting Junket Down Memory Lane
"BEEHIVE," a finger-snapping, hand-clapping, toe-tapping trip down memory lane, is at Theater Three in Port Jefferson through Feb. 20.
A retrospective of the music of the female singers and "girl groups" of the 60's, "Beehive" is a cornucopia of songs made memorable by people like Patty LaBelle and the Bluebirds, Brenda Lee, Connie Francis, Petula Clark, the Supremes and many others.


Interview Goes Well, So King Gets the Call
After weeks of denying they were interested in signing Bernard King, the New Jersey Nets announced today that they have signed the 36-year-old forward to a free-agent contract for the rest of the season.
The 6-foot-7 King, a first-round draft choice of the Nets in 1977 and a Knicks star in the mid-1980's, hasn't played a game in almost 17 months because of a recurring problem with his surgically repaired right knee.
He was released just a little over two weeks ago by the Washington Bullets following a bitter exchange with the Bullets' front office over the team's plans for him.


Common-Sense Advice For Novice Collectors
THE aggressive marketing by the United States Postal Service is evidently luring new collectors, but letters from readers indicate that many do not have a clue about how to develop their new hobby beyond buying stamps as they are issued.
A good way to start the transformation from accumulator to collector is with a new paperbound book from Dell, "Stamp Collecting: The Complete, Easy Guide to the World's Most Popular Hobby." (The immodesty of the title belies the stereotype of the deferential collector who studies philatelic minutiae in isolation.)


Of Still Life, Very Still Life
NAME: Andres Serrano.
IDENTITY: Photographer.


When Fiction Is More Real Than 'Reality'
Long a television staple but somewhat neglected in recent years amid the rush to half-hour sitcoms, crime drama has become prime time's most forceful link with reality, especially that of the contemporary urban scene.
Fiction, it seems, can pack a more devastating wallop than the so-called "reality" shows like "Cops" that tend to be lopsided toward the police point of view because they require the considerable cooperation of law-enforcement agencies.
The crime drama can venture into more complicated, darker corners.
What makes the trip particularly compelling these days is the form's new-found style and sophistication.
Current and stunningly powerful examples: NBC's new weekly series "Homicide: Life on the Street" (Wednesdays at 9 P.M.), which could justifiably be called "Hill Street Blues: The Next Generation"; and, beginning Thursday at 9 P.M. on public television's "Mystery" series, "Prime Suspect 2," a four-episode continuation of the mini-series from Granada Television that last year turned the gifted British actress Helen Mirren, playing Detective Chief Inspector Jane Tennison, into an international star.


Concerts for Black History Month
A LITTLE late for the birthday of its honoree, but on the eve of Lincoln's Birthday and right in the middle of Black History Month, the New Orchestra of Westchester and its major funding partner, Pepsico, are presenting MusicAmerica II on Thursday at 8 P.M.
Calling it "a gala benefit in honor of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.," Ronald Harrison, Pepsico's vice president for community affairs, further described the event at the Performing Arts Center at the State University of New York at Purchase as "the second annual concert promoting ethnic, racial and religious harmony, diversity and mutual respect."
For Paul Lustig Dunkel, music director of the New Orchestra, the evening promises to be "not only an opportunity to help some worthwhile causes -- by raising funds to support programs that work to overcome the limits of prejudice, apathy and indifference -- but also a thrilling concert experience."


WINKING AT BIMBOS?
To claim that Gennifer Flowers and others are "direct descendants" of the likes of Madame de Pompadour is really stretching it.
Pompadour was one of the most accomplished women of the age, one who advised the King on all sorts of matters, including patronage of the arts, industries like porcelain making and even, as we now know, matters of state.


Snowstorm Surprises People and Animals Alike


WINKING AT BIMBOS?
I was astonished at the snide description of what happened to Jessica Hahn as a "one-day stand in a Florida motel room." My recollection of what happened is that Hahn was drugged and raped by two men, one of whom was Jim Bakker.


Emily Fisher, A. W. F. Fletcher
Emily Anstice Fisher, the daughter of Elizabeth Peters of New York and Edmund B. Fisher of London, was married yesterday to Alexander William Frederick Fletcher, the son of David S. L. Fletcher of Thurlestone, Devon, England, and the late Ada Mary Fletcher.
The Rev.
Dr.
Chad Varah, an Anglican priest, officiated at St.
Stephen Walbrook church in London.
The Rev.
Stephen S. Garney, an Episcopal minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Fletcher, 26, is a saleswoman at a Waterstone's bookstore in London.
She graduated cum laude from Smith College.
Her stepfather, Alton E. Peters, is a partner in the New York law firm of Kelley Drye &amp; Warren and president of the Manhattan Opera Guild.
Her stepmother is Anne-Louise Fisher.
The bride's late grandparents were Irving Berlin, the songwriter, Ellin Berlin, a novelist, James Fisher, an ornithologist, and Margery Fisher, the publisher of Growing Point, a quarterly review of children's books.


Howe Is Back in Rink, if Not Quite Out of the Cold
Gordie Howe and Maurice Richard were hockey superstars in the 1940's and 1950's, before that term was commonly used.
They didn't like each other much then, although the relationship has warmed just a bit over the decades.
On Friday night, Richard, wearing a tasteful business suit and standing on a red carpet, waved to the cheering fans at the Forum here after the Heroes of Hockey game, which opened the National Hockey League's All-Star weekend.
Howe, who had played in the game for retired players, broke ranks from the blue line and skated over to his old rival for a few words.


Airline Pillows
To the Editor: I hit on a wonderful solution to the slippery, elusive lozenge-sized airline pillow on my last red-eye trip from San Diego to New York -- a full-sized bed pillow.


An Evening Of Tributes
A birthday party at Roseland ends a benefit for the Schomburg Center, Feb. 2.


Investment Pays Off For Florio
In a swift and very overt manner, President Bill Clinton has begun to repay his political debt to Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey.
Even by Washington standards, the political generosity and attention that the President showered on Mr.
Florio during the last week is extraordinary -- from delivering more than $400 million to the state in time to rescue the Governor from possible budget problems to showing up at a dinner here for New Jersey political and business figures and turning it into a testimonial for Mr.
Florio's re-election bid.


Witchcraft for Lovers and Other Explorers
WHEN all else fails (prayer, psychotherapy, exercise), some people turn to witchcraft.
Others try it just for fun.
Whatever the case, witchcraft may not be all that you think it is.
Steve Teicher, the manager at Magickal Childe, the appropriately dusty West 19th Street haunt of those interested in the occult, was reassuring on a recent afternoon.
"It's not like it was in ancient times, when they slaughtered things in blood," he said.
"A lot of people are afraid of the word 'witchcraft.' They think it's evil, but generally it's not."
At Magickal Childe, founded in the mid-1970's as the Warlock Shop by Herman Slater, who died last July, the walls are lined with curiosities like voodoo dolls from New Orleans stuffed with Spanish moss ($45) and plaster figurines representing the Cretan snake goddess ($66) and other goddesses of antiquity.
You can also find herbs that sound perfect for a witch's brew (devil's shoestring, dragon's blood), skull-shaped candles ($4.25), talismans and amulets ($5 and up), and wood, stone and terra-cotta gargoyles ($12 and up).


CASE BEING BUILT AGAINST AVIATORS
The Pentagon Inspector General investigating the assault of dozens of women at a 1991 naval aviators convention in Las Vegas has compiled evidence that may lead to the courts-martial of more than a dozen officers and disciplinary action against many others, Pentagon officials said today.
The long-awaited final report on the convention of the Tailhook Association goes well beyond several previous inquiries, outlining in much fuller and highly explicit detail the assaults on as many as 50 women and instances in which aviators engaged in indecent behavior.


Making a Difference; Gently Presiding Over The GATT's Final Round
IN 1986, at this country's posh beach resort, Punta del Este, the world's trading partners began discussions on how to liberalize international trade and fight protectionism.
Under the auspices of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, it became known as the Uruguay Round.
Now after seven arduous years, the talks, known by the acronym GATT, appear close to an end, and it is perhaps fitting that Uruguay's Foreign Minister, Sergio Abreu Bonilla, has been chosen as president of the round to bring the negotiations to a close.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Jan. 23  MANHATTAN  Chelsea  $425,000
205 West 19th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, dining room, 2 living rooms, 16 windows, 10-ft. ceilings, 2 exposures; maintenance $874, 33% tax-deductible (Broker: Don DeFranco Co.)  SoHo  $300,000
92 Lafayette Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, 11-ft. ceilings, arched windows, skylights, 2 exposures; maintenance $645, 48% tax-deductible (Broker: Eychner Associates)  Upper East Side  $625,000
136 East 64th Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,200-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, maid's room, dining room, fireplace, 3 exposures; maintenance $2,491, 42% tax-deductible (Brokers: Corcoran Group-Ambrose Mar-Elia)  Upper East Side  $175,000
315 East 68th Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 850-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, fireplace, north exposure; maintenance $672, includes gas and electricity; 50% tax-deductible (Brokers: Freda Green &amp; Associates-Carnegie Hill Properties)  Upper West Side  $460,000
375 Riverside Drive (110th St.)  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room, playroom, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,160, 50% tax-deductible (Brokers: A.J. Clarke Real Estate)  BRONX  Eastchester  $143,000
3340 Mickle Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family detached frame house; dining room, finished basement, private driveway and carport, 31- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $1,245 (Broker: ERA/Best Match Real Estate)  Fieldston  $792,000
5021 Fieldston Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, detached one-family stone colonial; dining room, screened-in porch, greenhouse, fireplace, lily pond, rose garden, 2-car garage, 0.5-acre lot; taxes $6,000 (Broker: ERA/Susan Goldy &amp; Co. Realtors)  BROOKLYN  Brooklyn Heights  $143,500
312 Hicks Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar town house; dining area, fireplace, private roof deck, Manhattan skyline view; maintenance $666, 65% tax-deductible (Broker: Harborview Realty)  Midwood  $173,000
1392 East 17th Street  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, attached one-family brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, hospitality suite in basement, 17- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $900 (Broker: Maryl Real Estate)  Park Slope  $117,500
404 6th Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. co-op in a brownstone; exposed-brick walls, 11-ft. ceilings, original moldings and detail; maintenance $450, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Warren Lewis Realty)  QUEENS  Astoria  $103,500
19-16 80th Street  (Garden Bay Manor)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 815-sq.-ft. postwar condo; eat-in kitchen, laundry room, common charge $358, taxes $1,080 (Broker: Rose Marie Realty)  Middle Village  $150,000
80-27 64th Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, attached one-family brick Tudor; dining room, finished basement, detached 1-car garage, 18- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Kremer Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Castleton Corners  $175,000
44 Governor Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, detached ongle-family brick Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement, 1-car garage, 45- by 98-ft. lot; taxes $1,608 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/ DeSimone Realty)  Westerleigh  $145,000
848 Jewett Avenue  2-family detached wood-frame house; 3 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room, eat-in kitchen, 3-bedroom, 1-bath hospitality suite, full basement, 40- by 129-ft. lot; taxes $1,786 (Broker: Salmon Realty)


Maura McElhinney, Dana Coates
Dr. and Mrs.
A.
James McElhinney of Pelham, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Maura Elizabeth McElhinney to Dana Milton Coates, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Coates of Weston, Mass.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
McElhinney, 29, is a law student at Fordham University.
She and her fiance graduated from Lehigh University.
Her father, a professor of surgery at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York, is the chief of surgery at the Veterans Affairs Medical Center in the Bronx, where the future bride's mother, Mary McElhinney, is an infection-control nurse.


Hoosiers Defeat Emotional Hawkeyes
At the end of yet another emotional night on the University of Iowa campus, the top-ranked Indiana Hoosiers preserved their unbeaten Big Ten conference record with a 73-66 victory over the Hawkeyes at Carver-Hawkeye Arena.
Led by Calbert Cheaney, who scored 27 points and made his last nine shots, the Hoosiers overcame an early 10-point deficit and held Iowa to two field goals and four free throws in the last 6 minutes 11 seconds of play to secure their 16th victory in the last 17 games.


Bells and Arrows
To the Editor:  English studios, too, have their film logos, especially Big Ben for London Films and the arrow in the bull's-eye of Archer Films.
In his autobiography, "A Life in Movies," Michael Powell explained that he and Jerry Jackson first used Big Ben for their Westminster Films; then Alexander Korda used it for his company, London Films.
Later, with Emeric Pressburger, Powell created the bull's-eye, inspired by a scene he directed in the 1940 film "The Thief of Baghdad."  TERRY BIGHAM Fairhaven, Mass.


Inaugural Nitpicks
Working under the deadline pressure experienced only by drama critics on opening nights, this former Presidential speech writer raced back from the inaugural oath-taking at the Capitol to review what Democrats hope will be "Clinton's First Inaugural Address."
Because I did not have a seat on the aisle, I was delayed by the exiting crowd. (The Rev. Jesse Jackson, also eager to get out, inveigled a medical worker to push a stretcher through the mob, crying, "Medic coming through!" and followed in his wake. Mr. Jackson did not make a lot of friends with that maneuver, but certainly displayed his resourcefulness.)


Assuming Responsibility
To the Editor:
Caryn James is entitled to her opinion regarding "Shining Through" and "A Stranger Among Us" as well as Melanie Griffith's performances in them.
True, these films were weak, but I would like to note that Ms.
Griffith neither wrote, directed nor produced them, that she has proved herself on a number of occasions to be a talented actress of some range, that film making is an unavoidably collaborative process and that a gentle, sexy and affable personality and style can hardly be held responsible for turning a film to "fluff."


Ill-Educated Noodles
To the Editor:
In his review of "The Creationists," by Ronald L. Numbers (Jan. 10), Stephen R. L. Clark reports that many American scientists "despise their countrymen" and regard them as "ill-educated noodles." Speaking as a left-wing Christian evolutionist who is an ill-educated noodle in many fields of human endeavor, I wish Mr.
Clark would see fit to leave the populist rhetoric out of it.
Anyone who thinks that the physical evidence supports the idea that man was created in his present form within the past 10,000 years is an ill-educated noodle in the fields of archeology and geology, and you don't have to be a snobby member of the intelligentsia to say that.
And yes, by all means let us have empathetic studies of 17th-century alchemists (one of whom was Isaac Newton), but do we have to allow modern-day adherents of 17th-century alchemy to pass laws favoring equal time for their beliefs in chemistry textbooks?


Mutual Funds; Big Names With Little Punch
Some money managers are much more well known than others.
They've made names for themselves as guests on "Wall Street Week" or at investing seminars.
Some are widely quoted investing gurus.
Others plaster their names across investing newsletters or advertisements.
The ultimate vanity toy is a private-label fund.
But does high profile mean high returns?
Not necessarily, according to figures drawn up for The New York Times by Thomas J. Herzfeld, who specializes in closed-end fund investment and analysis in Miami.


No More Big Sticks
WHIRLPOOL
U.S.
Foreign Policy Toward Latin America and the Caribbean.
By Robert A. Pastor. 338 pp.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. $24.95.


AIDS Groups Dismayed by Report They See as Discounting Concern
Advocates for people with AIDS say they are worried about misinterpretations of a National Research Council report that says the epidemic is having little impact on most segments of American society because it has struck most fiercely among the "socially disadvantaged."
Jay Blotcher of Act Up, one such advocacy group, said he feared that people would read the report, issued Thursday by a committee of the research organization, and use it as an excuse not to care, to say that AIDS was not going to affect them.


Why Ride a Bus If There's a Limo?
To the Sports Editor:
Pressure on major league baseball owners to hire blacks and other minority candidates as managers, coaches, scouts and administrative executives poses the question of how many of today's active players might aspire to such jobs at a fraction of their seven-figure playing salaries.


JAN. 31-FEB. 6: Asylum in Canada; In a Landmark Change, Refugee Status May Be Given to Persecuted Women
Last week a young Saudi Arabian woman who had tried to travel alone, drive a car and go without a veil in her native country won asylum in Canada in a landmark change of policy.
Canadian immigration officials laughed at the woman when she first requested refugee status 21 months ago, based on her fears of persecution as an outspoken opponent of Saudi discrimination against women.


'Past Imperfect'
To the Editor:
Chacun son penchant
: there will always be revisionist historians, moralists, idolaters and iconoclasts, but even when the times seem propitious to a re-evaluation of the "monsters" of the past -- on the right (reappraisals of the Vichy regime), on the left (critiques of Soviet Marxism) or even dead center (the recent rereading of Churchill's wartime decisions) -- there is still room for a contextual reading of Tony Judt's "intellocrats."


Surprise Snow Causes Scores of Accidents
A surprise storm that only an auto-body shop owner could love dropped up to three inches of snow on parts of the New York metropolitan region yesterday morning, causing scores of fender-benders and, in one case, a 14-car chain-reaction collision.
Facing powerful gusts and temperatures dipping into the low teens -- and to single digits north of New York City -- residents who ventured out received a bitter lesson in the wind-chill factor.


The Cold Shoulder
WHAT: They peek out of gowns, cat suits, unitards, sweaters: women are flashing more deltoids than there are blondes in beer ads -- all because of a design inspiration so eerily simple, anyone could do it with a black turtleneck and scissors.
Aren't you sorry you didn't think of this?
Donna Karan isn't.
HOW AND WHO: Lauren Bacall whistled over hers.
Rita Hayworth gave them a shimmy, Betty Boop a shrug and Mae West simply rolled hers to get someone to come up and see her sometime.
Ms.
Karan is certainly not the first woman to activate the shoulder.
But she is almost universally recognized for devising this game of peekaboo.


Serbs Expel 4,000 From Bosnian Town
Assurances by Bosnian Serb and Yugoslav Government leaders notwithstanding, gangs of Serbian gunmen have unleashed a new wave of "ethnic cleansing" in Bosnia and Herzegovina, expelling about 4,000 Bosnian Muslims from the town of Trebinje and reportedly settling Serbs in their homes.
Groups of uniformed Serbs have gone door to door through Trebinje over the last two weeks, bullying Muslims into abandoning their homes, cars and all their other property, dozens of refugees said.


Baird, Wood, Outrage
Many angry women across the country contended that Judge Kimba M. Wood was being treated unfairly because of the President's political calculations.
"Kimba Wood got caught in the wave created by the Zoe Baird situation," one woman said.
Article, page 22.


On Sunday; Goodbye Line May Be Next For Serby
AFTER two weeks away covering the Super Bowl, the veteran sportswriter Steve Serby walked into The New York Post on Thursday and was kissed by the phone operator, hugged by a printer, slapped on the back by a guy in the men's room and asked the same question by all: "You leaving Serby?"
"Everyone's asking," says Serby. And Serby isn't saying.


Matthew P. Ziehl, Amelia T. R. Starr
May wedding plans have been announced by Dr.
Rebecca K. Starr of Eastington, Gloucestershire, England, and William W. Starr of Columbia, S.C., for their daughter, Amelia Temple Redwood Starr, and Matthew Phelps Ziehl, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph D. Ziehl of Greens Farms, Conn.
Ms.
Starr, 24, is a law student at New York University.
She and her fiance graduated from Yale University; she graduated summa cum laude and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is the cultural affairs editor at The State, a daily newspaper in Columbia.
Her mother is a professor of American history at the Cheltenham and Gloucester College of Higher Education in Cheltenham, Gloucestershire.
Ms.
Starr is a stepdaughter of Carol Reis of Columbia.


The Major League Cases of Minor League Jitters
The roster includes a two-time National League most valuable player, a pitcher with 287 career victories, the National League 1989 rookie of the year, the career leader in saves, the relief pitcher who is No. 5 on the career list in saves, the National League 1987 Cy Young Award winner, an eight-time All-Star catcher and an infielder who batted .320 in the first of the two successive seasons the Atlanta Braves have won the National League pennant.
Dale Murphy, Bert Blyleven, Jerome Walton, Jeff Reardon, Rich Gossage, Steve Bedrosian, Lance Parrish and Jeff Treadway are not on the same team, but they are teammates in what has become an increasingly popular game played by major league clubs.


Secessionist Turmoil
Will the five boroughs of New York become four?
The very idea once seemed inconceivable, but the Staten Island secessionist movement is accelerating so quickly that only a late dose of common sense is likely to stop it.
Blame Gov.
Mario Cuomo and the Legislature for irresponsibly authorizing this misguided secession process in 1989.
If Staten Island insists on going ahead, only they can overrule it.


Conjuring With Epic Images in Miniature
I DIDN'T get over to the special bonsai exhibition at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden until late last week (today is the last day, so go if you can), and my heel-dragging may have been related to my general wariness about this ancient Eastern art.
The wiring of the branches -- pulling them down, curving them this way and that -- troubles me.
So does the constant pruning of leaves and growing tips and even roots -- so that a tree that might grow 40 feet in nature can live in a tray with a couple of inches of soil.
I stared at a 25-year-old trident maple no bigger than a kitten.
I felt like a giant looking down on a suburban yard.
And I was fascinated.


At Work; The Family Leave Bargain
HERE are two facts of life: Babies are here to stay and so are women in the work force.
Women now make up 46 percent of the American labor force.
For the rest of the 1990's, some studies project, two out of three new workers will be female.
By 2000, half the work force will be women, mostly of childbearing age.
And four out of five women in the work force will probably have children during their working lives.
So managers may want to pull up their socks and read a second chapter in "Parental Leave and Productivity," a study released recently by the Families and Work Institute in New York.
Like the institute's research on supervisors' attitudes toward leave reported on here last week, "The True Cost of Parental Leave" may offer some surprises to anyone who thinks family leaves are terminally disruptive and expensive.
The message is particularly apt now that President Clinton has signed the family leave law.


Executive Gets Life Term in Killing of His Family
A judge on Friday sentenced a computer executive to life in prison, with no chance of parole for 30 years, after convicting him the day before in the killing of his wife and two children last April.
It was a surprise verdict in a case that has gripped the Boston area.
The jurors in Middlesex County Superior Court found 35-year-old Kenneth Seguin guilty on three counts of second-degree murder.
They had been expected to choose between verdicts of first-degree murder or not guilty by reason of insanity.


Sports of The Times; Too Early Better Than Too Late
AS soon as referee Joe Santarpia waved his arms, Michael Dokes began yelling.
But only because Riddick Bowe had stopped hitting him.
Up in the Madison Square Garden rafters, boos resembled the roar of a waterfall.
To those in the far seats, the referee had stopped the fight too soon.
After only 2 minutes 19 seconds of the first round last night, Riddick Bowe had retained his two-thirds of the world heavyweight championship.
But if those in the far seats had been closer to the ring, maybe they would not have objected.


French TV Anchorman Is Indicted
France's best-known television anchorman, Patrick Poivre d'Arvor, was indicted on Friday on a charge related to his acceptance of expense-paid trips from a Lyons businessman who is currently in jail awaiting trial for misuse of public funds.
Mr.
Poivre d'Arvor, who presents the evening news on France's most popular channel, TF1, and is host of several cultural programs, has acknowledged he took trips to the Caribbean, the French Riviera and Switzerland as a guest of the businessman, Pierre Botton.
But Mr.
Poivre d'Arvor has denied any wrongdoing.


There's a Better Way Than Layoffs
To the Editor:
Regarding "Stanching the Loss of Good Jobs" (Jan. 31), it seems highly unfair to make certain employees suffer by layoffs while leaving the remaining employees to continue working unscathed.
Isn't that discrimination at its worst?


Corrections
A listing on Jan. 17 with an article about film schools referred incorrectly to the Center for Advanced Film and Television Studies at the American Film Institute.
The center offers a degree program leading to a Master of Fine Arts.


Church Rentals
To the Editor:
The article on rental of building space by religious bodies  [ "Houses of Worship Widening Rentals," Dec. 27 ]  blurred several key distinctions in practice and law as well as creating the false impression that tax officials are lax with churches that foray into commercial activities.


Susan Prockop, D. F. Wertheimer
Susan Elizabeth Prockop, a fourth-year medical student at Columbia University, was married last evening to David Franklin Wertheimer, a partner in the New York law firm of Davis, Markel &amp; Edwards.
Rabbi Susan Marks performed the ceremony at the University Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.
Ms.
Prockop, 29, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Hamilton College.
She is the daughter of Dr.
Darwin and Elinor Prockop of Philadelphia.
The bride's father is chairman of the department of biochemistry and molecular biology at Jefferson Medical College in Philadelphia, where he also is a director of the Jefferson Institute of Molecular Medicine.
Her mother is a freelance editor of scientific journals.


Mullin Adds to Woes
CHRIS MULLIN of the Golden State Warriors played a week with a torn ligament in his right thumb, but has little to show for it except an aggravated injury and the prospct of a two-month layoff.


Naughty Sophie Hawthorne
DEAREST BELOVED
The Hawthornes and the Making of the Middle-Class Family.
By T. Walter Herbert.
Illustrated. 331 pp.
Berkeley: University of California Press. $28.


Piggott's on Hold Again
The comeback of the British jockey LESTER PIGGOTT was again delayed yesterday because of heavy rains in Dabai, the United Arab Emirates.
A track steward said the races were scheduled for Wednesday because the track at Nad Al Sheba was still waterlogged.
The 57-year-old jockey was seriously injured in a fall at the Breeders' Cup three months ago. (AP)


Keeping Would-Be Doctors' Dreams Alive
EVERY Saturday, Galia Lyn, a 17-year-old junior at Mount Vernon High School, forgoes part of her weekend in favor of a sixth full day of school.
Early in the morning, she takes a bus to New York Medical College in Valhalla, where she and 39 other high school students work to re-enforce and improve their study skills, mainly in science and mathematics.
Ms.
Lyn was chosen for the Science and Technology Entry Program, known as STEP, at the college because of her academic potential and her interest in science.


Fordham Woman Sets Mark
Lauren Gubicza of Fordham University ran 5,000 meters in 16 minutes 00.43 seconds yesterday afternoon to highlight the women's metropolitan intercollegiate track championships at Seton Hall University in South Orange, N.J.
Gubicza's time was a meet record and makes her the 19th-fastest American ever in an indoor race, the 37th fastest over all.
Her victory was all the more remarkable considering that she had run only 15 hours earlier in Friday night's Millrose Games, where she finished a close second to Cherie Goddard of Villanova in 4:41.23.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-19  ETHNIC WARS MULTIPLYING


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
MURDERER WITH A BADGE The Secret Life of a Rogue Cop. By Edward Humes. Dutton, $23.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LATIN AMERICAN ART
For the first time in its 90-year history, the Thornton-Donovan School, a private preparatory school in New Rochelle, has organized its own art exhibition, for which an opening reception will be held today from 2 to 6 P.M.
The works of 20th-century Latin American artists are featured, along with Hispanic-inspired works by non-Hispanic artists.
The show is based on a quincentennial "Spanish Steps" program introduced into the school's curriculum in 1991, focusing on the historic and cultural ties between the United States, Latin America and Spain.
Jean Charlot, now dead, whose work is on view, was born in France in 1898 but moved to Mexico in the 1920's and was a founder of the Mexican Mural Renaissance.
He collaborated with Diego Rivera on mural projects in the 30's, and he painted portraits of many of his artist friends, including David Siqueiros and Jose Orozco.
Antonio Frasconi came to New York City from Uruguay in the 1940's on a scholarship to the Art Students League.
His work as a printmaker and illustrator is known worldwide.
He is now distinguished teaching professor of art at the State University of New York at Purchase.
Gabriela de la Vega, a native of Mexico, studied in Manhattan, Paris and Los Angeles and has an established reputation as a watercolorist and illustrator.
Antonio Martorelli was born in Puerto Rico and studied in Madrid.
He is a performance artist, writer and teacher as well as an illustrator and set designer.
Constance Del Vecchio Maltese is a native New Yorker and a member of the Society of Illustrators.
She is best known for her portrait series of the great explorers, including Columbus, Magellan, Marco Polo and others, on view at the U.S.S.
Intrepid Sea-Air Space Museum.
Alton Tobey, an American whose work is in the collections of major museums in the United States and Europe, contributed his portraits of several notable Mexican individuals painted during his 35 trips there.
More than 100 works of art in various media can be seen through Feb. 21.
The school is at 100 Overlook Circle; visiting hours are tomorrow through Friday of this week from 3 to 6 P.M., and Saturday through Feb. 21 from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
For more information, call 632-8836.
CONCERTS FOR SINGLES
"Musique d'Amour," one of the Symphony Singles concerts by the New Orchestra of Westchester, designed as get-togethers for music lovers who have no spouses or significant others, will be held today at 3 P.M. in the West Room at Reid Castle of Manhattanville College in Purchase.
The concert features Chris Calloway, daughter of Cab Calloway, in a program of songs by George Gershwin, Rodgers and Hammerstein and Irving Berlin.
Ms.
Calloway will be accompanied on the piano by Kevin O'Connell.
A reception and refreshments will follow the program.
Tickets are $25 at the door.
ARROWWOOD VALENTINE
A bottle of champagne and a box of chocolates will welcome Valentine getaway weekenders at the Doral Arrowwood in Rye Brook.
Special rates of $129 a room for each night are offered on Friday and Sunday, $139 on Saturday.
Buffet breakfasts are included.
Some special programs begin with a cocktail reception Friday evening.
A Saturday-morning aerobic workout will be followed by a workshop on techniques for body massages, and a cooking workshop is scheduled for Saturday afternoon with Paul McCarthy, the executive chef.
He will demonstrate how to prepare heart-shaped dishes for two.
Admission of $20 for one or two people includes take-home recipes and aprons.
Saturday evening's candlelight dinner will cost $28 a person and include dancing to a jazz ensemble, roses for the women, and a complimentary glass of champagne.
A four-course Italian menu, with wines selected for each course, will be served on Sunday night for $50 a person.
The number to call for more information or reservations is 939-5500.
FAMILY ART WORKSHOPS
Every Sunday from noon to 2:30 P.M., beginning today through May 23, two-hour family art workshops will be in progress at the Caramoor Center in Katonah.
The program, which takes advantage of the educational opportunities inherent in the architecture, furnishings, decorative and fine arts of Caramoor's House Museum, its outbuildings and landscaped grounds, was devised by Evelyn Albert, the new director of education and former museum educator at the South Street Seaport Museum in Manhattan.
Today's subject is stick puppets of the Renaissance, which the children and adults will make after touring the Music Room -- filled with Renaissance treasures -- and listening to music of the period.
Next Sunday's project is the making of a commedia dell'arte mask for Valentine's Day, based on an orientation tour of the museum.
Workshops on such subjects as animals in architectural and decorative detail, door knockers, elaborate hats, and book-making are to be offered in future sessions.
The series is suitable for children from 4 through 11, accompanied by a parent or other adult.
The fee for each workshop of $6 for adults and $4 for children includes materials.
For reservations or more information, the number to call is 232-5035.
Caramoor is on Girdle Ridge Road off Route 22.


Recent Sales
Chappaqua, N.Y.  $590,000
41 North Way  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 40-year-old colonial; family room, dining room, breakfast room, eat-in kitchen, 1.8 acres; taxes $10,927.
Pound Ridge, N.Y.  $260,000
Pine Drive  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 61-year-old colonial; fireplace, dining room, eat-in kitchen, butler's pantry, sun room, 2 acres; taxes $4,536.
South Salem, N.Y.  $220,000
49 Smith Ridge Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 12-year-old contemporary; kitchen, pantry, computer room, stone fireplace, deck, 3.3 acres; taxes $6,444.
Branford, Conn.  $160,000
12 Midwood Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 39-year-old Cape Cod; skylights, new kitchen, in-ground pool, 0.5acre; taxes $2,719.
Hamden, Conn.  $210,000
575 Ridge Road  5-bedroom, 4-bath, 63-year-old colonial; wood stove, solar panels, in-law setup, 1 acre; taxes $5,571.
Milford, Conn.  $79,900
17 Sands Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 69-year-old summer cottage; walk to sandy beach, garage storage, gas heat, 40- by 90-foot lot; taxes $1,643.
OTHER AREAS Bergenfield, N.J.  $150,000
40 Queen Street
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 24-year-old split level; 1-car garage, c/a, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,700.
Mahwah, N.J.  $375,000
27 Malcolm Place  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 4-year-old contemporary; family room with fireplace, 2-car garage, cathedral ceiling; taxes $4,820.
Bay Shore, L.I.  $370,000
35 South Ocean Avenue  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 100-year-old colonial; fireplace, deck, 1-bedroom, 1-bath guest cottage, 10 boat slips, 1.5 acres; taxes $10,200.


A la Carte; Forget the Loud Jukebox Music
A FRIEND who received a gift certificate for the Iron Horse, a restaurant near the Glen Head railroad station, was exasperated when his wife was hesitant about entering.
From the outside, the Iron Horse looks like a neighborhood bar.
Inside, twice as many people are usually at the bar as are in the booths.
More than one person has described the pub as a dive.


Sigrid Armstrong, Ryan F. Keough
Sigrid Elisabeth Armstrong, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Armstrong Jr. of Denver, was married there yesterday to Ryan Francis Keough, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
John J. Keough of Smithtown, L.I.
The Rev.
Marcian T. O'Meara performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Good Shepherd.
Mrs.
Keough, 26, manages a Gap clothing store in Manhattan.
She graduated from the University of Colorado.
Her father, who is retired, was the information systems manager for the Denver public schools, for which her mother, Diane G. Armstrong, was a substitute teacher.


Looking for an Attorney General: White House Memo; Setting Up Direct Line To Country
Guided by polls, focus groups and a keen sense of pop culture, President Clinton is executing a plan to put a distinctive stamp on his Presidency instead of allowing others to define it for him.
Rather than mount White House news conferences or rely solely on sober televised speeches, Mr.
Clinton is attempting to forge a direct path -- by satellite and by jet aircraft -- into the minds of the Americans who are willing to give their President more time to prove himself.


Learning at Hofstra Can Be Lifelong
The growth and commitment of Hofstra University  [ "Hofstra Thrives Amid Crowded University Field," Jan. 10 ]  to the Long Island community illustrates what can be achieved when long-range thinking and challenging action are a part of planned growth.
Unfortunately a small aspect of this phenomenal growth has been overlooked.
The P.E.I.R. program, now involving more than 200 "senior" retirees devoted to a lifelong-learning concept came into being very shortly after Dr.
Shuart's investiture as president.
While granting that all the physical and academic improvements are most gratifying, it would have been even more impressive to have noted how Hofstra is meeting the challenge of the "senior" learner.


Professor or Mother
To the Editor:
As a woman nearing completion of a Ph.D. in political science at Columbia University, I can point to an explanation you overlook in "Rare in Ivy League: Women Who Work as Full Professors" (front page, Jan. 24).
The academic profession is particularly unforgiving to parents, most often women, who want to spend the early years of their children's lives working part time or not at all.


Cool Passions Rule a Love Story
There are lots of adjectives I'd willingly bestow upon "Martin Guerre," the new musical drama at the Hartford Stage Company in Connecticut.
It is lean, forthright, disciplined, cool and unsentimental -- to give you five.


INSIDE
Serbs Renew Ethnic Purge
Serbian gunmen have begun a new wave of "ethnic cleansing" in Bosnia and Herzegovina, expelling 4,000 Muslims from one town.
Page 18.
Bitter Winter in Armenia
Crippled by a fuel shortage, Armenia is experiencing a rare level of misery that was partly brought about by its ethnic war with Azerbaijan.
Page 12.
A New Gay Lobby
Caught off guard by the fierce opposition to homosexuals in the military, gay-rights advocates have formed an aggressive new lobby.
Page 26.
Navy Men Face Discipline
A final report on the assaults on women at a 1991 naval convention could lead to the courts-martial of more than a dozen officers.
Page 20.
New Names for the F.B.I.
The Administration is circulating the names of possible successors to the embattled William Sessions.
Page 28.
Boew Still Champion After Knocking Out Dokes
Riddick Dowe remained heavyweight champion last night, scoring a first-round technical knockout over Michael Dokes at Madison Square Garden.
Some copies of SportsSunday went to press before the fight ended.


Rent Control: A 'Misnomer'
This is in response to a recentarticle, "Battle Lines Drawn for Major Struggle Over Rent Control."
First of all, rent control is a misnomer since it implies that rents are fixed.
They are not -- they go up every year, usually on a par with inflation, and often beyond it.
In Cliffside Park they go up beyond what banks pay, so that landlords are making a profit over ordinary interest.


If We'd Let Drafted Gays Die for Their Country in Wartime; What Fears Reveal
To the Editor:
In "Military People Split Over Ban on Homosexuals" (news article, Jan. 28), you report on the fears that straight men in the armed forces voice about lifting the ban on open and practicing homosexuals in the military -- sexual harassment by superiors, unwanted advances from co-workers, ogling by unwelcome eyes, embarrassing "pin-ups." What these men fear most is that they will receive the treatment our society ordinarily reserves for women.


The Man Who Would Be Governor Again
AT 8:30 on a brisk Wednesday morning, 150 members of Italian-American organizations around the state trouped to Drumthwacket, the Governor's mansion in Princeton, to join Jim Florio and his wife, Lucinda, for breakfast.
As the guests milled about the first floor, engaging in ritual small talk and nibbling on Italian pastries, their hosts were pursuing a ritual of their own in the upstairs apartment -- a breakfast of cereal, bananas and coffee.


Those Beauties, Steam Trains
THE Erie Lackawanna Railway, the Chesapeake &amp; Ohio, the Atchison, Topeka &amp; Santa Fe: when it comes to names, Conrail and Amtrak cannot compare with their forerunners any more than their hooded electric locomotives can with the steam-powered beauties that made railroads famous.
If there are any viewers left who like their art and technology separate, they should remember that both Monet and Manet were among the many artists inspired by steam trains.


Gaudy News, With New Twists
The lives and events featured in "Live, and in Sizzling Color, the Trashing of Long Island"  [ Jan. 24 ]  are not a recent phenomena.
Having covered the most horrifying tragedies on Long Island in my "Recall Series" over the last five years, I've done sculptures titled "Joseph Porto Recalls Kathleen Holland," "Cheryl Pierson Recalls Her Father James," "Vincent C. Laezza Recalls Carol Ann Zagorski, John Phillips and Peter Phillips" and "Cove Neck Recalls Avianca Flight 52."


Streetscapes: Boulevard House; The End of the Line For an 1871 Saloon?
THAT it has survived so far is a minor miracle that brings a smile to those who pass the little 1871 wooden saloon at the northwest corner of 100th Street and Broadway.
Now it is hard to tell if the fragile Boulevard House, built for travelers when the Upper West Side was open country, will survive or is at the end of its journey.


Easy Ways to Put Wainscoting in Place
WAINSCOTING, wood paneling that covers walls from floor level to about three feet, can add charm and a look of warmth to a room or stairway while protecting the walls.
Kits containing precut wainscot materials are available.
Installation usually requires trimming pieces to size with a saw and nailing the wainscoting into place, but amateurs with moderate carpentry skills should not find the job too difficult.


Suit Filed on Cardinal
A 20-year-old woman has filed a civil suit against tackle LUIS SHARPE of the Phoenix Cardinals, charging that the lineman raped her while she was taking care of his children on a trip to Hawaii last spring.
Sharpe denied the allegation.
According to the suit filed in state court in Phoenix by the woman, Sharpe returned to the hotel late one night and raped her while his children slept in an adjoining room. (AP)


Gaudy News, With New Twists
The article says, apropos of the likes of Amy Fisher, Joe Buttafuoco, Sol Wachtler, the gadabout garbage barge, et al.


The New Auto Junkyard, Borne by Taxpayers
ACROSS the state, municipalities are struggling with a byproduct of the poor economy: the rusting hulks of abandoned automobiles that are littering the landscape.
In all Connecticut cities, officials say, the scene is repeated with increasing frequency: A person who has wrung the last mile out of a car -- often one that has been unregistered for a couple of years, so it is difficult to trace -- pulls up to a curb or drives into a vacant lot or municipal parking garage.
The driver pulls off the license plates, removes the parts he wants to keep and walks away, leaving the city with a wreck that could cost hundreds of dollars for towing, storage and disposal.


Not a 'Zoo'? Only in New York
The name of the Bronx Zoo is supposed to be extinct tomorrow.
New Yorkers are probably practicing the change today in their off hours.
"Driver," says Ralph, "Take me and Norton to the International Wildlife Conservation Park." If they don't like being dropped off at the United Nations or the International House of Pancakes, well, Ralph can ask the driver if he'd like to go to the moon.
It's only words, after all, the stuff of this life, this city and the notions of its creatures.
Which is the point of William Conway, the ceaselessly thoughtful president of the zoo and of the vast galaxy of fauna preserves and research projects that the New York Zoological Society runs across 40 nations beyond the Bronx.
New York City's other borough zoos are to be called wildlife conservation centers, and the society's title will be zooless: NYZS/The Wildlife Conservation Society.
"It's really too late for the simple idea of conventional zoos," said Mr.
Conway, excited with the phylogenetic frisson he finds in the new title and the power he hopes it has to enlist the public in a whole new level of self-education in the preciousness of life.
He admits zoo is a neat word.
"Short and snappy -- zoo -- and we know we created a problem." But he is concerned about its secondary meaning -- as a place marked by rampant confusion.


Fight Week Leaves City Cold as Weather
It all begins to blur now, but somewhere in the middle of Fight Week, Rock Newman recited the apocalyptic vision of a heavyweight title fight in New York in February.
"They said it would be too cold," Newman chanted, in the street-preacher voice he can effect at times.
"They said there would be a snowstorm. Inclement weather. They said a Saturday-night fight would not work, that the suburbanites would not come in.


Gartner Scores! And Scores! And Scores! And Scores!
Josh and Natalie Gartner got to skip school on Friday.
This alone was worth some excitement.
According to 6-year-old Natalie, watching her father, Mike Gartner of the Rangers, win the most valuable player trophy in the Wales Conference's 16-6 victory today at the 44th All-Star Game was even better than cutting class.
Josh wasn't so sure.


POSTINGS: City Auction; Gatehouse Sale, With Conditions
The most distinctive of 101 city properties on the auction block Feb. 17 is the old Croton gatehouse, at Amsterdam Avenue and 113th Street.
Built in 1876, the sturdy little granite structure once marked the junction where water from the Croton aqueduct system was channeled into a half dozen mains for distribution.
Bidding is to begin at $870,000.
Although the gatehouse is being auctioned publicly, the city already has a purchaser in mind.
One condition of sale is that future development of the property be limited to " 'nursing home' use and uses ancillary thereto." Further, demolition of the gatehouse is prohibited.


THE COMPANY HE KEEPS
Michael Kelly and Maureen Dowd's examination of the personal chemistry between Bill Clinton and Al Gore omits a key fact: both men are equipped to assume the Presidency ("The Company He Keeps," Jan. 17).


Judge Grants Delay of Class Integration At Richmond School
A judge today granted a request by a dozen parents to delay integration of classes at an elementary school where pupils had been grouped by race for at least seven years.
The judge, T. J. Markow of Richmond Circuit Court, said the school board had not held a required public hearing before ordering 74 of the 452 students at Bellevue Model Elementary School to move to new classes.


Disney World
To the Editor: We enjoyed Nancy Sharkey's article about Disney World ("Days and Nights at Disney World," Dec. 6) as we have stayed at Caribbean Beach, Port Orleans and Dixie Landings over the past several years.
This year, in the week before Thanksgiving, we stayed at Dixie Landings.
We found it wonderfully quiet.
We opted for a corner room which gave us two windows, a view of the "river" and easy access to the restaurant area.
We also had a refrigerator, and Ms.
Sharkey could have had one for the asking.
When the luggage attendant was loading our bags, he noticed our cooler and asked if we wanted a fridge.
Sure enough, a few minutes later a small refrigerator arrived.


Lemieux Says He Is Feeling Well
The man who most deserved to play in the N.H.L All-Star Game this afternoon watched from an upper-level security box.
Mario Lemieux recently finished his first five days of radiation treatment for Hodgkin's disease.
Today, he looked no thinner, no weaker.
Before the game, at center ice at the Forum, he pulled a Wales Conference jersey over his head.
He looked ready to play.
The league's leading goal-scorer with 39 goals despite having missed 13 games, first because of back problems and then because of the cancer, Lemieux would have been a shoo-in to start for the Wales Conference team here, in front of his home-town crowd.


Don't Be So Quick To Overlook Cobb
To the Sports Editor:
In the article by Joe Sexton on Maury Wills he states that "Wills was arguably the best on the base paths that anyone had ever seen." Sexton, as most people do, is forgetting the best base runner of all time: Ty Cobb.
Many runners have stolen a significant number of bases in their career, but no one has ever dominated the base paths like Ty Cobb.
He constantly disrupted the opposition with his tactics in an era when the average ballplayer was much more savvy than today's best.
He stole home a phenomenal number of times and frequently went from first to third on sacrifice bunts.
Twice he scored from first on a sacrifice bunt.
Many may have been faster but none smarter on the base paths than the great Cobb.
ROGER WATERS Washington Township, N.J.


A Woman, No, 8 Women, Of Substance
Ann Marwood Bartle accessorizes excessively.
It isn't enough for the Manhattan socialite in Paul Rudnick's hit Off Broadway play, "Jeffrey," to wear a red AIDS-awareness ribbon; she has to wear a purple ribbon, too, along with a jumbo diamond brooch.
"The purple is in memory of those who have died, and the diamond spray is a gift from her first husband," said Harriet Harris, the actress whose send-up of Mrs.
Bartle, who organizes a hoedown at the Waldorf-Astoria to raise money for AIDS, is one of the most hilarious performances in the play.
"She really is doing something wonderful, but it is just really weird having a square dance to benefit AIDS."


Lawyers Face Rise in Claims of Corruption
Tempted by the economic expectations of the high-octane 1980's but hindered by the sluggish reality of the 1990's, more and more lawyers in New York State are stealing larger sums of money from their clients, according to officials who monitor lawyer misconduct.
"What has happened since the recession began a few years ago would knock your socks off," said Frederick Miller, executive director of the Lawyers' Fund for Client Protection, an agency created by New York State in 1982 to compensate people who have been robbed by their lawyers.
He said the fund, which is supported by licensing fees paid by all lawyers, is "stretched to the breaking point."


Recent Sales
Bay Shore  $370,000
35 South Ocean Avenue  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 100-year-old colonial; fireplace, deck, 1-bedroom, 1-bath guest cottage, 10 boat slips, 1.5 acres; taxes $10,200.
Massapequa  $215,000
264 Forest Avenue  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 27-year-old high ranch; family room, hardwood floors, new windows, deck; taxes $5,800.
Northport  $170,000
5 Wren Court  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 30-year-old split level; family room, deck, 1-car garage; taxes $3,800.
Plainview  $250,000
985 Washington Avenue  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 35-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, basement, 2-car garage, 1.5 acres; taxes $10,500.
Smithtown  $253,000
14 Graystone Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 13-year-old center-hall colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den with fireplace, 0.57 acre; taxes $6,200.
Uniondale  $160,000
113 Cunningham Avenue  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,300.
OTHER AREAS South Salem, N.Y.  $220,000
49 Smith Ridge Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 12-year-old contemporary; kitchen, pantry, computer room, stone fireplace, deck, 3.3 acres; taxes $6,444.
Branford, Conn.  $160,000
12 Midwood Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 39-year-old Cape Cod; skylights, new kitchen, in-ground pool, 0.5acre; taxes $2,719.
Bergenfield, N.J.  $150,000
40 Queen Street
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 24-year-old split level; 1-car garage, c/a, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,700.


Heinz H. Bender, 83, Presidents' Pastry Chef
Heinz H. Bender, the pastry chef to three Presidents, died Thursday at his home on Longboat Key, outside Sarasota.
He was 83.
Before retiring in 1979, Mr.
Bender worked for 11 years in the White House, baking cakes and cookies for Presidents Richard M. Nixon, Gerald R. Ford and Jimmy Carter.


Corinne Hermann and David Weintrob
Corinne Renee Hermann, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul M. Hermann of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married in Brooklyn yesterday to David Perez Weintrob, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Weintrob of Potomac, Md.
Rabbi James Perman performed the ceremony at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Mrs.
Hermann-Weintrob, 29, is a senior copywriter at Grey Advertising Inc., in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president for the American Express Company in New York.


Look, Ma, I'm an Auteur!
For most people, interactive movies and television -- you talk to the screen and the characters do what you say -- still means clapping to save Tinkerbell.
As it happens, I never clapped for Tink, even as a 4-year-old.
It was a test.
I didn't clap, Tink lived anyway, and I knew the fix was in.
For children growing up in a computer-literate world, talking back to movies is bound to be different.
The first inkling of this trend is "I'm Your Man," a low-budget, good-humored, 20-minute "interfilm" (now playing in New York and Lakewood, Calif.) in which the audience directs the plot by pushing green, orange or red buttons connected to the armrest of every seat in the theater.


Moor is More


Alaska, on Land and Sea
AS we cruised along Alaska's rugged coastline, veils of mist rose and fell in languid sweeps, first revealing, then concealing patches of green amid the snow.
Even in August the mountains that lined our route were touched with white.
Mesmerized, we watched as some invisible Salome of the north fluttered wisp after diaphanous wisp across the tree-covered heights.
In the stillness of those remote reaches it was easy to commune across time with those who first glimpsed such a spectacle eons ago, after crossing over from Siberia on the now-submerged land bridge.
During the 10 days of our 2,300-mile journey on the Sagafjord, through the Gulf of Alaska and down the Inside Passage from Anchorage to Vancouver, with stops at Homer, Seward, Valdez, Sitka, Skagway, Juneau and Ketchikan, there were frequent reminders of the past.
For me there were personal links.
Out there, beyond our sea lanes, on an island in the Aleutians, an older brother had served as an ordnance officer during World War II.
Onion-domed churches similar to those he visited still dot that landscape, an enduring legacy from Russian missionaries.


Brad Phillips, 74, Dies; Was Radio Newscaster
Brad Phillips, a retired radio news anchor at WINS in New York City and a leader in the national radio and television union, died on Thursday at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 74 and lived in Manhattan.
He had a short illness, his family said.


Polgar Starts Strongly Against Spassky
JUDIT POLGAR of Hungary, at 16 the world's youngest grandmaster, won two of the first four games against Boris Spassky of France, a former world champion, to lead in their exhibition match in Budapest.
After winning the fourth game on Thursday, Polgar was ahead, 2 1/2-1 1/2.
Game 1 on Sunday was a draw, Polgar won on Monday and Spassky, 56, was victorious on Wednesday.


Spano's Bid Heats Up Campaign
FOUR years ago, County Clerk Andrew J. Spano, a Democrat, set his sights on the county executive's office, a post that had been held since 1980 by Andrew P. O'Rourke, a Republican.
But the contest was not to be.
Mr.
Spano was persuaded by fellow Democrats to drop out, leaving the field to another Democrat, Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky of Greenburgh.
Mr.
Brodsky ran and lost, and this year the same lineup appears to be taking shape, to the annoyance of Democratic Party leaders who had hoped to avoid a costly and divisive primary.
As one of them put it last week, "We thought we had an understanding with Richard that if he lost in 1989, he would not run again."


Champions All, Strutting Their Stuff
The Westminster Kennel Club's 117th annual show, which opens a two-day run at Madison Square Garden tomorrow, shapes up as one of the most keenly contested in recent years.
A wire fox terrier, Ch.
Registry's Lonesome Dove, last year's best-in-show performer, returns, as well as four other top winners she defeated in the 1992 final.
This is the second year that Westminster has limited the entry to champions.
Indeed, it is the only dog show in the country that requires all of its entries to have the coveted Ch. title.


Campbell Is Using His Time Wisely
Playing time has become a precious commodity for Tony Campbell.
He cannot forget the lonely period he went through earlier this season, when he rarely got off the Knicks' bench except when someone called a timeout.
How bad was it?
From Dec. 3 to Jan. 13, Campbell did not play in 16 of the Knicks' 19 games.
And in the 3 games when he did see action during that period, Campbell played a grand total of 19 minutes.


Labor's Showdown at Federal Express
BY most measures, Don Wilson has realized the American dream.
As a 20-year pilot for the Federal Express Corporation, he has worked his way up to the senior ranks and now earns more than $175,000 a year.
He lives in a comfortable house in Memphis, the company's home base.
And he even likes his boss, Frederick W. Smith, the man who founded the company and revolutionized the air express industry by making overnight delivery a dependable, nationwide service.
Mr.
Smith cares about his employees, Mr.
Wilson says.
Yet Mr.
Wilson has become a dyed-in-the-wool union man.
As good as the company has been to him, he is worried about a yawning gap in pension benefits compared with those at unionized carriers.
Even more important, he says, is the need to have a larger voice in dealing with management at a time of industry turmoil and retrenchment.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
SHE'S A REBEL The History of Women in Rock &amp; Roll.
By Gillian G. Gaar.
Seal Press, paper, $16.95.


Tech Notes; An Infrared Zap for Metals
NEW methods are being introduced to the heat-treating of metals, offering the promise of a more efficient way than gas- or oil-fueled ovens to improve a metal's strength and hardness.
The development of short-wave length, high-intensity infrared heating seems likely to be particularly useful for treatment of aluminum.
Among the drawbacks of conventional furnaces are their long heat-up times.
Because it takes 1 1/2 to 2 hours for an oven to reach the proper temperature, many factories are reluctant to ever shut the ovens off.
Infrared heating warms up in five to eight minutes.


Update; Harry Connick Jr. Won't Sing 'Jailhouse Rock' After All
The Queens District Attorney's office has agreed to dismiss misdemeanor charges against Harry Connick Jr., the singer, who was arrested Dec. 25 at Kennedy International Airport for carrying an unlicensed 9-millimeter pistol.
Mr.
Connick, who was carrying the unloaded gun in his luggage, turned it over to the police before it was found, but was charged nonetheless.


Meredith Hyde, James Treadwell
Mr. and Mrs.
David R. Hyde of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Meredith Ellen Hyde, to James Treadwell, a son of Dr.
Thomas Treadwell of London and Tatiana Barker of DeCourcy Island, British Columbia.
A fall wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hyde, 27, graduated cum laude from Yale University and received a master's degree in English literature from Oxford University.
She has taught English literature at Oxford and at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Her father is a senior counsel to the New York law firm of Cahill Gordon &amp; Reindel.


Sports of The Times; It's Early February and It's Time to Get Real
WENT to drop a note to a friend.
Found a book of art postcards in my drawer: "Baseball," issued by Fawcett Columbine of New York.
Gift from my wife.
Started to flip through it.
Realized just how badly I was suffering from baseball deprivation.
Where have you gone, Francisco Cabrera?
Hmmm.
The timeless Rockwell painting of Cubs manager grimacing in the dugout.
Saw Frey, Zimmer and Lefebvre twisting just like that in recent years.
Can't part with this card.
Next.
Bill Purdom's offset lithograph "Crosley Field Revisited," Frank Robinson trying to hit the ball over one of the charming hills of Cincinnati.
Spent a lot of nice hours in that sweet doomed old park.
Next.


Better Days Muffle Clinton's Call for Sacrifice
To economists, it makes no sense whatsoever.
But in a perverse way, the rather good economic news these days may make it harder politically for President Clinton to ask Americans to tighten their belts for the sake of future prosperity.
Before the election, when the economy seemed dead in the water, when the unemployment rate was peaking, when Ross Perot was barking about how the economy was perched on the edge of a cliff, Mr.
Clinton had no trouble campaigning for a fundamental change in direction.


Twosome


Arthur Ashe, Tennis Champion, Dies of AIDS
Arthur Ashe, a tennis champion who spent his years in the sport fighting discrimination and then spent the final year of his life seeking to broaden public awareness on the subject of AIDS, died yesterday.
He was 49.
A New York Hospital administrator, Judith Lilavois, said Ashe died at 3:13 P.M. of pneumonia, a complication of AIDS.
He was admitted to the hospital on Friday.


Lea Dobbs, William Kelsey
Gloria Lea Dobbs, the daughter of Gloria Fisher Dobbs of Leawood, Kan., and Robert H. Dobbs of Bella Vista, Ark., was married yesterday to William Crighton Kelsey, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas V. A. Kelsey of Summit, N.J.
The Rev.
George A. Keith, an Episcopal minister, officiated at St.
George's Church in New York.
The Rev.
Preston T. Kelsey, an Episcopal minister who is the bridegroom's uncle, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Dobbs Kelsey, who is 29, is known as Lea.
She is a marketing consultant in Frankfurt with St.
Gallen Consulting, a management consulting concern.
She graduated from Tulane University.
Her father is a real-estate developer and manager in Bella Vista.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Karen Dobbs.


Wall Street; How John Bull at Home Becomes John Bear Abroad
WITH the British Government pushing down interest rates to end the country's stubborn recession, stock prices have begun to soar.
Or have they?
It all depends on how you measure them.
In pounds, the bull market is certainly on.
The Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100 index ended this week 24 percent higher than at the end of last August, shortly before the Government's economic policy changed.
Last week, the Footsie, as it is affectionately called, rose 2 percent.


Arthur R. Weckel, 87, Engineer and Executive
Arthur R. Weckel, who was a test engineer and a vice president at the former Sperry Gyroscope Company, died on Jan. 27 at Pennswood Village, a retirement community in Newtown, Pa.
He was 87 and a former resident of Yardley, Pa.
His death was announced by the Charles F. Swartz Funeral Home in Newtown.


Corrections
Two picture captions on Jan. 24 about ouzeri restaurants in Athens reversed the identities of the restaurants shown.
The woman drawing beer from a tap was at Avyssinia and the diners at a table were at Apostos.


Arcade Owner And the Community
After reading "A Rare Oasis of Enjoyment Suffers a Moment of Doubt"  [ Jan. 17 ]  about the decline in business at Space Plex, the amusement arcade in Nesconset following the alleged Katie Beers disappearance, I felt compelled to write.
Not only does Gary Tuzzallo run a clean, safe, carefully supervised business, he is also a generous and supportive member of his community.


2 Approaches To Costa Rica
Two specialized one-week tours of Costa Rica are scheduled in the next few weeks, one sponsored by the Craft and Folk Art Museum of Los Angeles, focusing on crafts and folk art, and the other by the 92d Street Y in New York, which will concentrate on forests and the ecology.
The museum's trip, leaving March 12, features an ox-cart festival, visits to woodworkers' studios and artisans' workshops, a rain forest tour and art museums.
It costs $2,195 a person, in double occupancy, including round-trip air fare between Los Angeles and San Jose via Miami, tour-bus transportation, seven nights' accommodations and most meals, and the services of two tour leaders.
The group will stay in hotels in Guanacaste, El Tucano and Alajuela as well as San Jose.
Information: the museum, (213) 937-5544, or Crown International Travel, (800) 421-9537 or (310) 475-5661.


Wall Street; The Murky World of Front-Running
IF you considered the 1980's scramble to divine a definition of insider trading a laugh, you'll really be yukking it up over the quest to nail down what constitutes research front-running.
Miscreants who front-run a research report profit by trading in a security before the formal dissemination of an analyst's change of opinion.
Such trading has apparently been happening prior to recommendations made by Raymond James &amp; Associates, the Florida firm has acknowledged in recent weeks.


Are Fallen Barons Victims of Their Press Clippings?
THE fall of one after another corporate chief -- Robert C. Stempel at General Motors, John F. Akers at I.B.M. and, a week ago, James D. Robinson 3d at American Express -- has prompted many writers to muster a royal procession of metaphors.
These men were monarchs or kings, we are told, holding sway over vast domains at imperial salaries, until they were beheaded or toppled by coups.
But who crowned them in the first place?
Their boards and their corporate predecessors, true.
But also the chummy publicists and the business press, whetting and then feeding the public's appetite for celebrity.


'Oklahoma!' Is Still O.K.
Broadway history buffs are already celebrating next month's 50th anniversary of the 1943 musical "Oklahoma!" Says one: "It changed Broadway forever." Another: "It gave birth to the musical as we know it today."
They rave because "Oklahoma!" was a musical with body, not bodies.
In contrast to all the leggy chorus-line shows that dominated musical theater in that era, the majestic songs of "Oklahoma!" by Rodgers and Hammerstein and the fabulous choreography of Agnes DeMille were structurally integral to a sunny boy-gets-girl plot with a flavoring of life in the Oklahoma Territory.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about the outbreak of food poisoning in the Northwest described one child's death incorrectly in one passage.
Although the child died from an E. coli infection, the kind associated with the food-poisoning cases, the child did not eat at a Jack in the Box restaurant, and there is no direct evidence that hamburgers sold there caused the death.
As the article noted, secondary infection -- by touching an infected person, for example -- is a possibility.


Dorothy and Wiz Hip-Hop Into the 90's
THE orchestra has two synthesizers, the citizens in Emerald City are voguing, the monkeys wear leather suspenders and the Wiz has a beeper number.
In "The Wiz," reimagined for the 90's - the book writer and director-choreographer are taking care not to use the word "revived" - the accent is on style and on substance.


Profile/Yang Jiaxing; Pushing the Limits In Chinese Banking
IN a nation where courtesy is often regarded as a sign of weakness, the most startling thing about China's first private bank is that its tellers are polite.
They smile.
They say thank you.
They don't take impromptu tea breaks at their desks while waiting customers look on murderously.
In another innovation that has people here shaking their heads in wonderment, the bank lends money based on creditworthiness.
"At state banks, it's the state's money, so if you have good connections or if you send the loan officers a gift, then you can get a loan even if your credit isn't so good," said Yang Jiaxing, the private bank's 47-year-old manager and founder, sitting in his small office above his bank.
"Here it's much stricter. We don't have buddy loans, the way they do. If you don't meet our requirements, then I won't make you a loan even if you are my friend."


WINKING AT BIMBOS?
Lois Gould's most amusing analysis of the fate of political bimbos suggests a tabloid claim that Marilyn Monroe "slept with Nikita S. Khrushchev, too."
That reminded me of a Russian joke of many years ago, with the usual American and Russian at a bar.
The two are recalling historic events, and the American asks the Russian what might have happened if Nikita had been killed intead of J.F.K.


Advancing The Gender-Neutral
To the Editor:
Brava to Ms.
Kakutani for her informative and insightful article on politically correct word usage.
I have not read the dic(Jane?)tionaries that Ms.
Kakutani mentioned, but found the excerpts she cited most interesting.
Let us do away with such obviously offensive terms as "bull market" (even though it is always contrasted with a "bear" and not a "cow" market, and even though bulls are in fact more aggressive than cows).
And let me make more suggestions.
"Ms." does not go far enough; how about a gender-neutral term, like "Msr.," for "Mazter?" And out of sensitivity to people who are losing their hair, I suggest that we do away with "bald" and "balding." Would not "hair-impaired" be more appropriate?
When political correctness says "jump," have we any options but to ask "how high?" RAPHAEL KLAYMAN, er KLAYPERSON  Brooklyn


Mary Bissell and Hedrick Belin
Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Bissell of Birmingham, Mich., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Mary Katherine Bissell, to H. Hedrick Belin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dorrance R. Belin of Waverly, Pa.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Bissell, 24, graduated magna cum laude from Yale University.
She is a second-year law student at Georgetown University.
Her father is a partner, in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., of Gundersen Partners Inc., a market-consulting and executive-search company in New York.


Corrections
The Cuttings column on Jan. 10, about the Huntington Botanical Gardens in San Marino, Calif., omitted a co-author of "The Golden Age of American Gardens" (Harry N. Abrams, 1991).
It is by Mac Griswold and Eleanor Weller.


Eclipsed For Centuries, Bassano Shines
In the Venice of Titian, Tintoretto and Veronese, one of the most sought after artists was Jacopo Bassano.
His reputation has since dimmed.
But the retrospective here at the Kimbell Art Museum should restore luster to him and help make sense of a career that can seem dizzyingly diverse.
There was the young Bassano of the 1530's, whose candid, orderly, festively colored paintings combined the simplicity of Carpaccio with the more advanced style of early
Titian.
There was the Bassano of the 1540's and 1550's, whose tumultuous images of tangled bodies, rendered in acid tones, are among the great examples of Italian Mannerist painting.


The Blues: A Cousin Of Mozart?
Two cultural events don't necessarily make a movement.
But when common ground is reached by such disparate performers as LaMonte Young, the pianist and minimalist composer, and Wynton Marsalis, the jazz trumpeter and composer, something's up.
In recent shows, both musicians used the simple three-chord blues form.
And though their interpretations were different, they had a shared purpose: they treated the blues as art music, as opposed to popular music.
The two composers approached the music in a new way, one not identified with the European classical world of Mozart or Beethoven, though undeniably classical.
Their conception was based on a classical model whose elements are simplicity, durability, cultural importance and critical consensus.
Blues, not the genre but the form, looks as if it's going to outlast many of the cultural products of the 20th century.
It may just end up being one of the century's better moments, transcending its background and attaining universal acceptance as a cultural landmark -- another definition of "classical."


In Time of Cutbacks, Explosive Growth
The huge success of the Ridgewood Bushwick Senior Citizens Council in accumulating government grants is particularly striking when matched against the cutbacks in many anti-poverty programs during the 1980's.
According to New York City figures, during the 80's Federal money for anti-poverty programs in the city fell by about $3 billion a year during the decade.
Tax returns for Ridgewood Bushwick's interlocking not-for-profit corporations show the annual budgets rising from virtually nothing in the early 80's to $33 million last year.


Behind a Fatal Beating, a Life of Drugs and Rage
On the joyful morning that Christopher Battiste joined his mother's white-washed church in the Bronx, the Rev.
Jerry Mosby felt a sharp, fleeting sense of dread.
He could not quite define it, he said later, but there had been something strangely unsettling in the newcomer's eyes.
Hours later, during a visit to another church, that intuition proved prophetic.
As organ and voices swelled in an opening hymn, Mr.
Battiste bolted toward the altar, sweeping the Bible, the gleaming metal cross and the brass candlesticks to the floor before loping glassy eyed for the door.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE CHESHIRE MOON By Robert Ferrigno. Morrow, $20.


Why Is New York Getting Exemption?
To the Sports Editor:
Times columnists have regularly, and rightly, chastised professional sports for failing to hire or promote minorities to head-coaching and front-office positions.
How is it, then, that during the just-completed "Let's Find a Giants' Coach Sweepstakes," only one list of potential candidates contained a minority candidate's name, even as a long shot.


Gary Simpson and Cynthia Sulzberger
Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Ochs Sulzberger of New York and Southampton, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Cynthia Fox Sulzberger, to Gary Leonard Simpson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Simpson of Old Westbury, L.I.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Sulzberger, a graduate of Duke University, is an intern in the Language and Learning Disability Unit at St.
Luke's Hospital in New York.
She is studying for a master's degree in reading disabilities at the Bank Street College of Education.


How Do You Say, 'Vegetable'?
THE first night my sister stayed with her Japanese host family on her junior year abroad, they took her to a restaurant on the outskirts of Kyoto.
Her Japanese was rudimentary and the family spoke no English, but everyone sat sociably around the low, polished wooden table drinking sake and smiling at each other.
When the waitress arrived to take their orders, however, my sister became flustered.
She was a vegetarian then, and while she had practiced how to say that she ate only fish, vegetables and fruit, she also wanted to be polite.
When it was her turn to order, she stared at the kanji characters marching down the menu and then, smiling beseechingly at her Japanese mother, made her careful announcement.
The waitress widened her eyes; the family froze.
My sister, not knowing what else to do, repeated what she'd just said.
Finally, her Japanese mother whispered something to her husband, who murmured something to the waitress, who vanished.
Everyone blinked nervously at my sister.
What she had confided, she learned later, was that she consumed only fish, greengrocers and children.


Mercer Misses The Mark Again
When he is finally finished boxing, Ray Mercer's legacy might look something like this: He could have been a contender.
For the second time in his career, Mercer got close and then wasted a chance to fight for the heavyweight title.
Last night, with a promise that he would meet Riddick Bowe if he beat Jesse Ferguson at Madison Square Garden, Mercer failed miserably.


Ideas Turn Soloists Into Daredevils
There they stand, all alone, ready to embark upon solo flights.
Dancers who present solos are daredevils, for they must persuade audiences that a single figure on stage deserves watching.
But dancers love taking risks, and as several recent solos demonstrated, the risks are well worth taking.
One notable work was based on realistic gestures.
Others emphasized the designs a moving body can make.
Still others looked abstract yet proved unexpectedly representational.


Sherry Bricker, Andrew Miller
Mr. and Mrs.
Norman R. Bricker of Bellmore, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Sherry Beth Bricker, to Andrew Laurence Miller, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Paul Miller of New Vernon, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Bricker, 26, graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y.
She is an actuary with Insurance Services Office Inc., which advises property and casualty insurance companies, in New York.
Her mother, Fran Bricker, and her father own Cherrywood Hallmark, a greeting card store in Wantaugh, L.I.


The Executive Computer; Beware! The Computer Is Extending Its Reach
ELECTRONIC mail, spreadsheets and data base programs are very efficient means of communications for much of the information that an executive needs, but they represent just a small subset of all the information flow in the modern office.
New technologies on display here last week at the Demo 93 computer conference made it seem likely that the executive's computer will quickly assume a wider role as a communications device in the months ahead.
"Sixty percent to 90 percent of all nonspoken communications are paper based," said David Skok, chairman and chief executive of the Watermark Software Corporation of Burlington, Mass., which, like a dozen other companies here, sees traditional voice and paper communications as the computer's next frontiers.


WINKING AT BIMBOS?
What were you thinking of to run that Hers column by Lois Gould ("Winking at Bimbos?" Jan. 17)?
It offered nothing but shopworn gossip, and to publish it in an issue focused on the Clintons three days before the Inauguration was simply rude.
ALICE K. TURNER
New York, N.Y.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.Family Leave: Vote to kill a Republican amendment to a family leave bill that would have prohibited any changes in the military's ban on homosexuals including President Clinton's decision to stop asking recruits about their sexual orientation.
Approved 62 to 37, Feb. 4.
2.Family Leave: Vote on passage of a bill that would guarantee workers up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave for medical emergencies and includes language endorsing the Department of Defense study on homosexuals in the armed services.
Approved 71 to 27, Feb. 4.
1 2
Connecticut Dodd (D) . . .  Lieberman (D) . . .
New Jersey Bradley (D) . . .  Lautenberg (D) . . .
New York D'Amato (R) . . .
&lt;&gt;QMoynihan (D) . . .


On the Case
TO DESCRIBE DANIEL Johnnes as the sommelier at Montrachet, the popular restaurant in TriBeCa, would be like describing Stephen Sondheim as a piano player.
There's a bit more to it.
The 37-year-old Johnnes (pronounced JON-iss) is one of a new breed of wine stewards who is perfectly happy to suggest something to drink with your sea urchin custard but whose job description goes way beyond recommending a white for the fish.


JAN. 31-FEB. 6: An Education President; A Pragmatic Note In Columbia's Newest Head
Can a university head successfully combine a pragmatic administrative style with a liberal theological philosophy?
Columbia University's newest president apparently can.
Last week the university selected its 18th president, George E. Rupp, currently president of Rice University in Houston and an ordained Presbyterian minister who once was dean of the divinity school at Harvard.


Dried Cherry Valentine Dishes, in Servings for Two
NEXT Sunday, Valentine's Day, offers an excuse to devise dishes and menus with foods that are heart-shaped, pink or red, sweet, prepared for two people and endowed with supposed aphrodisiac properties.
Some of those goals can be achieved by using dried cherries, an ingredient that is a fairly recent addition to the pantry.
Dried cherries are plumper than the typical raisins sold in boxes.
While not quite as sweet as raisins, they do add both a note of color and a tart sweetness when substituted for raisins in a dish.
They can be used in savory recipes, with poultry, game meats and even fish like salmon.
A dried-cherry relish or vinegar-based chutney is excellent to accompany a pate or, for a luxurious Valentine dinner, some foie gras served cold or freshly sauteed.


Blockade and Winter Deepen Misery in Armenia
For two months now, since a fuel shortage grew into a national catastrophe for Armenia, a children's hospital perched on a hilltop overlooking the capital has been without heat, and more often than not, electricity and running water.
Stoves stoked with wood cut from trees on the grounds of Nork Hospital are kept going day and night, both to warm the wards and to heat pots of water, food and even bottles of intravenous fluid for infants in the intensive care unit.


Focus: Greenville, Del.; Builder's Motto: 'Move On, Clean House'
PACKING is a pleasure for Vernon and Beverly Toulson, or so they say.
It is certainly a familiar experience.
They have moved 21 times in the last 23 years.
The most recent move was from Vero Beach, Fla., to Delaware, where they lived temporarily in Mr.
Toulson's parents' house before moving six months later into a new house in this high-end residential suburb half a dozen miles northwest of Wilmington.
They sold the house in Vero Beach after having lived in it a year and now their 6,400-square-foot French-country-style house here is on the market for $950,000.


WINKING AT BIMBOS?
Surely, in an election where so many women's issues were important and so many female candidates were elected, it should have been possible to select a topic that was more timely.
The year of the woman?
I wonder.
THELMA SOKOLOFF
Sands Point, L.I.


Sue Thornton, Adrian Chanler
Mr. and Mrs.
James D. Thornton Jr. of Westerly, R.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Sue Hay Thornton, to Adrian J. Chanler, a son of Mrs.
Hubert W. Chanler of Geneseo, N.Y., and the late Admiral Chanler of the United States Navy.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Thornton is a partner in the Charleston, S.C., law firm of Geoffrey Smith &amp; Associates.
She graduated from Boston University and received a law degree from the University of South Carolina.
Her father is the senior partner in Thornton, Thornton &amp; Thomsen, a law firm in Westerly.


POSTINGS: Bankruptcy Reorganization; Manager for Troubled Port Liberte
Launched in 1980's ambition and becalmed in 1990's economic reality, the enormous Port Liberte project on the Hudson River in Jersey City has taken what its lenders hope will be a first step toward recovery.
As part of the bankruptcy reorganization plan, the lending institutions have appointed Glaves/JLW Financial Advisors as general manager of the troubled project.
Set on a network of canals, Port Liberte was to have had 2,280 town houses and apartments, a marina, yacht club, health club, hotel, office building and stores.
Only 363 residential units were begun, of which 252 are occupied and 111 are unfinished.


So You Thought That Computer Note Was Private
Who knows what Oliver North was doing back in 1986 when he sent this electronic message to his aide Ronald Sable: "Oh Lord, I lost the slip and broke one of the high heels. Forgive please. Will return the wig on Monday."
Whatever the message meant, Mr.
North, the lieutenant colonel at the center of the cloak-and-dagger scheming that became the Iran-contra affair, assuredly never imagined that the rest of the world would one day be able to read it.


Bearing Witness To 3-Letter Words
To the Editor:
The suggestion by a member of the Modern Language Association that "ovarimony" be used as a politically correct female equivalent of "testimony," reported by Michiko Kakutani in her stimulating article "The Word Police" (Jan. 31), is unmatched in hilarious imbecility.
A glance at a dictionary would have told this misguided zealot that "testimony" is derived from the Latin word "testis" in its primary meaning, "witness." The anatomical meaning of "testis" was a later development, reflecting the notion that the testes "bear witness" to their owner's masculinity.


As Hunger Ebbs, Somalia Faces Need to Rebuild
Seven weeks after American troops first came to this country's shores, the famine that drew them here has moved out of sight.
Like the guns now hidden in the fields of southern Somalia, hunger remains, but it is no longer an overwhelming presence.
While precise national figures on the death rate are hard to come by, perhaps the most revealing signs of change are in anecdotes showing that a measure of ceremony has returned to death.
A burial here last week was more than a numb farewell to another famine victim.
In the early morning, the family gathered for a service with a mullah.


Perspectives: Chemical's Consolidation; Merger Adds Space to the Office Market
IN the cause of making a point about the uses of real estate, Cesar J. Chekijian likens the merger of "old" Chemical Bank and Manufacturers Hanover Trust a year ago to the marriage of two people who were living in separate houses.
Mr.
Chekijian, as the director of the Corporate Properties Group of the new Chemical Bank, is the man who is getting the newlyweds into a single house.


Queens Chief Not Favoring Chancellor For 2d Term
The Borough President of Queens, who has been the focus of a week of intense lobbying by supporters and critics of the city's Schools Chancellor, strongly suggested yesterday that she did not support extending his term, saying he had expended more energy on controversial social issues than on educational initiatives.
The Borough President, Claire Shulman, whose appointee to the Board of Education appears to be the swing vote in the board's decision this week on the future of Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez, declined to say explicitly whether she supported renewing his contract.
But her remarks clearly showed that Mr.
Fernandez and his policies had not won her support or that of her constituents.


Night Salesclerks Targets of Violence
A FATAL assault last month on a night attendant at a gasoline station in Commack has focused increased attention on the rising number of violent late-night crimes targeted not only at such stations, but also at convenience and fast-food stores throughout the Island.
The 24-hour businesses, often with just one employee on duty at night, are considered easy prey for intruders, a majority of whom are crack addicts, said Detective Lieut.
John Horan of the robbery squad of the Suffolk police.
"These are desperate people," he said.
"If they get resistance, they react."  Immigrants and Low Pay
There are no separate data on crimes involving violence or injuries, Detective Horan said, but they are definitely increasing.
In many late-night robberies, the employees are immigrants, Lieutenant Horan said, adding:


Give That Hat A Hand
Whimsical hats, which make their wearers look as if they were on their way to the Mad Hatter's tea party, are the rage this winter in Greenwich Village and SoHo.
Designed and worn with a sense of humor, the shapes include variations on the Mad Hatter's top hat and the Cat in the Hat's stovepipe crown.
Warm and witty, the king and queen crown hats -- sold by a sidewalk vendor in SoHo -- are made of soft, crushable fabric and are decorated with beads.
Felt cloches from the Far East are embroidered with seashells.
One of the real head-turners is the hat that looks like a pair of gloves, each hand a different color.
Even the conventional candy-striped stocking cap has evolved, and now sprouts a tassel.
One woman strutted in a hat made from the black tail feathers of a rooster.
On Fifth Avenue, a young man wearing a flowered-patterned top hat nearly collided with a shopper wearing a stylish felt sombrero, but neither noticed the other.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about the film maker Joseph L. Mankiewicz omitted a survivor in some copies.
He is survived by his nephew Frank Mankiewicz, the public relations executive long active in Democratic politics.


Record Bookings in a Buoyant Year
THE first two weeks of the year are always the cruise industry's busiest, but reservations during that period this year broke all records.
Carnival and Royal Caribbean together booked more than 125,000 passengers in the first week, 8,000 more than last year's record, and other cruise lines also reported big increases.
The main reasons for the booking surge, according to industry executives, were pent-up demand and an improving economy.
Reservations have since returned to normal, but if the economy continues to improve and potential world trouble spots stay quiet, the industry expects almost five million passengers this year, 10 percent higher than 1992.
At least five new ships are scheduled for delivery this year, at least six others are planned by 1996 -- which, despite the increased bookings, may be too much of a good thing from the industry point of view.


Armani Disarmed
WHO is Gio?
If you don't know now, you will soon enough.
Gio is the new fragrance by Giorgio Armani and also his nickname; the question is the theme line of an advertising campaign that already feels as if its gone longer than the Energizer.


A Jury's Trials: Will Memories of Riots Influence a Verdict?
IF any of the four officers on trial here for the beating of Rodney G. King is convicted, defense lawyers have already set the stage for an appeal, suggesting that the fear of a riot could make it impossible for a jury to vote for acquittal.
Jury selection in the Federal retrial of the officers began last week.
But many experts in jury selection, as well as the defense lawyers themselves, are raising doubts about the jurors' ability to set aside concerns over the immediate impact of the verdict they reach.
When a state jury acquitted the officers of assault last April, riots broke out in Los Angeles, causing more than 50 deaths and a billion dollars in damage.


Now It's the Jungle That the Khmer Rouge Decimates
ALONG Cambodia's long, semicircular border with Thailand, stretches of what had been dense tropical jungle now resemble a strip mine.
And in that newly bleak, slate-gray landscape lies an explanation of how the fanatical guerrillas of the Khmer Rouge have managed to survive -- even prosper -- as they attempt to sabotage a United Nations-sponsored peace plan in Cambodia.
When they controlled the central Government in the 1970's, the rebel group's Maoist-inspired leaders punished free-market commerce by death.
Today, the Khmer Rouge functions to a large degree as a business venture, granting lucrative concessions to companies, most of them from Thailand, involved in gem-mining and logging.


London Displays Wright's Works
A new gallery devoted to the work of Frank Lloyd Wright at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London is described by the museum as the most comprehensive display of his work in Europe.
The centerpiece is the complete office built in 1937 for one of Wright's most loyal patrons, Edgar J. Kaufmann, president of Kaufmann's Department Store in Pittsburgh.
The office contains the original furniture, woodwork, upholstery and carpets, all designed by Wright.
Other examples of Wright's work include furniture, prints, books, graphic designs and stained glass.
Alongside the Frank Lloyd Wright Gallery, which opened last month, a new exhibit at the museum shows works by some of the most influential Western architects, including Lutyens, Vanbrugh, Pearce and Hawksmoor.
The display, which will be changed regularly, is selected from the 35,000 works in the Victoria and Albert's national collection of architectural drawings.


Corrections
A report last Sunday about the wedding of Jennifer Grace Gawler and James Matthew Gelb misstated the dates of the wedding and of the groom's graduation.
The couple were married on Jan. 30, not Jan. 29.
Mr.
Gelb is to graduate from Columbia University on Feb. 15, not in May.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
THREE WISHES.
By Lucille Clifton.
Illustrated by Michael Hayes.
Doubleday. $15. (Ages 5 to 8) "Find a penny on New Year's Day with your birthday year on it" and make three wishes -- the wishes will come true.
A 1976 story reillustrated.


Neediest Cases Shortfall Poses a Threat
With only three weeks left in the 81st annual campaign, The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund is facing a shortfall that could cripple efforts to rescue thousands of people who desperately want help and have nowhere to turn.
The current Neediest Cases campaign passed the $4 million mark yesterday, but it has received about $625,000 less than it had by this date in 1992.
Officials at the seven charities supported by the fund now have to consider what was once unthinkable: reducing or eliminating vital programs.


U.N. Chief's Advice Stirring Japanese Criticism
The Secretary General of the United Nations has touched off criticism from Japan in recent days after he said Tokyo should change its Constitution to permit it to fully participate in peacekeeping operations.
Boutros Boutros-Ghali's comments to leading Japanese newspapers, a little more than a week before he is scheduled to arrive in Tokyo, seemed bound to fuel a movement by conservative party leaders to amend the "peace Constitution," despite the objections of Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
DANCING DEITY
The familiar figure of Shiva, the Hindu god of destruction and rebirth, is the focus of an exhibition at the Yale University Art Gallery through April 11.


Emily Bruce, Gib Chapman
Mrs.
Murphy H. Baxter and George S. Bruce 3d, both of Houston, have announced the engagement of their daughter Emily Kay Bruce to Gilbert W. Chapman 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Chapman Jr. of Mill Neck, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Bruce, 32, is a public-relations manager in New York for Philip Morris U.S.A.
She graduated from Louisiana State University.
Her father is an owner of Bruce &amp; Wimberly, an insurance agency in Houston.
Her mother is a marketing consultant in Houston.
The prospective bride is a stepdaughter of Mr.
Baxter and of Fran Bruce.


Where's The Bright Side?
To the Editor:
To your article "So, You Wanna Be a Director?"  [ Jan. 17 ]  my answer is: "No, and I Don't Wanna Be Your Audience." Of the student-directors, one writes about a transvestite; another about adventures of a gay in the age of AIDS, and the third is putting together "a violent thriller."


Within the Walls of the Chelsea
IT was a Chelsea morning.
In the lobby of the 110-year-old Chelsea Hotel, delivery boys bearing take-out coffee tangled with art handlers carrying paintings to a truck parked outside.
A woman sat making up her face surrounded by a dusty exhibition of resident's art work, acquired in some cases in exchange for rent.
The son of Stanley Bard, the hotel's proprietor, was trying to find a pet store to take the seven progeny of a guest's rabbit.
The mail was just in; the switchboard was already jammed.
The Chelsea has always been a sort of Tower of Babel of creativity and bad behavior.
Some of the world's most gifted and most destructive minds have called 222 West 23d Street home.


Arabian Sights
A little something from the Casbah to wear along with your Seventh Avenue djellaba.


Joanne Adamko, Charles Tatham
Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph M. Adamko of Colonia, N.J., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter, Joanne Marie Adamko, and Charles Mark Tatham, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George M. Tatham of Guelph, Ontario, Canada.
Ms.
Adamko, 32, is a freelance script reader in Marina del Rey, Calif.
She graduated from the University of Hartford and received a master's degree in communications from Syracuse University.
Her father is the vice chairman of the Sterling National Bank and Trust Company in New York.


The Academic Couple From Hell
THE EMPTY LOT
By Mary Gray Hughes. 212 pp.
Chicago: Another Chicago Press.
Cloth, $22.50.
Paper, $10.95.


Sizing Up the Health of a Baby's Heart Before Birth
AT first glance, it looks like nothing more than a small black-and-white television screen with weak reception.
But to a pediatric cardiologist, the device is a window into the inner workings of a tiny fetal heart.
These shadowy images can lead to a life-saving diagnosis.
The pictures are produced by fetal echocardiography, which has become the principal diagnostic test for detecting heart disease in utero.
Essentially, the procedure, which has become increasingly refined over the last decade, produces a highly sophisticated ultrasound image of the fetal heart.
While most obstetricians perform routine ultrasounds (also known as sonograms) on pregnant women, the Westchester County Medical Center is the only place in the seven-county Lower Hudson Valley region -- Westchester, Putnam, Dutchess, Rockland, Orange, Sullivan and Ulster Counties -- that offers those advanced assessments of the fetal heart.


The Virtues Of Universal Recycling
In response to "A La Carte"  [ Jan. 10 ]  regarding recycling, I would like to commend the owners of the Bellport Restaurant for recycling so many items that they use.
It is unfortunate, though, that they had to "press their village officials" for recycling pails.
I believe that for recycling to be successful on Long Island, all restaurants and businesses should be required to recycle metal, glass, plastics and office paper.
Every Long Island Rail Road station, including Pennsylvania Station, should have newspaper-recycling containers.


The Queen Of Buzz
YOU are going to the movies with Peggy Siegal, a Hollywood publicist based in New York who excels at creating word of mouth about films before their release.
Ms.
Siegal is wearing Ralph Lauren and carrying a tub of buttered popcorn.
At the entrance to the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center, she pauses to smile tentatively for a news photographer.
"I hope he didn't get my gummy smile," she says after the photographer leaves.
"That's what Spy magazine calls it -- Peggy Siegal's 'gummy smile.' They always trash me."


Miss Redmond, Robert Anderson
Claire D. Redmond of West Orange, N.J., and John R. Redmond of Convent Station, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Suzanne Gertrude Redmond to Robert Stanton Anderson, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles A. Anderson of Shawnee Mission, Kan.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Redmond is an investor in Little Falls, N.J.
She graduated from Villanova University.
Her father is a senior partner of Fowler, Rosenau &amp; Geary, a specialist firm on the New York Stock Exchange.
The prospective bride is also a stepdaughter of Norma Redmond of Convent Station, N.J.


Challenging A Speed Limit
The article "Borough Challenged on Speed Limit" (Cresskill Journal, Jan. 3) told of Alpine Councilman Larry Manus's getting a ticket charging him with doing 50 miles per hour in a 25 m.p.h. zone and challenging the legality of the 25 m.p.h. speed limit.
But that's what it was as long as the sign was up.
He did not know it was technically illegal.


Data Bank/February 7, 1993


Close Calls: On the Road and on the Phone
FORGET for a moment that scientists know nearly nothing about whether cellular phones cause brain cancer.
The question is complicated, but researchers might some day figure it out.
There is a second, far more obvious kind of risk widely attributed to car phones: car crashes.
But there is a paradox.
While the symptoms may be as easy to spot as a tow truck, the link between phones and accidents may be even harder to verify, in a scientific way, than any link between phones and brain cancer.
A decade into the era of cellular phones, nearly everyone has seen them used in frightening ways.
"I marvel at people in stick-shift cars, one hand on the phone, one on the stick and steering with their knees," said Ken Hacker, who sees such juggling acts on his half-mile walk to the train station every morning.
"They're doing 35 miles per hour in a 45-mile-per-hour zone, and other drivers are swinging around them, and they have absolutely no idea what they are doing."
But in a statistical sense, Mr.
Hacker has no idea of the risk, even though he is a spokesman for the American Insurance Association in Washington.
"Everybody shares this gut feeling that it's a problem," said William R. Schroeder, who has a friend who was recently rear-ended by a driver talking on the phone.
But Mr.
Schroeder, a vice president of the American Insurers Highway Safety Alliance, of Schaumburg, Ill., also has no data to back up his gut.
Nor does Brian O'Neill, president of the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety, which collects crash data on all cars.
"It's one of these questions I'm afraid we are never going to know definitively," Mr.
O'Neill said.
Why?
Because no one keeps track of which cars have phones.
The police, if they are called to an accident at all, do not bother to record whether either car had one.
Insurance companies, which keep the other data needed to screen for accident rates -- age, sex, how many miles a driver logs each year and the like -- do not record whether their drivers have phones, because they don't insure the phones separately, since so few are stolen.
Motor Mouths
Traffic ticket statistics are no help, either.
If officers think a phone helped cause the accident, said Ronald H. Sostkowski, president of the International Association of Chiefs of Police, they may ticket the driver for speeding or inattention.
But not for phoning, which is not a crime.
Nor is it likely to be.
"You'd be opening a can of worms, I'll tell you," Mr.
Sostkowski said.
"With the money the cellular phone company makes, you'd have a lobby you couldn't resist."
Some of the spotty evidence on hand is not reassuring.
A 1991 study by the American Automobile Association Foundation for Traffic Safety found that the attention of drivers using phones as they drove in a simulator was reduced by 20 percent or more.
Older drivers were even more distracted.
A.T.&amp;T. -- which sells phones, not auto insurance -- sponsored a 1985 study that found that drivers with phones tend to have fewer accidents than the norm.
But the study was done by interviewing drivers, not by screening accident data, and few drivers will say they've gotten worse.
Some even said using a phone made them
better
drivers.
A spokesman for A.T.&amp;T., Burke Stinson, said that "it became apparent that talking on the phone did naturally take your attention away from keeping your eyes on the road." But the study did speed the development of speaker phones, for hands-free talking, and even phones that can carry out voice commands like "Call home!" Still, few car phones pay attention to drivers; it's almost always the other way around.
Cilie Collins, a spokeswoman for the Cellular Telecommunications Industry Association in Washington, acknowledged that high-speed discourse can be distracting.
Her suggestion: "If the phone conversation is an emotional one, pull off the road." Or, as someone outside her industry might suggest, if you talk with your hands, take the train.
But Ms.
Collins noted that there are plenty of distractions in a car.
"You could be changing a tape and you could have an accident," she said.
"That's not the tape manufacturer's fault; it's your fault. You can tie an accident to eating a McDonald's hamburger." Car phones don't cause accidents, she said; people do.
And car phones can increase public safety.
The California Highway Patrol found in a study that such phone users report accidents and drunk drivers.
But competition for the driver's attention may get worse.
There are already mobile fax machines.
Mr.
O'Neill foresees dashboard screens with maps and listings for nearby hotels and restaurants.
With the speed of a computer, such devices could call up vast amounts of useful information.
"How will we stop the drivers from reading restaurant reviews?" he said.


Corrections
A picture caption on page 35 of the Arts and Leisure section today refers incorrectly in some copies to the Bartok work being presented by the Canadian Opera Company at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
It is "Bluebeard's Castle."


A Full Day, Brunch Trio To Opera
EVERY so often the concert gates swing open to reveal a bewildering abundance of musical events on a single day.
Today's schedule is an example.
Off to the earliest start is the chamber music brunch at Zenny's in Storrs, with food served at 11:30 followed at 1:15 by performances of works by Beethoven, Frank and Brahms by Ani Kavafian, David Jolley and Anne-Marie McDermott.
Call 429-7510 for details.


Car Import Duty Can Only Hurt U.S. Economy
To the Editor:
Before President Clinton backs the punitive duties on imported cars that American car manufacturers propose (front page, Jan. 26), he will presumably evaluate their impact on the American cost of living, job creation and the interest rate the Government has to pay to sell bonds -- the last an important part of the Federal budget.
On all three counts, the news will be bad.


On a Clear Day, You Can Watch Television
Richard Meier has come home.
That's the felicitous first impression struck by his new building for the Paris headquarters of Canal Plus, the French television and production company.
No, Meier is not a native Parisian.
But then neither was Le Corbusier, the Swiss modernist to whom Meier's crisp white buildings address a respectful "cher maitre." Like Le Corbusier, Meier builds temples to the creed of lucidity that claims the City of Light for its mecca.
Canal Plus infuses that faith with a formal intelligence not seen here since Le Corbusier built his pioneering villas 70 years ago.
Le Corbusier haunts not only the forms of Canal Plus but also its site, formerly the location of Citroen's car factories.
From here, Le Corbusier derived the name, and partly the inspiration, for his Citrohan House, a 1920 project in which he developed his concept of the house as a "machine for living." In the past decade, the district (a 20-minute walk south of the Eiffel Tower) has been redeveloped, chiefly with residential buildings facing onto what will eventually become a new large park on the Left Bank of the Seine.


White House Listing Possible Successors at F.B.I.
Confronted with near chaos in the top ranks of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Clinton Administration has taken preliminary steps to compile names of possible successors to William S. Sessions as F.B.I.
Director, Administration officials said today.
Potential successors whose names have been circulated on Capitol Hill include Lee P. Brown, the former police Commissioner in New York City; James R. Thompson, the former Republican Governor of Illinois, and Lee Colwell, an adviser to President Clinton when he was Governor of Arkansas and a former official of the F.B.I.


Expert Pairs Events Are Hardly Sure Bets
ALTHOUGH it is hard to control, betting on bridge events is frowned on by most official bodies.
This may be just as well, since the performance of bridge experts is often more unpredictable than that of race horses, especially when they play as pairs rather than teams.
Consider for example the strange ups and downs in European play last month in two major invitational events.
In the Hague, Gabriel Chagas and Marcelo Branco, both multiple world champions, scored a convincing victory.
A week later in London, they finished 14th in a field of 16.


KILLINGS BY TROOPS UP IN ISRAELI ZONES
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's first half-year in office has seen a surge in killings of Palestinians by Israeli soldiers in the occupied territories, raising questions about the army's use of gunfire to break up riots and to arrest suspects there.
In the latest violence, six Palestinians were killed in the Gaza Strip on Friday and today.
The army said three armed men were killed Friday when soldiers opened fire at their car.
In street clashes that followed, three more Palestinians were fatally shot.


'Heidi Chronicles,' a Woman's Search
IN 1970, Heidi Holland wandered into a women's consciousness-raising session, announced that she was just visiting and insisted that some things, like body hair and love affairs, were too personal to talk about.
Sharing, the buzzword of all groups, had limits for Heidi, who was more concerned with mattering as an individual than with being a member of a movement.
Although she loosened up and got into the spirit of female bonding, Heidi never let go of her insistence that humanist was the label of choice, not feminist.


BENEFITS
For Women in the Theater
MONDAY -- The Women's Project and Productions, a national organization founded in 1978 to promote the development of female playwrights, directors and performers, will stage a tongue-in-check cabaret show examining male-female relations.
The benefit starts at 8:30 P.M. with a cocktail party at B. Smith's Rooftop Cafe, Eighth Avenue at 47th Street, followed by the show at 9 P.M.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 247-2222.


Looking for an Attorney General: The Law; NO LAW VIOLATED BY JUDGE IN 1986
Judge Kimba M. Wood was right when she said she had violated no law in hiring an illegal immigrant to work as her baby sitter in March 1986.
It was not until eight months later, on Nov. 6, 1986, that Congress outlawed the hiring of illegal aliens, when President Ronald Reagan signed the Immigration Reform and Control Act.


Car Import Duty Can Only Hurt U.S. Economy; No to Gas Tax Hike
To the Editor:
"Reading Mr. Clinton's Lips" (editorial, Jan. 28), on the Federal budget deficit and taxation, incorrectly asserts that there is a "sudden enthusiasm" by the American Petroleum Institute "for a national sales tax rather than a gasoline tax increase."


Casting a Shadow in the Land of Illusion
This is the story of a Hollywood hoax, of a penniless actress who played the role of her own personal manager, pushed her way into movie premieres and got the most important people in Hollywood to return her phone calls.
Carol Ann Francis has been acting 365 days a year.
Since she arrived in Los Angeles in 1989, and failed to get an agent, she recreated herself as her bossy, 43-year-old personal manager, Ann Hollingsworth, who -- in her own fantasy -- has the long legs, blond hair and careless confidence of Candice Bergen.


Has Kodak Built Tomorrow's Brownie?
WHAT happens when high technology and inexpensive camera ideas collide?
For one thing, the Cameo camera line is created.
Eastman Kodak's engineers have produced a new breed of box cameras -- electronic Brownies, in effect -- aimed at the amateur market.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
AMERICAN SALONS Encounters With European Modernism, 1885-1917.
By Robert M. Crunden.
Oxford University, $35.


Hodges Simply Doesn't Belong
To the Sports Editor:
Why is Craig Hodges in the All-Star 3-point contest?
He is no longer an N.B.A. player.
Is the competition open to anybody?
What a mockery of the league and what an insult to active players who use 3-pointers in real game situations as part of a diversified arsenal.
RONALD DIONNE Willington, Conn.


Technology; Australia's Plastic Bills: Durable and Harder to Counterfeit
AUSTRALIA'S monetary officials were so pleased with the birthday present they gave the nation for its bicentennial in 1988 -- the world's first plastic money in a special issue -- that they are now overhauling the nation's currency system, viewing plastic bank notes as both longer lasting and more difficult to counterfeit than traditional paper notes.
Other countries are turning to Australia for help with their own conversions.
Actually, it took more than 20 years to bring out notes made of solid plastic and involved sophisticated technologies generally used in the production of advanced computer chips.
Why plastic?
It is much smoother than paper, so bills can be printed with finer type -- letters only .25 millimeter high, about one-hundredth of an inch -- which is far too fine to be duplicated by copying machines.
Plastic can also be made clear, another way to defeat color copiers.
And it can incorporate other security features better than paper.


Looking for an Attorney General: The Dispute; THE WHITE HOUSE AND JUDGE'S ALLIES CLASH OVER HIRING
The White House and people close to Judge Kimba M. Wood gave contradictory accounts yesterday of the extent and timing of the information she supplied the Clinton Administration about her hiring of an illegal alien, the issue that forced her withdrawal from consideration as Attorney General.
Judge Wood herself, who sits on the Federal District Court in Manhattan, declined yesterday to amplify her Friday statement announcing her withdrawal.
But one person familiar with her version of the events and her dealings with the White House said yesterday that she had given the White House full details of her seven-year employment of an illegal immigrant as her baby sitter, first orally more than a week ago and later in documents and records that she said made it clear that she had done nothing illegal.


Street Vendors Wary of Council Effort to Create More Licenses
While the music throbbed from a large cassette player under a table filled with an assortment of homemade pies and body oils, Morris Powell was quietly seething.
Mr.
Powell, who has sold his wares for a decade on the broad corridor of street vendors along 125th Street, was angry about a measure now before the City Council that would issue more licenses for vendors, but would cause those permits to expire after five years.
"They act like they're doing us a favor," said Mr.
Powell, 50, an unlicensed vendor with a graying beard and buttons reading "Buy Black" and "Marcus Garvey" pinned to his heavy brown coat.
"But they're really trying to squeeze us out."


Kimberly A. Kelly, David T. Villano
Mr. and Mrs.
David M. Kelly of Chatham, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kimberly Ann Kelly to David Thomas Villano, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas A. Villano of Kinnelon, N.J.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Kelly, 28, is a portfolio assistant at Trainer, Wortham &amp; Company Inc., a financial management company in New York.
She graduated from the College of St.
Elizabeth.
Her father is the president and chief executive of National Securities Clearing Corporation, a financial-trade clearinghouse in New York.


Auction in Baltimore
The Maryland home of ELI JACOBS, the owner of the Baltimore Orioles, will be auctioned Feb. 26, according to a sign posted Friday by Mercantile-Safe Deposit and Trust.
The institution began foreclosure proceedings a week ago.
Jacobs, who lives in New York, bought the house in Owings Mills, Baltimore County, in January 1990.
He paid $2.25 million, of which he borrowed $2 million.
He stopped making monthly payments of $19,968 to Mercantile last September or October, according to court documents.


World Markets; In Mexico, It's All a Matter of Trade
FOR Mexico's stock exchange to suffer, it has begun to seem, investors merely need feel uneasy about the fate of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
They need not have anything especially substantive to make them feel that way.
After climbing 43 percent over the previous four months, values on the Bolsa de Valores, as the exchange is known, began falling again on Tuesday, Jan. 26.
By last Wednesday, the market index had dropped more than 11 percent, and analysts were putting a good part of the blame on doubts about the future of the agreement.


Dried Cherry Valentine Dishes, in Servings for Two
NEXT Sunday, Valentine's Day, offers an excuse to devise dishes and menus with foods that are heart-shaped, pink or red, sweet, prepared for two people and endowed with supposed aphrodisiac properties.
Some of those goals can be achieved by using dried cherries, an ingredient that is a fairly recent addition to the pantry.
Dried cherries are plumper than the typical raisins sold in boxes.
While not quite as sweet as raisins, they do add both a note of color and a tart sweetness when substituted for raisins in a dish.
They can be used in savory recipes, with poultry, game meats and even fish like salmon.
A dried-cherry relish or vinegar-based chutney is excellent to accompany a pate or, for a luxurious Valentine dinner, some foie gras served cold or freshly sauteed.


Hull Asks for a Raise: $20-30 Million Will Do
He has more than a year to go on his four-year $7 million contract with the St.
Louis Blues, but BRETT HULL has opened a drive for a new five-year pact that would put him in the double million-dollar digits and perhaps in another city.
According to The St.
Louis Post-Dispatch, the star right wing is asking for a deal that would pay him from $20 million to $30 million.


The Executive Life; Skiing, Schmoozing, Chasing New Films
SOME ski, some amazingly -- don't.
But for all the entertainment executives gathered here at the end of last month, the Sundance Film Festival was the place to be to meet clients, sign deals and schmooze with colleagues.
"The most valuable part of the festival is the networking," said Ira Deutchman, president of Fine Line Features ("The Player"), whose company checked out several film acquisitions.
"Some of my closest friends in the business I met here skiing."


Sight and Sound Effects In the Film Noir Style
"WHEN I start to figure it out, it all goes blooey." The line is from "The Postman Always Rings Twice," James M. Cain's steamy novel of the 1930's that became a movie four times over.
The 1946 version, with Lana Turner and John Garfield, comes to mind as an archetypical film noir and that's the tough, ominous, cinematic style "Sunspots," an abstruse new work produced by Company One in Hartford, means to re-create on stage.
And Cain's line, acknowledged in the script by Charles Borkhuis, may well explain it all.


THE COMPANY HE KEEPS
At least the picture on the cover of your magazine was a good one.
Your article was full of information that I did not need to know.
The press was mostly supportive of Clinton during the campaign and now seems to have changed its mind.
Give the man a chance before you start tearing him down.
Most people in this country want him to succeed.
MARCIA LEVEY Tucson, Arizona.


Looking for an Attorney General: The Hurdles; Few Women Have Resumes That Fit Job at Justice Dept.
The mishaps that have befallen the Clinton Administration in its protracted search for an Attorney General have arisen in part from the scarcity of Democratic women with enough experience of the right kind to qualify them for the job.
As the hunt for an acceptable candidate resumed today with new intensity, White House officials said they were not now restricting their search to women.
But they said that if a man was picked his qualifications would have to be so well known and so well suited for the job that his selection would be unquestioned.


About Women in Television . . .
To the Editor:
Though she is technically correct, I must take Anne Thompson to task for a statement in "Hollywood Is Taken to Task by Its Women" (Executive Life, Jan. 17).


Arthur Ashe: a Hero in Word and Deed
THERE'S no way, really, to prepare for the death of a close friend.
Death is not like a boxing match or a football game where you look at films and chart tendencies and practice keys: When a boxer throws the jab, he drops his right; when a quarterback looks right, he will throw left.


Late St. John's Rally Falls Short
It was Pittsburgh's turn tonight in the Big East, where the 10 teams continue to beat on one another like bass drummers.
The Panthers beat St.
John's, 71-69, at the Fitzgerald Field House, and the loss cost the Redmen outright possession of first place in the conference.
They now share the lead with Boston College, a team whose fortunes this season were considered to be about as poor as St.
John's back in November.
Pitt is in second place, followed by Seton Hall, with another month to go in the regular season.


Go Figure
THE MYSTERY OF NUMBERS
By Annemarie Schimmel. Illustrated. 314 pp. New York: Oxford University Press. $22.


A Poet of the Proletariat Finds an Unlikely Subject
Barbara Kopple's documentaries usually honor the downtrodden.
Typically, the subjects are anonymous, hard-working Americans oppressed by corporate greed.
"Harlan County, U.S.A." (1976) was an emotional portrait of striking Kentucky coal miners abused by a power company.
"American Dream" (1990) was a parable of the decline of union power as illustrated by a strike by meatpackers in Minnesota.
Both films won Academy Awards.
Now Ms.
Kopple has unexpectedly aimed her blue-collar sensibility at Mike Tyson, the former heavyweight champion who is serving a six-year prison sentence in Indiana for the rape of a beauty pageant contestant.
And just as surprising, perhaps, the film she has made about the boxer is to be shown not in theaters, not on PBS or cable, but on NBC.


Justice Awaits a Leader
The Clinton Administration stumbles into its third week with its plans for revitalizing the Justice Department in chaos.
President Clinton's first nominee for Attorney General fell on his first day in office.
His next choice crashed Friday evening, the victim of crude handling and misunderstanding.
The delays are frustrating, but the damaging mistakes counsel even greater caution and care.
Zoe Baird's nomination was poorly researched because President Clinton, as he admits, imposed an arbitrary deadline on himself.
Clumsy vetting and the White House's eagerness for a publicity bonanza destroyed the chances of Judge Kimba Wood, causing her needless embarrassment.


Ah, Those Were The Days
To the Editor:
Caryn James's lament that the current spate of successful lady-with-a-gun movies is only an update "from the wicked woman in 1940's films noir"  [ "The Year of the Woman? Not in Movies," Jan. 10 ]  strikes me as just plain silly.
Of
course
that's what's going on.
Rebecca De Mornay in "The Hand That Rocks the Cradle" is simply an update of Joan Crawford or Bette Davis or Barbara Stanwyck just out of the bughouse and intent on gunning down her man.
But now we look back on the 1940's as the pinnacle of women in films.
Who's to say that, in years to come, Ms.
De Mornay's role won't be looked back on with pride?
And ditto Jennifer Jason Leigh in "Single White Female."


Through Medium and Process, 13 Artists Make Their Marks
FROM its curving gables to its leaded window panes, the John Slade Ely House has the look of 17th-century Dutch architecture.
It also has a slightly ecclesiastical air, although this is quickly dispelled by the sign outside that announces the exhibition within, "Connecticut Invitational: Curator's Choice." In fact the building, at 51 Trumbull Street, has been a center for art and artists since 1959, when Grace Taylor bestowed it for that purpose on the City of New Haven, naming it for her husband.
The 13 artists in the show, on view through next Sunday, were selected by Anna Broell Bresnick, one of the center's two curators.
Some are just starting their careers, others have shown in Connecticut or Manhattan.
Their work -- equal parts abstraction and figuration -- reflects a preoccupation with medium and process.


Enough Already
To the Editor:
Is it possible to lay off articles and letters complaining about David Mamet's hostility toward women?
Sure, Mr.
Mamet is hostile toward women.
He is hostile toward everybody.
That is his world.
No one seems to complain that Wendy Wasserstein writes mainly about women.
True, she is less hostile toward men, but then she is less hostile toward everybody.
That is her world.


Christianity Is Booming In China Despite Rifts
The Rev.
Wang Yijun is a Communist's headache, the kind of fellow who can spend 25 years behind bars and still remain bowed in prayer, presumably asking for the forgiveness of his jailers.
Yet he is also turning out to be a bit of a headache for some of the faithful.


Austria Starts Culture Event
Graz in southern Austria will be the first city to stage a European Cultural Month in a new program established by the European Community.
Each year a different European city will hold such an event, inviting artists and performers from across the Continent to take part.


Mutiny in Zaire Leaves Hundreds Dead


NOTES
Anna Wintour wants to be the White House wardrobe consultant.
Ms.
Wintour, the editor in chief of Vogue, has written a letter offering fashion advice to Hillary Rodham Clinton.
"This was just a way to offer informal assistance," said Paul Wilmot, Vogue's spokesman.
"We read that she was getting barraged from designers sending in sketches and people calling. We ourselves were getting called daily about what she was wearing and what our opinion was. We simply offered to sift through all of the fashion for her."


Please, Just Smoke the Food
The ban on smoking in the White House, announced last week by Hillary Rodham Clinton, conjures up visions of heads of state sneaking a smoke outdoors between courses at a state dinner.
But it's hardly the first ban instituted by a new Administration.
When the Jimmy Carters, who are Southern Baptists, lived in the Executive Mansion, the only hard liquor officially known to have made its way inside was used in a cake calling for bourbon.
Wine, however, was served at official functions.


Covering Losses if You Cancel a Cruise
FEW, if any, travelers need trip insurance more than cruise passengers.
In buying a cruise, one pays in advance for the whole package -- transportation, room and meals, and often an air ticket to the place of embarkation.
Those who cancel at the last minute may lose the whole amount.
Cruise lines and the travel agents who act on their behalf usually sell protection against such losses, but there are pitfalls.
Often the passenger winds up buying not insurance but a waiver of the cruise line's own cancellation penalties.
Even if the traveler buys a separate insurance policy, it may conk out even before the trip begins.


B.C. and the Buzzer Disconcert the Hall
In a battle between two teams tied for second place in the Big East, Boston College escaped with a 63-62 victory over Seton Hall tonight and earned a share of first place in the conference beside St.
John's.
After Seton Hall took a 62-61 lead on Jerry Walker's 3-point play with 16 seconds left, Boston College's Bill Curley rebounded Malcolm Huckaby's missed layup and scored the winning basket at the buzzer.


DOWN AND OUT
In "Down and Out" (Jan. 10), Kevin Phillips calls on the new Democratic Administration to put the nation on the road to prosperity by adopting new policies that will be deemed fair by the middle class.
Phillips reminds us that the top individual tax rate dropped from 70 percent in 1980 to 50 percent in 1981 and then to 28 percent by 1988.
The middle-class taxpayer surely would be willing to forgo promised lower taxes if the tax rate on our wealthiest citizens were to be raised, at least to the 1981 rate of 50 percent.
HYMAN WEBER
Stony Brook, L.I.


Speeding Into a Hard New World
In May 1989, Junior Johnson visited the Indianapolis Motor Speedway, and the longtime Nascar team owner was asked to name the Indy-car drivers he considered capable of challenging stock-car racing's best drivers.
He answered with only one name: Al Unser Jr.


Lorin L. Reisner, Miriam S. Judlowe
Miriam Sue Judlowe, an account executive in New York for Esprit de Corp, a clothing manufacturer, was married last evening to Lorin L. Reisner, an assistant United States attorney in Manhattan for the Southern District of New York.
The cantor Theodore Aaronson performed the ceremony at the Metropolitan Club in New York.
Ms.
Judlowe, 30, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Lehigh University and received a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a daughter of Stephen and Helen Judlowe of Murray Hill, N.J.


Lee White, Sergio Galvis
Mrs.
John H. Keating Jr. of Princeton, N.J., has announced the engagement of her daughter, Mary Lee White, to Sergio Jordan Galvis, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Claudio Galvis of Houston.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss White, who is known as Lee, is an associate at the New York law firm of Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam &amp; Roberts.
She graduated summa cum laude from Princeton University and received a law degree from Columbia University.
Her father, the late Dr.
Richard L. White, was a surgeon and a cancer researcher at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center and an assistant professor of surgery at the College of Physicians and Surgeons at Columbia.
The prospective bride's stepfather, the late Dr.
Keating, was an internist and attending physician at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in New York.


Gino Bechi, a Baritone and Leading Man, 79
Gino Bechi, an opera baritone who became a popular leading man in Italian musical films in the late 1940's, died on Tuesday at his home in Florence, Italy.
He was 79.
His daughter, Rosella, said his death occurred in his sleep.


Georganna Hoag, Ronald Berry
Mr. and Mrs.
William K. Hoag Jr. of Ridgefield, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Georganna Amey Hoag, to Ronald Alan Berry, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward L. Berry of Goshen, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Hoag, 26, graduated from Towson University.
Her father is a partner and executive vice president of CDHM Advertising Inc., an agency in Stamford.


Turkey's Monument to a Goddess
WHEN a young archeologist visited the Turkish village of Geyre in 1959, he found modern houses supported by Corinthian columns.
For years villagers plowing this fertile spot overlooking the Menderes River Valley in southwestern Turkey had been turning up rubble from an earlier civilization and putting it to modern uses.
Elaborately carved marble sarcophagi served as handsome watering troughs for sheep and as vats for pressing grapes into homemade wine.
Modern inhabitants, who rode their donkeys beside the majestic columns that were still standing, passed along a legacy of the ancient city of Aphrodisias.
According to legend, the Greeks and Romans built this ornate marble metropolis to honor Aphrodite, the goddess of love, life and fertility.
But it took more than 30 years of excavations to provide a portrait of the extensive cultural center, complete with a stadium that could hold 30,000 spectators, centrally heated Roman baths and workshops where sculptors elevated marble-carving to a high art.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Tuesday
Dec. wholesale trade, percent change
0.4
0.6
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
352
325
January retail sales, percent change
1.2
0.4
Friday
January producer prices, percent change
0.2
0.2
Dec. business inventories, percent change
0.2
0.1
Tuesday: Treasury auctions 3-year notes  Wednesday: Treasury auctions 10-year notes  Thursday: Treasury auctions 30-year bonds


Corrections
A brief review of "Jean Cocteau: The Mirror and the Mask" on Jan. 24 misidentified the book's editor.
She is Julie Saul, the owner of the Julie Saul Gallery in New York City.


Admiring Beauty That's Only Skin Deep
FEBRUARY is the month when nearly everyone catches cabin fever.
The cure?
A long walk on a fine day.
During one of these walks, the birch trees were discovered.
Oh, they had been growing in the park for many years.
But they were never really seen until just a few days ago.
They had no leaves to block the view; they just stood there with their long, high trunks glistening white in the sunshine.
This group of white, or paper, birch trees was mature enough so that their trunks had that clean chalky quality.
The trees had several stems, which is a birch trait.
The view was dramatic.
And the tree count?
Maybe seven or more.


Computer Horizons (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Treasury's Auction Schedule for the Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week begins with the regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills today.
Tomorrow, Wednesday and Thursday are devoted to the quarterly refunding.
Three-year notes will be auctioned tomorrow, followed on Wednesday by an auction of 10-year notes and on Thursday by an auction of 30-year bonds.


Peoples Westchester (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New York Has a Reasonable Labor Settlement
To the Editor:
"Labor Agreement Will Haunt New York City" (letter, Feb. 2) by State Comptroller Edward V. Regan is fundamentally false and misleading.


To Battle AIDS, Scots Offer Oral Drugs to Addicts
In 1985, doctors in this ancient Scottish city awoke to a terrible truth: More than 50 percent of blood samples drawn from drug addicts in Edinburgh's poorest neighborhoods tested positive for the virus that causes AIDS, a rate of infection as high as in some parts of New York City.
Now, eight years later, a broad-based community response forged from the shared horror of AIDS and of spreading intravenous drug abuse has not only reduced the number of addicts injecting drugs from thousands to only a few hundred, but has also effectively halted the spread of H.I.V. via contaminated needles.
Switch to Oral Drugs
Drug counselors, doctors and the police say the reversal in intravenous drug use among Edinburgh's 3,000 users of heroin and other drugs results largely from a decision to allow local physicians to prescribe, free and on demand, oral versions of nearly any drug craved by addicts, on the condition that they avoid the use of needles and agree to regular drug and medical counseling.


The Law Can Recognize Sexual Harassment; Crying at Wolves
To the Editor:
Congratulations to Sheryl E. Reich for "Crying Wolf in Albany" (Op-Ed, Jan. 23)!
Finally in print somebody has focused on one side of the sexual harassment situation that for years has been known and unevenly tolerated by most of us (men and women alike) in the business setting.


American Healthcare Management reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Seafirst Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Killer Orders Girl to Help Rob Mother
A 39-year-old woman was fatally shot in the face during a robbery Saturday night after a man talked his way into her Washington Heights apartment pretending to be a repairman, the police said yesterday.
The intruder then coolly ordered the woman's 14-year-old daughter to remove her dying mother's gold jewelry.
The victim, Isabel Rodriguez, died early yesterday morning at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
The intruder fled with two gold bracelets and a gold necklace his victim was wearing and $20, the police said.
The daughter was not injured.


Iowa's Women Seize Shot at TV Spotlight
The television lights are not turned on each time the women take the court, not even when the No. 3 Iowa Hawkeyes play.
For that reason, a high-profile televised game, like the one today, can take on an added significance.
"You don't know how big that is," said C. Vivian Stringer, the Iowa coach.
"I wouldn't want any other coach to see us sputter or hesitate."


Atlanta Gas Light reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Extinct? Dinosaurland Is Jammed These Days
G.I.
Joe turns 30 this year.
But that's not such a big deal.
Check out Barbie.
She's 34.
Mr.
Potato Head is 41, and Raggedy Ann, bless her polyfill heart, is 79.
Never mind how old that makes you feel.
These are classics in the toy business, favorites that prove year after year age has little bearing on popularity.
Then there's Barney.
He's a dinosaur.
Goofy-looking, purple and green, he was born just four years ago as the star of a modest home-video line.
Now look.
In April, he became a regular on public television, then a stuffed animal in October.
As a toy, he generated more than $25 million in retail sales in the last quarter alone to become one of the hottest properties of the year.
His home video sales produced $55.5 million in 1992.
Species Galore
Barney, however, will be just one of the species on display as 1,600 exhibitors entertain 22,000 buyers for 10 days, starting today, at the American International Toy Fair in New York.
Barney will be joined by Darlin' Dinos, Bend-Ems baby dinosaurs, Dino-roars, Zwibble Dibble the Star-Struck Dinosaur, and others.


Critic's Notebook; Focus Festival: At the Far Edge of Public Vision
"Cavett," a book of conversations with the talk-show host Dick Cavett, includes an anecdote that incidentally sheds light on the history of 20th-century music.
In the chapter devoted to Mr.
Cavett's years at Yale, a "brilliant weirdo" named Dick Higgins is recalled: "He would announce to anyone who would listen that he had started a string quartet that abolished the concept of pitch, since each note was a glissando." Whatever happened to this undergraduate eccentric?
The book fails to reveal that Higgins studied with John Cage and became a notable figure in American experimentalism.
Nonetheless, he has probably achieved his widest exposure in the pages of "Cavett," a mid-70's artifact with blurbs from Groucho Marx and Woody Allen.
I was reminded of the infinitesimal fame of Dick Higgins as I attended Juilliard's Focus festival last week, a Monday-through-Saturday banquet of music by young Western European composers.
The series presented dozens of pieces in different styles, from different countries and disciplines; none of them will ever make much of an impression outside a subculture of devotees.
The concerts tended to be long, the program notes dense, the audiences thin.
Reality, it might be said, was elsewhere.


Marble Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


SIHANOUK MOVING TO REGAIN POWER
Twenty-three years after his ouster as Cambodia's head of state, Prince Norodom Sihanouk is moving quickly to reclaim power here, this time with the support of nations that he once considered his enemies to the death.
The United Nations is on the verge of revising the 1991 Cambodian peace accords to allow the election of a President as well as a legislature, a move that would all but guarantee the Prince's return to power this spring or summer.


Bosnia Peace Talks Yield No Progress
Struggling for the semblance of an accord on the eve of a Security Council meeting, international mediators failed to make any progress this weekend in their effort to make peace among Bosnia and Herzegovina's three factions.
The mediators had hoped to win some last-minute concessions before briefing the Security Council on the negotiations on Monday.
But Radovan Karadzic, the leader of Bosnia's Serbs, refused again to accept a proposal to divide the country into 10 semi-autonomous provinces.


Horsham Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Central Jersey Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Xyplex (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Messier Will Face the Devils
Rangers Coach Ron Smith said yesterday that Mark Messier, who has missed six games with sprained ligaments in his right wrist, would return to action tonight when the Rangers play the Devils at Byrne Meadowlands Arena in East Rutherford, N.J.
James Patrick, who has missed four games with a knee injury, and Jeff Beukeboom, who missed the 2-2 tie with the Flyers in the Rangers' most recent game because of an ankle injury, are also expected to return.


BSB Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Soviet Files Yield Pieces of a Puzzle
The Communist Party's main archive, which holds millions of pieces to the vast puzzle of Soviet history, is only one depository for 204 million separate files controlled by Moscow.


Iowa-Illinois Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wisconsin Public Service reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pitney Bowes reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Union Bank (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


United Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Waste Management reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Network Equipment Tech.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


CFS Financial Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


George W. Dudley, 43, Artist and Card Maker
George W. Dudley Jr., an artist who founded a greeting card company and was active in gay and AIDS causes, died on Wednesday at Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 41 and resided in Manhattan.
He died of complications of AIDS, said Norbert Sinski, his companion.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11 U.S. STRATEGY ON EX-SOVIETS
The Clinton Administration intends to create a supercommittee in the State Department to shape a unified strategy toward Russia and the other former Soviet republics, but has no intention of immediately increasing foreign aid to the area, Administration officials say.
A1


G.O.P. IS OPPOSED TO ECONOMIC PLAN
Signaling that Republicans plan to oppose at least part of President Clinton's economic program, Senator Robert Dole, the minority leader, and three other Republican Senators said today that they disagreed with the Administration's plans for a short-term stimulus package because it would increase the deficit this year.
Mr.
Clinton's economic aides have repeatedly talked about a stimulus program of $15 billion to $30 billion that would seek to create jobs and to insure that the economy does not slide back into the doldrums.


Ryland Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Norman Is Diagnosed With Pleurisy
Forward KEN NORMAN of the Los Angeles Clippers was diagnosed with pleurisy after complaining of chest pains during the first half of Saturday night's game against the Sacramento Kings.
Norman, a six-year veteran from Illinois who is the Clippers' career leader in scoring and games played, left the game and was accompanied to the hospital by the team doctor, KUKESH BHATIA.


China Reports On Phone Use
In a rare instance of Communist Chinese glasnost, China has reported data about the world's largest potential market for residential telephones.
A.T.&amp; T., which compiles a reference work called "The World's Telephones," said this week that China had contributed data for the coming edition for the first time in four decades.


Temple-Inland reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Zions Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


White House Memo; Hillary Clinton's Debut Dashes Doubts on Clout
Hillary Rodham Clinton swept through Capitol Hill the other day, and a rumble went through the Republican cloakroom.
In the privacy of their leathery L-shaped retreat off the Senate floor, some lawmakers grumbled about the First Lady with the briefcase who was lobbying by phone and in person: Did you hear, they muttered among themselves, that she had actually been calling some senators by their
first
names?
If there was any shard of doubt left that Bill and Hillary Clinton were going to run the Government in tandem, it has disappeared.
Clinton strategists worried obsessively during the campaign about how to prevent Mrs.
Clinton from appearing to be an "empowered Nancy Reagan," as they put it in a secret memorandum.
But now the President, Mrs.
Clinton and the White House staff are determinedly matter-of-fact about the First Lady's stunning debut as the most openly empowered Presidential wife in American history.


Corrections
A chart last Monday listing major contributors to the New York City mayoral candidates through Jan. 15 misstated the amount given to City Council President Andrew J. Stein by John Catsimatidis of the Red Apple grocery chain.
It was $32,000, not $59,000.


Universal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fab Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Guiding Hand of Arthur Ashe Is Remembered
The handwritten sign taped to the door at the top of the dank green stairwell said it all:
"The Harlem Tennis Center mourns the death of Arthur Ashe Jr. He died on Saturday Feb. 6, but will never be forgotten."


No News? Well, That's Business
Gary Bettman apologized before he began his news conference.
He had just presided over his first Board of Governors meeting as the new commissioner of the National Hockey League.
And he had little to report.
"I'm sorry I don't have any news," Bettman said.
"I'll tell you, we basically had a business session."


New Laws Address Old Problem: The Terror of a Stalker's Threats
For more than a month, a young woman in Stratford, N.J., was hounded by a man she had briefly dated.
He followed her to work and to the hairdresser.
He left repeated messages on her answering machine.
She talked to the police several times and filed a harassment complaint, but there was little the police could do except ask the man to stop.
"Our hands were tied," said Jay Wilkins, a detective in the Stratford Police Department.
"We were in the position of waiting for a crime to happen." Defining a New Crime
But on Jan. 4 law-enforcement officials in New Jersey got a new tool for handling such cases with the signing of a state law making stalking a crime.
The next morning, Detective Wilkins arrested the man.


Wood's Letter on Steps With White House
Following is a letter from Judge Kimba M. Wood to The New York Times, sent by fax yesterday:
I have not commented beyond my Feb. 4, 1993, statement concerning my withdrawal from consideration by the President as his nominee for Attorney General, but I feel compelled to correct the impression conveyed in the Feb. 7 New York Times that there is a significant dispute between Mr.
Bernard Nussbaum and me as to who said what to whom, when.
The correct version is as follows:


Shift to Dirt Leaves Sea Hero in the Dust
The path to the Kentucky Derby took one more mean twist today when the favored Sea Hero, one of the prime candidates in the East, ran next to last while the outsider Kissin Kris won the Palm Beach Stakes and added to the confusion already surrounding this year's racing classics.
It was one day after the favored Great Navigator ran second to Hidden Trick in the Hutcheson Stakes, one of the milestones on the road to Louisville.
So, in two days of early tests at Gulfstream Park, two of the East's leading 3-year-old candidates stumbled in the standing.
And Sea Hero, a son of the grass-horse sire Polish Navy, may have flunked out of further consideration for the Derby on May 1.


Good Enough to Fight, But Not for Citizenship
Although his eyes have grown dimmer, the slight, white-haired Filipino veteran vividly remembers taking an oath of allegiance to the United States of America, half a century ago in the mountains of Sara on Iloilo island in the Philippines.
The former second lieutenant, Uldarico D. Dumdum, now 74 years old, proudly displays a pile of yellowed, dog-eared military records, from induction documents to benefits papers, showing that he served three years under the United States Armed Forces in the Far East.


Records Link Buyer of Post To a Swindler
Federal court records in Manhattan show that Steven Hoffenberg, the prospective new publisher of The New York Post, knowingly used a confessed swindler to help him sell stock in his flagship company, the Towers Financial Corporation, in ways that violated Federal securities laws.
Mr.
Hoffenberg's negotiations to take over the Post have focused public attention on his financial empire, whose accounting methods are being investigated by the Securities and Exchange Commission and whose business practices have been the target of numerous civil lawsuits.


Old National Bancorp (NMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Dance; Taking Wing From the Confines of a Wheelchair
The Tom Evert Dance Company, headed by a former leading dancer in Paul Taylor's troupe, and Dancing Wheels, founded and directed by Mary Verdi-Fletcher for disabled and nondisabled performers, would seem to have little in common beyond the fact that they are based in Cleveland.
Yet on Friday night at the Marymount Manhattan Theater, they offered a model of creativity emerging from practicality.
Pooling their resources to share expenses in a two-day New York City appearance, the two groups offered a program that wound up on a singular and successful esthetic wavelength.


Books of The Times; The Apparent Banality of Multiple Murder
A Violent Act
By Alec Wilkinson
Alfred A. Knopf. 228 pages. $22.
On the morning of Sept. 22, 1986, Tom Gahl, a young Indianapolis probation officer, told his wife, Nancy, that he wished he had "something more exciting to look forward to" that day, and set off on his rounds.


Mr. Mobutu's Long Goodbye
History seems to be catching up with President Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire.
Despite a rioting army, he still clings to power.
And he faces a new demand from Zaire's chief creditors -- France, Belgium and the United States -- that he transfer authority to a transitional regime, as he promised months ago.
But Zaire's currency is as worthless as Mr.
Mobutu's promises, a reality he cannot change with a wave of his totemic cane.
When he finally goes, Mr.
Mobutu will be universally unlamented.
Zaire is poorer today than it was 27 years ago, when Mr.
Mobutu, then a high army officer, seized power in what was then called the Congo.
However divided, his political opponents were strong enough to close down the capital of Kinshasa last month with a strike.


North Fork Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Callaway Golf reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hailing Grit of an Injured Firefighter
A year ago at a funeral, a husky firefighter introduced himself to Patricia McTigue and said: "I admire your husband. He's everything I'm striving to be."
She next saw the firefighter on Tuesday, when he was watching from the curb as her husband -- his 6-foot-1 body savagely transmogrified by burns that eight operations have only begun to heal -- was released from the hospital.
He gave a thumbs-up sign.


Results Plus
TENNIS Agassi Beats Gilbert to Capture Title  Andre Agassi recovered after blowing three match points in the second set and beat Brad Gilbert, 6-2, 6-7 (4-7), 6-2, last night to win the Volvo Tennis San Francisco tournament.
It was the 19th career singles title for Agassi. (AP)


Davis Distributing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Next: Campaign Finance Reform
An unmistakable fog of political incompetence is beginning to form around the White House.
The Bush and Carter Presidencies showed the danger of letting small droplets of error condense into an enveloping miasma.
History also points out a quick fix uniquely available to Presidents -- change the subject by re-emphasizing a core promise.
In President Clinton's case, one such promise is political reform.
No one can undo the mistakes of the past two weeks -- all the more reason for Mr.
Clinton to get on with pushing ethics and campaign finance legislation on the Hill.
But he must have the support of the Democratic leadership, and the unpleasant truth is that House Speaker Thomas Foley is still backpedaling on his pledge of swift action to clean up campaign financing.


Banks' Plan For Stimulus Is Questioned
After being cheered by the Clinton Administration's initial interest in their plan to loosen bank regulations as an economic stimulus, the nation's bankers are running into increasing skepticism about the merits of the plan.
The bankers officially kicked off a lobbying campaign against red tape in lending last week, timing it to closely follow the introduction of legislation to ease bank regulations by Senator Richard C. Shelby, a moderate Alabama Democrat.


United Water Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Nuclear Metals Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Magna Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wynn's International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pharmaceutical Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Market Place; It may be too soon to bemoan the passing of corporate behemoths.
A FEW hundred million years ago, the earth was ruled by dinosaurs, whose great size made them seem invincible.
But through accident or the failure to adapt, the giants perished, leaving only their bones behind.
Over time, the energy-producing carbon in those fossils converted to petroleum, which Arab sheiks made fortunes selling to an energy-hungry world.
Therein lies a lesson for modern investors: reduced to its bare essentials, even what seems a dinosaur can produce a healthy return.
Plodding corporate giants -- including Sears, Roebuck; Eastman Kodak and Boeing -- have ruled the business world almost exclusively since World War II.
In that time, many of the companies had the reputation of being highly profitable, and a belief in ever-rising stock prices was an article of faith.


York International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reader's Digest reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reagan Celebrates His 82d Birthday


First Comes a Junket, Then a Golden Globe; Hollywood Is Buzzing
Is this another Golden Globes crisis?
Is this like the embarrassing Pia Zadora incident?
It has been two weeks since the Hollywood Foreign Press Association unexpectedly awarded the Golden Globe for best picture of the year to "Scent of a Woman." The film won over such acclaimed movies as "Howards End," "A Few Good Men," "The Crying Game" and "Unforgiven."


New Yorker Raises Minimum Circulation
An increase in the circulation guaranteed to advertisers and an advertising campaign to be photographed by Richard Avedon are on tap for The New Yorker.
Steven T. Florio, president and chief executive, said that effective with the weekly magazine's March 8 issue, the rate base -- the circulation that advertisers are guaranteed -- would rise 7.7 percent to a record 650,000, from 600,000, where it has been since 1989.
He attributed the increase to gains in subscriptions as well as a doubling of newsstand sales, to an average of 45,000, since Tina Brown became editor in October.


Is the Saxophonist Truly the President?
To the Editor:
As an ear person with five decades in music and several in psychology, I've been watching the snippets of Bill Clinton's musical behavior on television, feeling for clues to the mysterious character of our new President among real sound bites that may tell what words can't.


New Yorker Raises Minimum Circulation
An increase in the circulation guaranteed to advertisers and an advertising campaign to be photographed by Richard Avedon are on tap for The New Yorker.
Steven T. Florio, president and chief executive, said that effective with the weekly magazine's March 8 issue, the rate base -- the circulation that advertisers are guaranteed -- would rise 7.7 percent to a record 650,000, from 600,000, where it has been since 1989.
He attributed the increase to gains in subscriptions as well as a doubling of newsstand sales, to an average of 45,000, since Tina Brown became editor in October.


Clinton Keeping Foreign Policy on a Back Burner
During a meeting of the President's top economic advisers last week, the Deputy Budget Director, Alice M. Rivlin, was describing areas of the country that would be affected by the withdrawal of a Federal timber subsidy when she found herself being corrected by President Clinton over which trees were found where.
A short time later, Mr.
Clinton's top foreign policy advisers were gathered in the Roosevelt Room poring over a map of Bosnia, in a nearly four-hour session intended to establish the Administration's policy for the Balkans, its first major foreign-policy initiative.
The President did not correct anyone about details on Bosnia.
He did not attend.


Coach and Star Together Too Long?
Danny Manning, six months out of the University of Kansas, pierced his ear.
His college coach, Larry Brown, ordinarily would have made him stitch it up, but Brown no longer had jurisdiction.
He was coaching the San Antonio Spurs by then, while Manning was free and clear with the Los Angeles Clippers, shopping, on Melrose Avenue, for hoop earrings.
Manning pitied the Spurs at the time, because he knew Brown -- a solemn perfectionist -- was hounding the players.
On a road trip to Texas, Manning bumped into a former Kansas teammate, Kevin Pritchard, who was trying out in San Antonio and Manning whispered, "Glad it's not me."


Man Beaten by Hasidim Arrested
A black man who was beaten in December by a group of Hasidim in Crown Heights was arrested last night on burglary charges, prosecutors said.
Ralph Nimmons, 25, was charged with breaking into an apartment house at 1650 President Street, less than a mile from the scene of the Dec. 1 beating.
He was charged with burglary, possession of burglar tools, and possession of stolen property, according to Al Tishman, an assistant district attorney in Brooklyn.


Lobbying Intensifies for Pivotal Vote on Renewal of Fernandez
Since it became clear last week that the New York City Board of Education might not renew Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez's contract, there has been tumultuous lobbying for the deciding vote, which will most likely be that of Carol A. Gresser, the Queens representative.
Ms.
Gresser's phone has been ringing with endorsement calls from many of the Chancellor's powerful supporters.
Claire Shulman, the Democratic Borough President of Queens who appointed Ms.
Gresser, has also recieved numerous calls on Mr.
Fernandez's behalf, at least two from Mayor David N. Dinkins, calling from his Puerto Rican vacation resort.


Review/Music; A Master Offers His Latest Discovery
The Polish composer Witold Lutoslawski has never been too preoccupied with courting an audience for his music, preferring instead to devote himself to private musical discoveries.
"I do not want to convince," he once wrote, "I want to find." But when some of his more recent findings were heard here on Friday night, as Mr.
Lutoslawski led the Los Angeles Philharmonic in a concert celebrating his 80th birthday, the audience at the Los Angeles Music Center needed no convincing.
The world premiere of his Fourth Symphony, a work commissioned by the orchestra, received a warm and enthusiastic reception.
And at the conclusion of the concert, there was a prolonged standing ovation.
The acclaim was deserved.
Over the course of a long career, Mr.
Lutoslawski has established himself as a leading composer of the post-World War II generation, one of a group of Eastern European and Soviet composers (including Gyorgy Ligeti, Gyorgy Kurtag and Alfred Schnittke), whose work has been highly original and idiosyncratic, despite the pressures of Communist regimes.
Composers like Shostakovich wrote music that could brilliantly undercut official taste while seeming to satisfy it, but Mr.
Lutoslawski, whose First Symphony was banned by Stalinist censors in 1949, led a double compositional life.
For many years, he earned money writing radio and film music for the Government while devising his own atonal language and style in solitude.


Amtech Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Seizing the Opportunity to Stroll Through the Snow in the City


Operation Rescue Disavows Violence
To the Editor:
In "A Rescue Operation for Congress" (editorial, Jan. 16), you falsely describe anti-abortionists as "violent, vulgar," "a band of vandals" and "conspirators."


AMC Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


G.M. May Not Join in Move Against Japan
The General Motors Corporation may not join its two big American rivals in filing broad "dumping" complaints against Japanese car makers, G.M.'s chief executive says.
John F. Smith Jr., the president and chief executive of G.M., said that he was not sure the cases could be won and that he was concerned about consumers' reaction to pleas for Government relief at a time when the Big Three are trying to convince the public they can compete with Japanese auto makers in areas like quality, value and customer service.


Review/Cabaret; Rodgers and Hart Spiced By Parody of an Old Film
It is not generally known that "Isn't It Romantic," one of the most beloved of all Rodgers and Hart songs, was introduced in a very elaborate form in the 1932 film "Love Me Tonight," starring Maurice Chevalier and Jeanette MacDonald.
With extra verses added, it was performed in various Parisian locales by assorted characters, among them a tailor, a cabdriver, a Gypsy violinist and a platoon of soldiers.
In his entertaining new show of Rodgers and Hart songs at the Oak Room of the Algonquin Hotel, David Staller recreates the entire sequence, singing every part including MacDonald's lovesick princess and adding sound effects.
Assisted by his pianist, Dick Gallagher, he makes the number the comic centerpiece of his new act, "Easy to Remember," which will play Tuesdays through Saturdays at 9:30 P.M. at the Oak Room through Feb. 27.


ALC Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Onbancorp Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Guatemalans Struggle for Basic Rights
To the Editor:
I was surprised to find your Jan. 25 report on the return of Guatemala Indians from 10 years of exile in Mexico such an unreflective reprint of propaganda.


Pope, in Uganda, Urges Chastity as AIDS Defense
Pope John Paul II walked among and blessed those infected with what he called the scourge of Africa today after counseling young people to adopt "the sexual restraint of chastity" as their only defense.
He visited AIDS patients and others at the Roman Catholic-run Nsambya Hospital here, where doctors said around 60 percent of the 400 patients were either H.I.V.-infected or suffering from AIDS-related illnesses.


Charting Japan's Course
Is the once formidable Japanese economy faltering, heading down a path of disarray and weakness?
The question would have seemed little more than a silly musing a few years ago, when Japan was often depicted as a Godzilla-like creature gobbling up markets worldwide.
Not only were Japanese manufacturers filling store shelves with newer and more competitive products, they were plowing their profits back into developing more efficient plants and better technologies.


Linda Heller, Michael Lappin
Linda Joy Heller, a health columnist and freelance writer in New York, was married yesterday to Michael David Lappin, the president of the Community Preservation Corporation of New York, a nonprofit organization of banks and insurance companies that sponsors the rehabilitation of affordable housing.
Rabbi Ira Youdovin performed the ceremony at Tavern on the Green in New York.
Ms.
Heller, who is keeping her name, graduated from the University of Iowa.
She is the daughter of Zelda Heller of Peoria, Ill., and the late Leonard Heller.
Her mother, now retired, was a kindergarten teacher at Hines Elementary School in Peoria.


King Watches the Nets Both Soar and Stumble
Bernard King saw first-hand today how impressive the young Nets can be and how erratic they often are.
After watching his new team defeat the Milwaukee Bucks, King predicted big things for the Nets later this season, and didn't mind including a supporting role for himself.
"This is the most talented team I've ever played on," King said after the Nets' 105-102 victory.
Reminded that he hadn't yet played, King smiled and said, with all due modesty, "I'll play before the year is out."


Belarus Shows the Way on Arms
Belarus has now formally committed itself to giving up its nuclear arms, the first state in history to do so.
Its Parliament voted Thursday to adhere to the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty and to ratify the 1991 Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty.
Belarus has already signed an agreement with Moscow to transfer all 81 of its nuclear-tipped SS-25 missiles to Russia for dismantling by the end of 1994.


CHRONICLE
Recognizing contributions that testify "to the power of an unyielding free spirit," Thurgood Marshall, the late Supreme Court Justice, and former JUSTICE WILLIAM J. BRENNAN JR.  have been named recipients of the Freedom Forum's 1993 Free Spirit Awards.
The winners were announced yesterday by ALLEN H. NEUHARTH, chairman of the Freedom Forum, based in Arlington, Va., The Associated Press reported.


Gun Range Contends With Lead
The hills around here are the backwoods of Westchester County, a place where the trim suburban streets seem to thin out and a terrain emerges that is closer to the rawness of the Adirondacks.
It is here that the county government 31 years ago chose to locate a public firing range that defies the genteel golf and tennis image the nation has of Westchester.
Over the years, hunters and shooting enthusiasts have pierced countless bull's-eyes and shattered innumerable clay pigeons, and their spent ammunition has dropped a mother lode of lead in the moist black soil of the range.


Canadian Tire reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Press Notes
STEVEN HOFFENBERG, who wants to buy The New York Post, is the latest in a long line of successful businessmen to be seduced by the idea of becoming a newspaper publisher.
Right away, he proved that it's not as easy as it looks.
There were gasps all around when he used his first few interviews to declare an end to negative news stories.


Marvin Rushkoff, 63, Health-Care Executive
Marvin Rushkoff, a health-care consultant and former hospital administrator, died on Thursday at his home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He was 63.
The cause of death was cancer, said his son, Bennett.
Mr.
Rushkoff was chief financial officer of the Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan from 1971 to 1989 and also its senior vice president for business and finance from 1984 to 1989.


Canfor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Rock; Trash Values From the Past, Presented Without Apology
Trash is out of fashion in rock-and-roll.
Styles of the 1970's may be hot on the runways, but the attitudes that accompanied those platforms and bell-bottoms are simply too decadent for Bill Clinton fans.
Rock's good old-fashioned creed, "We're in it for the chicks, the booze and the thrills," holds little currency for today's serious superstars, who promote themselves as concerned citizens, whether stumping for animal rights, attending therapy or staying home with their families.
Certainly, rock's reform era has some benefits: blatant misogyny is on the downswing, and ethical behavior is in.
But there's something sad about the demise of outrageousness.
When bands like the New York Dolls and T. Rex, KISS and Cheap Trick wowed 70's fans with comic-book flash and bad-boy attitude, rock usurped the dominant ideology with a casual shake of the tail feathers.
These bands played rudely constructed songs with a basic pop flair and never acted as if they deserved anything more than their share of fun.
But fun, in their hands, became a weapon against social convention.


Australian Can Now Call U.S. His Home
Exhibiting the kind of steel backbone to be expected from someone resembling a 1-iron, Brett Ogle bounced back from a missed 2-foot putt and a drive that was lost in the sands of the Pacific beach to cruise to a three-shot victory today at the A.T.&amp;.T.
Pebble Beach National Pro-Am.
Ogle, a 28-year-old Australian who is a rookie on the PGA Tour, birdied three of the final six holes to pull away from Billy Ray Brown and earn the $225,000 first-place check and a vitally important first victory in the United States.


Midlantic Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ashe Was Stricken Suddenly After Years of AIDS
Arthur Ashe's doctor said yesterday that he was as surprised by the suddenness of the tennis champion's death from AIDS on Saturday as he was of how Ashe had remained healthy for more than four years after AIDS was diagnosed.
Ashe, 49, died from a form of pneumonia known as PCP, for pneumocystis carinii, the fungus that causes it.
He had recovered from an earlier bout of PCP in January but became ill again last Wednesday and entered New York Hospital on Friday.
Even a few hours before his death -- when his breathing had to be assisted by a mechanical respirator -- his doctors thought he would pull through again.


No Headline
The habit in Washington is to compensate for shallow moral reflection by being incredibly moralistic on tiny things.
People go nuts over these little things. -- JAMES DAVISON HUNTER, sociologist.  [ A15:1. ]


BMJ Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


American Federal Bank reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Sterling Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Thomas &amp; Betts reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Arthur Ashe, Tennis Star, Is Dead at 49
Arthur Ashe, a tennis champion who spent his years in the sport fighting discrimination and then spent the final year of his life seeking to broaden public awareness on the subject of AIDS, died Saturday.
He was 49.
A New York Hospital administrator, Judith Lilavois, said Ashe died at 3:13 P.M. of pneumonia, a complication of AIDS.
He was admitted to the hospital on Friday.


Zenith National Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


SPS Transaction Services reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


World Economies


Bridge
Talking about the play while it is in progress is a breach of the proprieties and can have many bad effects.
It disturbs the game.
It may give assistance to partner, which gives the opponents valid cause for complaint.
And it may help an opponent, giving your partner something to complain about.
The most famous example of helping the opposition in this way occurred many years ago on the diagramed deal.
The goat was East, who was, however, sorely tried.
His partner, who liked to be tricky and imaginative, showed these traits in the bidding and then with the opening lead.
For no particular reason, he produced a psychic take-out double of the opening one club bid.
And when he found himself defending six clubs doubled, he decided to be a hero and led the spade king.


Patents
IT may not put radio traffic reporters out of work right away, but a small company in Rockville, Md., has patented a blueprint for an "intelligent" road system that would tell drivers how to avoid congestion.
Working under contract with the Federal Highway Administration, Farradyne Systems recently patented the overall architecture of a system that organizes traffic information in a useful way for cars heading all over a city.
A simplified version of the system, which broadcasts data about once a minute to cars carrying special computers, is in place in Orlando, Fla.


INSIDE
No Progress in Bosnian Talks
Mediators struggled, but two factions refused to accept a peace plan for Bosnia on the eve of a United Nations Security Council session.
Page A10.
U.S.
Builds Amid Office Glut
Congress is spending billions of dollars building Federal offices even though the commercial market is glutted with vacant space.
Page A12.
Scotland Curbs AIDS Threat
By giving oral versions of drugs sought by addicts, Edinburgh has sharply reduced the number of people who have the AIDS virus.
Page A3.
The Capitalists Return
Americans are trickling back to Vietnam, hoping to employ their former enemies and ready the country for a corporate invasion.
Page D1.


Broad National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fight Was Like a Mirage But Bowe's Title Is Real
When Riddick Bowe rose from his hotel bed yesterday morning, he must have thought he had forgotten to wake in time for the big fight.
Everything happened so fast Saturday night that the heavyweight championship bout seemed to come and go in a matter of moments.
Bowe needed less than one round to dispose of Michael Dokes and retain his two-thirds share of the title at Madison Square Garden.
It will take much longer than that for him to decide whom to fight next.


Leo Burnett Wins Most Mobius Awards
The Leo Burnett Company took top honors last week at the 22d annual Mobius Advertising Awards presentation in Chicago, honoring excellence in production.
Burnett won 21 first-place Mobius statues for work done by its offices in Chicago, Singapore, Tokyo and Toronto.
Lintas Worldwide followed with 14, for its offices in New York and Warren, Mich.
Tied for third were Saatchi &amp; Saatchi and DDB Needham Worldwide, with 12 awards each divided among several of their offices.


U.S. Businesses Turning to Vietnam
Almost 18 years after United States diplomats fled Saigon before the advancing Communist troops, American capitalists are trickling back, hoping to employ their former enemies and ready the country for a corporate invasion.
A trade delegation of about 30 American business people arrived in Hanoi this weekend, one of the first concrete results of a Bush Administration decision in December to permit American companies to open offices in Vietnam.


CHRONICLE
Last summer, Laurie Colwin, the novelist and short story writer, phoned GAIL ZWEIGENTHAL, the editor in chief of Gourmet magazine, for whom she wrote a monthly essay and said, "I have all my columns for next year, is it O.K. if I send them in now?" Ms.
Zweigenthal recalled the other day.
"I was flabbergasted but I said, 'Sure.' "
What had motivated Ms.
Colwin, who had never submitted her columns by the batch before, to work so far in advance will forever remain a mystery: She died of a heart attack on Oct. 25 at the age of 48.
The magazine will continue printing her work through November.


Overtime and Hirings Show Some Factories Picking Up
Much of the nation's industrial sector is shifting into higher gear, though this is sometimes hard to discern in the dust kicked up by wounded corporate giants like General Motors, Sears and I.B.M.
The companies enjoying a surge in business are not suddenly putting out the call for thousands of new workers based on the last few months' growth, but many have stepped up production lines and some have turned on the green lights for expansion.


Knicks Click And It Sounds Like a Romp
So many Knicks played well last night, it hardly mattered whom Pat Riley put on the floor.
Patrick Ewing (21 points, 7 rebounds) had a superb three quarters, then sat out the fourth quarter because the Knicks didn't need him.
Tony Campbell continued his recent strong play and scored a season-high 21 points.
Charles Smith (flu) missed the game, but the Knicks did not miss a beat with Rolando Blackman (14 points) starting at small forward.
And both Anthony Mason (14 points) and Charles Oakley (10 points, 6 rebounds) played power forward, with the emphasis on power.


NFS Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Baroid Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Editorial Notebook; How to Rescue a Crack House
Until very recently, the big single-room-occupancy building at 558-60 West 165th Street in Washington Heights housed a thriving wholesale drug market.
Dealers operated in more than 30 of the building's 216 rooms.
In the rear they stored the drugs, while lookouts faced the street.
Customers seeking cocaine to retail elsewhere placed orders with men on the sidewalk who disappeared into the building, then returned with the goods.
Today the drug dealers are gone.
The aging building is peaceful once again for tenants who had endured years of intimidation.
Therein lies an intriguing tale that holds promise for intimidated communities everywhere.


Cygnus Therapeutic (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Metro Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sterling Software reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Historic Cemetery in Westchester County Is Vandalized


Phobellina Best of Shar-Peis
The Empire Specialty Associated Clubs ended a two-day run yesterday on Pier 88 at the New York City Passenger Ship Terminal in Manhattan.
The Chinese Shar-Pei Club of America drew 109 dogs, an unusually large entry since the breed was registered by the American Kennel Club only last year.
Anne Clark, who was one of the handful of judges eligible to rule on all of the 135 breeds listed by the A.K.C., chose Jill Parslow's home- bred Ch.
Chesapeake's Phobellina as best of breed.


A Brief Version of Time
Suppose that people live forever.
Strangely, the population of each city splits in two: the Laters and the Nows.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball National Basketball Association  NEW JERSEY NETS -- Signed Bernard King, forward, for the rest of the season.
Placed Dwayne Schintzius, center, on the injured list.
Hockey  East Coast Hockey League  DAYTON BOMBERS -- Announced that Dave Smith, center, has been recalled to Fort Wayne of the International Hockey League.
Activated Doug Evans, defenseman, from the injured list.
College  RHODE ISLAND -- Suspended Jason Alexander, guard, from the basketball team indefinitely for violation of team rules.


Pope Urges Chastity to Fight AIDS in Uganda


Equity Issues Scheduled for This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Biocircuits Corp., Burlingame, Calif., 2.5 million common shares.
Hambrecht &amp; Quist Inc.


Sports of The Times; America Loses A Hero
WE have nine years and 363 days to come up with a stamp.
Shall it be the dignified and lean young Arthur Ashe, or shall it be the dignified and lean middle-aged Arthur Ashe?
Shall it be the let's-not-call-attention-to-ourselves short hair of the 50's, or the modified black-is-beautiful Afro of the 70's, or back to the board-room short hair of the 90's again?
That's the only decision to be made about the mandatory Arthur Ashe stamp, as soon as he is eligible, the stamp that will honor an American hero who never got to see his daughter graduate, or cheer the next black tennis champion, or become President of the United States.


Message and Morality; Concerns Over Public Relations and Ethics Clash in the Crisis of Clinton's First Weeks
The capital is running a fever, gripped by the frenzy that sets in every so often when morality and expediency get tangled up.
This time, Bill Clinton is in the soup.
Mr.
Clinton, who came to Washington as a populist and economic savior of the middle class, has once again been diverted by questions of the ethical standards and calculated diversity of his Administration.


Australian Prime Minister Sets Election for March
Facing what is expected to be a tight race with the faltering economy as the main issue, Prime Minister Paul Keating on Sunday called for a general election on March 13.
Mr.
Keating, entering his first election as Prime Minister, has led the Government for 14 months after a bitter dispute in the Labor Party led to the ouster of Bob Hawke, the former Prime Minister, by the Party's right wing.


Advanced Logic Research (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Survey Finds More Playing
On the day after the death of Arthur Ashe, whose style of play and commitment to teaching brought new players to the game, tennis marketing executives contemplated a new study that found participation has risen despite the recession, but much remains to be done to increase how often people play.
Ashe was scheduled to attend a forum of the Tennis Industry Association today at the Super Show, a sporting goods convention.
He was also slated to sign autographs at the Head Sports booth.


Accounts
*
Unum Corp., Portland, Me., to Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein, San Francisco, for the disability and life insurer's account, formerly at the Guthrie Group, Portland.
Goodby, Berlin was awarded the account, with billings estimated at $5.5 million, in a review that also included Guthrie; Fallon McElligott, Minneapolis, and Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners, New York. *
Ryobi America Corp., Anderson, S.C., to Henderson Advertising, Greenville, S.C., to handle the power tool and lawn-care equipment maker's account, previously at Elisco &amp; Herrmann, Pittsburgh.
Billings were estimated to exceed $5 million.


Shelby Williams Ind.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ryka Supports Women's Cause
Ryka Inc. a maker of women's athletic footwear, has joined the growing number of corporations trying to integrate brand marketing with social issues.
An extensive marketing campaign, developed by Cone Communications in Boston, will focus on helping to end violence against women.
Ryka intends to donate 7 percent of its pretax profits to a newly created organization, the Ryka Rose Foundation -- Rose stands for Regaining One's Self-Esteem -- which will sponsor community action programs for women.


West Newton Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Glamis Gold reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Western Gas Resources reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Owens-Illinois reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Morrison Knudsen reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Trans Financial Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Little Help for Mentally Ill Addicts; Two Treatment Bureaucracies Compete to Avoid Them
The case of Christopher Battiste, the homeless man whose arrest in the beating death of an elderly Bronx woman underscored New York's inability to deal with growing numbers of mentally ill drug abusers, has lent new urgency to the debate over how best to help such people while protecting the public from harm.
Government officials and advocates alike say the case of Mr.
Battiste, who for years drifted among jails, psychiatric emergency rooms and homeless shelters, demonstrates the need for sweeping changes in three distinct, though clearly intertwined, areas.


Weis Markets Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Omnicare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Guns in Prison Show Futility of a Ban on Arms
To the Editor:
In light of your editorial support of more restrictions on legitimate ownership of private firearms, "When Inmates Carry Guns" (editorial, Jan. 20) misses a crucial point.


Horace Mann Educators Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rev. Robert Hershey, Lutheran Pastor, 83
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert D. Hershey, pastor of the Lutheran Church of the Holy Trinity in Manhattan for 21 years until his retirement in 1974, died Saturday evening at his home near Reading, Pa.
He was 83.
He had been ill with cancer, his family said.
Dr.
Hershey was most widely known for his parish preaching and nationally broadcast appearances at various times from the late 1940's until the mid-1960's on NBC's "National Radio Pulpit," ABC's "Sunday Vespers" and the Mutual Broadcasting System's "Faith in Our Time."
While he was at Holy Trinity, which is at 65th Street and Central Part West, the church began its series of Sunday afternoon musical vespers focused on the works of Johann Sebastian Bach.
He was born in Reading, Pa., graduated from Gettysburg College and the Lutheran Seminary at Gettysburg, and received a doctorate in sacred theology from Temple University.
His books include "The Secret of God," "Advent Landmarks: From a Preacher's Notebook" and "Think About These Things," a collection of sermons.
Dr.
Hershey is survived by his wife, the former Mary Billman; a son, Robert D. Jr., a correspondent in the Washington Bureau of The New York Times, and a daughter, Georgina S. Leon, an editor at Pennsylvania State University in State College, Pa.


Not Quite Campaigning, Perot Crusades in Maine
The last election was only three months ago and the next one is almost four years away, but when Ross Perot flew here today, it looked like the traditional start of the Presidential primary season in neighboring New Hampshire.
There was the usual snow-covered New England landscape, the same curious, enthusiastic crowds and a man who said he was ready to fix the mess in Washington.


E.P.A. Head Removes Herself From Decision on Ohio Incinerator
Carol M. Browner, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, has removed herself from decisions about the testing and commercial operation of the nation's newest hazardous-waste incinerator, in East Liverpool, Ohio.
Ms.
Browner's decision, which was made Friday at a meeting with opponents of the incinerator, is considered a setback by opponents of the Waste Technologies Industries incinerator, which is is on the banks of the Ohio River near a heavily populated section of East Liverpool that includes homes, an elementary school and churches.
A Federal district court in Cleveland began a hearing today on whether a permit for testing the incinerator should be rescinded.


U.S. Is Building Offices Despite Many Vacancies
Although the nation's commercial real estate market remains glutted with vacant space, Congress is spending several billion dollars building new offices for Federal workers here and in other cities.
Most of this money is being spent on projects, like the Federal office building going up in Foley Square in Manhattan, that were in advanced stages of planning or under construction before the market turned sour.
But as recently as October, Congress appropriated $626 million to start 35 projects.


Mapco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  THE ENDURING LEGACY OF ARTHUR ASHE
If a place in New York City evokes Arthur Ashe's spirit, it is surely the Harlem Tennis Center's makeshift courts, inside the cavernous 369th Regiment Armory building at 143d Street and Fifth Avenue in Harlem.
It was there in 1968 -- the same year that Mr.
Ashe became the first black to win the United States Open men's singles championships -- that the Harlem Junior Tennis Program was founded, to give minority children a chance to play a sport that had long been dominated by whites, until Mr.
Ashe came along.
The former tennis champion died Saturday afternoon at the age of 49.
A1.
HOUSING PROGRAM STALLED IN WASHINGTON
Since the late 1980's, money from a Federal tax break for corporations has put thousands of low-income New Yorkers into new homes.
Now legislation that would renew the financing is stalled in Washington, and that, coupled with state budget cuts, threatens plans for dozens of affordable housing developments in the state this year.
A1.


CGC Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Coleman Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ankle Injury Sends Bournissen Home
With nothing happening on the race courses because of bad weather yesterday in Shizukuishi, Japan, the big news at the world Alpine ski championships was the broken ankle that sent Swiss champion CHANTAL BOURNISSEN home without the gold medal she was favored to win.
It was an injury that brought back memories for CORINNE SCHMIDHAUSER, a former World Cup slalom champion who once broke her ankle doing the same thing as Bournissen: playing volleyball.


Israeli Soldiers Seize Palestinian Journalists
Israeli soldiers arrested two Palestinian journalists and their assistant today while they were covering anti-Israel street protests in Gaza City.
According to the Israeli Army, the three Palestinians were held for police investigation after refusing to leave an area that had been declared a closed military zone during the demonstrations.
An army spokesman said the authorities were investigating whether the men had incited protesters.


Happy With the President, So Far
President Clinton has come under heavy criticism for his handling of several major issues, including his effort to lift the ban on homosexuals in the military and his troubled search for an Attorney General.
But there has been little notice of his handling of the bond market.
Yet, to the surprise of many investors and traders, he and his economic team, with help from Congress, have done nothing but say what the market regards as the right things.
So while Democrats, Republicans and the press have been lamenting the performance of the new President, the odd fact is that Wall Street is really liking this Democrat.


Delay on Tax-Credit Measure Stalls Projects to House Poor
Since the late 1980's, money from a Federal tax break for corporations has put thousands of low-income New Yorkers into new homes.
Now legislation that would renew the financing is stalled in Washington, and that, coupled with state budget cuts, threatens plans for dozens of affordable housing developments in the state this year.
In New York City alone, the tax break, the Federal low-income housing tax credit, which uses money from corporations that buy tax credits to help pay for affordable rental housing, has supplied roughly one-third of the cost of rebuilding more than 5,000 apartments since 1989.
Using Abandoned Buildings
Most of the units have been carved out of abandoned buildings that the city has taken from owners because of tax delinquencies.
Of the apartments rebuilt with tax-credit money, 30 percent are set aside as permanent housing for homeless people.


Property Tax Loan Makes Financial Sense
To the Editor:
A Jan. 30 article reports criticism of Mayor David N. Dinkins's proposal for New York City to borrow $215 million from Chemical Bank, using unpaid city property taxes as collateral.
Far from being "financial gimmickry," as you call it, the proposal makes good financial sense.


Abroad at Home; It's Gender, Stupid
Can anyone still doubt that underlying the troubles of President Clinton's first two choices for Attorney General was the attitude of a male-dominated society toward women?
Can anyone doubt that the politics of the business is steeped in hypocrisy?
Judge Kimba M. Wood was forced to withdraw because she employed an undocumented alien for child care when it was legal to do so.
Judge Wood paid all taxes due and filled out all the forms required.
But after the Zoe Baird flap her entirely lawful actions were deemed politically dangerous.


College Aid Program Is Threatened by Cuts
A New York State program that helps low- and middle-income residents pay their college tuition is running more than $100 million in the red for a second year in a row because of the lingering recession, a state budget official said yesterday.
As layoffs have reduced many two-income families to one income and people with jobs have been forced to take pay cuts or work fewer hours, more students from these families have become eligible for grants from the Tuition Assistance Program, or T.A.P., said Claudia S. Hutton, spokeswoman for the state's Budget Division.
The same factors, she said, make more students eligible for full, rather than partial, grants.


A Workhorse Astride NBC's West Coast Track
When Don Ohlmeyer was first attracting attention as a producer and director of sports events for ABC in the early 1970's, he gained a reputation, in the words of one colleague, as "a brute for work."
He is likely to have plenty of opportunity to display that capacity in the new position he assumed last week at NBC -- president of the network's West Coast operation, with authority over all its entertainment-related business.


Poughkeepsie Savings Bank (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


SkyWest Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


People
*
George W. Slowik Jr. was named to the new position of publisher at Out magazine, New York, effective in April.
He had been publisher at Publishers Weekly, New York.
Michael Goff, president and editor in chief at Out, who has been handling the duties of publisher, said Mr.
Slowik would help in the raising of $1.3 million needed to complete Out's long-term capitalization plan.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday
None


Home Beneficial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Brad Phillips, 74, Dies; Was Radio Newscaster
Brad Phillips, a retired radio news anchor at WINS in New York City and a leader in the national radio and television union, died on Thursday at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 74 and lived in Manhattan.
He had a short illness, his family said.
Mr.
Phillips was a newscaster on WINS for 44 years until his retirement last year.
He started there as a disk jockey on music programs, after working as an announcer on several other stations.


Safety-Kleen Corp. reports earnings for 17wks to Jan 2


Symix Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Advertising
THEY say that breaking up is hard to do.
And that's as true for agency top executives as it is for love-struck teen-agers.
Case in point: Atlas Citron Haligman &amp; Bedecarre, a San Francisco shop with a reputation for stylishly creative work for accounts like Allure magazine, Gap Inc. and the Neutrogena Corporation.
The agency was founded three years ago by four colleagues who have worked together for 13 years at agencies in San Francisco and New York.


EMC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


JUDGE WOOD BACKS WHITE HOUSE STAND ON WHAT SHE TOLD
Judge Kimba M. Wood today supported White House assertions that before President Clinton settled on her as Attorney General, she never explicitly told officials that she had once hired an illegal immigrant as a baby sitter.
In a letter to The New York Times, Judge Wood said she wanted to "correct the impression conveyed" in a front-page account the newspaper published today.
That article quoted a person close to Judge Wood as saying she had told White House officials in detail about the baby sitter more than a week ago, when she was first approached about the Cabinet job.
Answered in General Terms
Judge Wood said today that when she was asked if she had a "Zoe Baird problem," she answered only in general terms, saying she had broken no law.
She said she did not mention the illegal immigrant who worked for her as a baby sitter in 1986, when there was no penalty for hiring an illegal alien.
Ms.
Baird's nomination as Attorney General was withdrawn two weeks ago because, unlike Judge Wood, she knowingly hired illegal immigrants as household workers after it became illegal.


Funeral Service Is Held in Greece for Queen of Yugoslavia


Bank of Boston reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


FCMI Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. WILL DRAW UP A STRATEGY TO AID EX-SOVIET STATES
The Clinton Administration intends to create a supercommittee in the State Department to shape a unified strategy toward Russia and the other former Soviet republics, but has no intention of immediately increasing foreign aid to the area, senior Administration officials say.
In an effort to avoid what it considers President Bush's haphazard approach to the problem, the Administration has chosen Strobe Talbott, a journalist and author who has written extensively about the Soviet Union, to head the committee in his capacity as Ambassador-at-Large to Russia and the other newly independent republics.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
A growing number of factories are shifting into higher gear, piling overtime on workers to handle the upswing.
The stepped-up production is sometimes hard to discern in the dust kicked up by wounded corporate giants like G.M., Sears and I.B.M.
And the companies enjoying a surge in business are not suddenly putting out the call for thousands of new workers.  [ Page A1. ]
Bankers are running into increasing skepticism about the merits of their plan to loosen bank regulations, after being cheered by the Clinton Administration's initial interest.  [ D1. ]


Critic's Notebook; Harsh Worlds Encroach On TV's Glossy Land
Television entertainment prefers to present parents and children just the way most of its viewers would like: in the kind of comforting, touchy-feely manner found in sitcoms like "Full House" and television movies like tonight's -- NBC at 9 -- "Danielle Steel's 'Heartbeat.' "
But increasingly, television and society are being forced to acknowledge other realities, one of them vividly encapsulated in the case of Gregory Kingsley, the 12-year-old who successfully sued in Florida to "divorce" his biological parents.
His story is being told tonight, on ABC at 9, in a television movie called "Gregory K," and tomorrow evening on a Court TV rerun of "Families Divided: A Child's Day in Court."


Lacey a Queen in Ring But Not on the Plane
Lacey, queen of all show dogs, is a banana-loving package of kinetic energy who, despite holding title to the ultimate canine throne, would rather raze it than recline on it.
But terriers are like that, even an exalted Asta-prototype like this one.
The airlines still treat her like another piece of baggage; Lacey, a 20-pounder, is too big and boisterous to fly first class.
But here in Manhattan, where she begins the defense of her Westminster Kennel Club championship today, Ch.
Registry's Lonesome Dove (as she's professionally known) has a two-bath suite and a round-the-clock valet, chef and playmate.


Neediest Cases Enriched by Tributes
Jill Walsh thought she had timed it perfectly.
When the Long Island Rail Road train pulled into Jamaica, Queens, she quickly got off to use the phone on the platform.
The train usually stops for five minutes, but as she was talking, it unexpectedly roared out of the station -- with her belongings on board.
An angry Ms.
Walsh complained to the station manager, who radioed the train's conductor.
She searched the train later that afternoon at its last stop, but her bags were gone.
So she filed a report with the railroad and returned home to Santa Monica, Calif.


Essay; The Clinton Direction
Whither the infant Administration?
We do not have to wait for the unveiling of the Grand Master Plan for the Economy, scheduled for Feb. 17, to find out.
All a pundit needs is a handful of public signals, a few whispered tips and his handy-dandy divining rod.
Q: Which path will the new President take -- deficit reduction or economic stimulus?


G.M. Set To Fight On Pickups
In an unusually aggressive corporate response to a liability problem, the General Motors Corporation is expected to announce today that it will sue NBC and several consumer groups, contending that they rigged crash tests of its pickup trucks.
G.M. also said yesterday that it was prepared to use strong technical evidence to prove that the pickups were not dangerously designed.
G.M. officials declined to discuss details of the company's campaign, which will be disclosed at a news conference in Detroit.
But even with no formal notification that it was being sued, NBC issued a response last night.


Dance in Review
New York City Ballet
New York State Theater
Ballet may have been about ballerinas for George Balanchine.
But he created his share of challenging roles for men.
One of the most demanding assignments was taken on by Nikolaj Hubbe and Igor Zelensky when the New York City Ballet presented "Tchaikovsky No. 3" on Friday night and Saturday afternoon.


'Oh, Yipe!' Said Thurgood Marshall
In 1977, Thurgood Marshall gave a series of interviews to Columbia University's Oral History Research Office.
They were conducted by Ed Edwin, a journalist, and made public after the retired Supreme Court Justice died at 84 on Jan. 24.
Lyndon B. Johnson appointed Mr.
Marshall, then a Court of Appeals judge, Solicitor General in 1965.
Then -- and many times later -- L.B.J. told Mr.
Marshall that he would never name him to the Supreme Court.
This excerpt describes events on June 13, 1967, when Mr.
Marshall learned that the President had changed his mind.


New York Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
The "How They Do It" chart in Your Money on Saturday, about one student's journey from community college to a bachelor's degree, described her driving costs incorrectly in some copies.
The cost of gasoline, auto insurance and normal maintenance of the car came to $7,225 for two years; gas alone was about $10 a week.


Political Miscalculations Threaten Fernandez's Job
It was just before Thanksgiving, and Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez was inching toward another confrontation, this time with a Queens school board over his mandate to teach tolerance for gay men and lesbians.
The Queens Borough President, Claire Shulman, who began her public life as a P.T.A. president and knows the turbulent political terrain in Queens, offered to help out.


Bliss &amp; Laughlin Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Law Can Recognize Sexual Harassment
To the Editor:
In "Crying Wolf in Albany" (Op-Ed, Jan. 23), Sheryl E. Reich states that the charges of sexual harassment made this month by Earlene Hill, a member of the New York State Assembly, against some of her male colleagues did not constitute sexual harassment because those who perpetrated the acts had no power over her and "were not in a position to deprive her of anything to which she was entitled nor did they threaten to do so."


One of New York's Bravest Continues to Heal
"This is really something special," said Fire Capt.
Martin McTigue at a news conference on Tuesday outside of New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
Captain McTigue suffered burns in an explosion at a Con Edison plant in 1992.
Page B7. (John Sotomayor/The New York Times)


The Slimmer Side of a New and Sprightly Life
After more than two years of intense self-examination, Life magazine finally bit the bullet and made the decision to remain a monthly.
"We're through with the public hanging of the laundry," said Daniel Okrent, the new managing editor.
"We have gone through a fundamental re-examination of the magazine, and we think monthly is a fine frequency."


Santa Monica Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lost Records Derail a Boyhood Dream


Ashe's Legacy Is the Gift for Inspiration
There can be no greater gift than that of holding out hope for those who have felt hopeless.
Arthur Ashe possessed that rare gift, the ability to inspire.
On Saturday, at 3:13 P.M. in a room in New York Hospital, Arthur Ashe died at age 49.
It is not stretching a point to say that his gift lives on.
Few men or women leave such a legacy; Arthur Ashe was one such extraordinary human being.


Owens-Corning reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mechanical Technology (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Sun Energy Partners reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cape Town Journal; A Nice Place, Parliament, but, Hark, the Bell Tolls
If the South African Parliament convened in a less alluring place, say in the dusty farm capital of Bloemfontein or amid the gaseous smelters of Richard's Bay, the whites who govern this country might have given up their political monopoly years ago.
Or maybe not, but as the last racially exclusive Parliament gathers in the southern-hemisphere summer of Cape Town, it is easy to understand the impulse of the white rulers to prolong their stay in power, if only for one more season of cold lobster and Cape wines, of the dolphins leaping in Camps Bay and the clouds tumbling down Table Mountain and the cream tea at the Mount Nelson Hotel.


Overruled Racial Quota Was a Means to an End
PRESIDENT CLINTON'S campaign manifesto last August mentioned race only once in a combined injunction and pledge: oppose racial quotas.
In a court case that went virtually unnoticed at the time, an unusual racial quota sanctioned by New York City's government was declared unconstitutional by a Federal judge.
The case was about means, not ends.
With the ends already achieved, any ruling that altered the means might have seemed moot.
And, given the raw emotions raised by the issue, self-congratulation was muted.


Critic as Chairman Gets Praise as Both
"Onward, Christian Soldiers" is not in the hymnal at the Allen Temple Baptist Church here.
An influential parishioner, Congressman Ronald V. Dellums, complained that it was too bellicose.
Now Mr.
Dellums, who began his political career as a Vietnam War protester and remains a vocal opponent of military intervention and costly new weapon systems, has taken on the unlikely post of chairman of the House Armed Services Committee.
And his constituents in this overwhelmingly liberal district, birthplace of the Free Speech Movement and countless other left-wing crusades, say they can hardly believe that the quintessential outsider has moved inside.


California Federal Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Power Struggle at the Berliner Ensemble
Grim and totalitarian East Berlin produced the most innovative, exciting theater in Germany, East or West.
The East Germans subsidized the arts lavishly for propagandistic purposes.
But that couldn't explain the stream of brilliant stage directors, many of whom immigrated to the West, who emerged from East Berlin in the 1950's and 60's.
The source and center of that theatrical energy was Bertolt Brecht and the theater company he founded in 1949, the Berliner Ensemble.
Young directors and actors flocked to Brecht and to perhaps naive notions of leftist idealism.
The theater remained a source of East German artistic vitality even after his death in 1956.


Soviet Archives: Paper Trail of a Rigid, Authoritarian System
On any given day, a dozen or so people can be found huddled over vintage metal table lamps in the hushed reading room of the Communist Party's main archive, plunged into what has become one of the more intriguing and frustrating exercises in Moscow: culling the millions of files for pieces to the vast puzzle of Soviet history.
Now called the Storage Center for Contemporary Documentation, the building in the old Central Committee complex on Staraya Square is only one depository for 204 million separate files now controlled by the Russian Government.


Sports of The Times; When a Winner Is Also a Loser in the Show Biz World of Boxing
HE sat there perspiring in his purple satin robe with a few purple lumps under his eyes, but Jesse Ferguson was smiling.
"I'm 35," this Philadelphia heavyweight was saying.
"They think I'm a sparring partner, but if Bowe was supposed to fight Ray Mercer and I beat Mercer, why doesn't Bowe fight me?"


La Quinta Motor Inns reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bosnia Peace Plan Said to Spur New Attacks by Serbs
A renewed Serbian campaign to expel Muslims from towns and villages in Bosnia and Herzegovina appears to have been set off by the United Nations proposal to divide the country into semi-autonomous provinces, diplomats here and Bosnian Government officials in Sarajevo said today.
Hundreds of Muslim refugees continue to stream out of Cerska, Kamenica and other besieged villages above the Drina River town of Zvornik in eastern Bosnia, said an official from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.


Spreading the Word on Mobile Messaging
General Magic, Silicon Valley's most closely watched start-up company, will introduce a software technology on Monday that it hopes will create a standard for transmitting messages among any machines that compute, regardless of who makes them.
The software is expected to add some zip to the faltering pen computing industry, which has been trying to redefine itself as a portable communications business after failing to generate many sales.


Travel &amp; Leisure &amp; Time &amp; American Express
Even as it prepares to turn over the management of its magazines to Time Inc., American Express Publishing Corporation is embarking on an aggressive marketing campaign for the $5 million overhaul of Travel &amp; Leisure, its flagship publication.
American Express's unusual partnership with Time, its decision to sell failing regional magazines, and its ambitious rejuvenation of Travel &amp; Leisure are meant as a signal that the troubled company has dealt with its problems and is ready to move ahead.


Review/Rock; With Volume Intact, Stars of the 70's Reunite
There's a slim chance that the 70's supergroup Emerson, Lake and Palmer's performance at Radio City Music Hall on Wednesday night was a conscious self-parody.
Keith Emerson, the group's keyboardist, standing in front of a monstrous bank of electronic equipment that looked like something out of a grade-B science-fiction movie from the 1970's, plugged and replugged a cable, causing no audible effect at all.
The group, known and loved for its bombast, may (or may not) just have been poking fun at its electronic pretensions to grandeur.
Bombast and pretensions have a firm place in rock, and clearly the audience, mostly male, was there for the size and volume of the show.
The cardinal rule in arena rock is that something has to happen, that in some way the show has to equal a natural event, that the magnitude and breathlessness of it somehow have to make it into the 6 o'clock news of the communal mind.


Dance in Review
Annabelle Gamson  Dance Company
St. Mark's Church
Annabelle Gamson's new dance piece, "The Women of Union Square," is a surprise.
Lyrical, abstract and clever, it is anything but the overt social-protest work its title, with echoes from the 1930's, might suggest.
The six women in the cast of the Annabelle Gamson Dance Company on Thursday night seemed to revel in their dancing with the same pleasure Ms.
Gamson had obviously poured into the piece.


Wisconsin Energy Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Westamerica Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Watts Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


State Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Newly Formed Salomon Unit Receives Top Credit Rating
Banks and brokerage firms have developed a lucrative and fast-growing business in custom-tailored contracts that shield customers from undesired moves in interest rates, foreign currencies or other financial markets -- or allow them to profit from such moves.
But customers have grown increasingly wary of conducting this business with firms that have less than pristine credit ratings.
To bolster its rating, Salomon Brothers has set up a subsidiary to handle this business for "derivative" products, and the unit carries a blue-chip triple-A credit rating -- an unusual accomplishment for a firm that has only a moderate overall rating of single-A.
In most cases, a subsidiary cannot have a higher credit rating than its parent firm.
The Salomon unit, Salomon Swapco, received its higher rating because the parent set aside a pool of capital, initially $175 million, to assure customers it would meet its obligations.


Velvet Worm's Lineage
The velvet worm, which looks like a slug with many legs, has been the focus of a continuing scientific debate over its lineage.
Named for its soft skin, the velvet worm was long thought to be a close relative of both the earthworm and the centipede.
A recent analysis of the velvet worm's DNA, however, showed that instead, it is closely related to the scorpion.
The study, published in the journal Science, found that the velvet worm, or onychophoran, is genetically akin to the joint-legged arthropods, a phylum or large classification of lower animals, and is not part of the more primitive phylum of segmented worms, the annelids.


Scholars Mourn and Fight A Landmark Library's Closing
"I feel like I'm watching the Titanic go down," said Margot Gayle, an author who has spent much of the last three years gathering material for a biography of James Bogardus, a 19th-century architect and engineer, at the library of the New-York Historical Society.
"The closing of the library throws a great cloud over my finishing this book," she added.
Like many other researchers, not to mention the general public, Ms.
Gayle said she was shocked and dismayed last week when she learned that the cash-starved historical society would close its library on Feb. 19 in a last-ditch effort to avoid bankruptcy.
It is also canceling all but one of its public programs and dismissing 41 employees.
The four floors of art galleries in its landmark building on Central Park West at 77th Street were shut down last month, although conservators will continue to work on the collection.


Classical Music in Review
Minnesota Orchestra Avery Fisher Hall
Written for the Minneapolis Symphony in 1944 as an antidote to wartime blues, David Diamond's "Rounds for String Orchestra" is a charming piece.
It draws its sophisticated yet forthright humor from rhythmic and metric transformations that surprise but rarely jolt.


Classical Music in Review
Symphony Orchestra of the Curtis Institute of Music Carnegie Hall
But for a few awkwardnesses in the brasses, occasional blurring in the strings and a false entry or two, the Symphony Orchestra of the Curtis Institute in Philadelphia sounded, for much of Friday evening, like a professional orchestra, and a fine one.
In Berlioz's "Corsaire" and Rachmaninoff's Second Symphony, the string and woodwind tone had a lovely sheen, and the young players responded alertly to the direction of the veteran Andre Previn.


The Ghosts of the Sidewalks of New York


1992's Best Dog a Disappointing 3d in Terrier Group
In a major upset, Ch.
Registry's Lonesome Dove, the wire fox terrier bitch who was top dog at the Westminster Kennel Club show last year, failed to win the terrier group last night at Westminster's 117th fixture at Madison Square Garden.
The dog known as Lacey, owned by Marion and Sam Lawrence of Orlando, Fla., placed only third in the group after winning best of breed in the afternoon.
She trailed the Dandie Dinmont Terrier, named Ch.
Pennywise the Butler Did It and owned by his breeder, Catherine Nelson of Potomac, Md., and the West Highland White, named Ch.
Holyrod's Hotspur O'Shelly Bay and owned by the group Montgomery, Gabriel, MacMillan, Foster and Dickerson of Simsbury, Conn.


Microsoft's Stock Takes a Tumble
Sometimes no news is not good news.
Shares of the Microsoft Corporation fell today in heavy trading after the Federal Trade Commission said on Friday that it was not yet taking action in its long-running investigation of the company's business practices.
Wary analysts said the F.T.C.'s announcement before the stock market close on Friday, which did not even mention Microsoft by name, did not rule out future actions against the software giant.


U.N. Affords Elderly Serbs an Opportunity for Refuge


Foodmaker Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 17


Mid Atlantic Medical Services (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CLINTON NOMINEES WILL BE SCREENED FOR ILLEGAL HIRING
All candidates for the hundreds of Government jobs subject to Senate confirmation are now being asked if they had hired illegal aliens or violated tax laws on household workers, Clinton Administration officials said today, and at least a dozen people have been dropped from consideration over those issues.
Use of the new questions follows an uproar over the nomination of Zoe Baird to be Attorney General and the withdrawal of another candidate for the same job, Federal District Judge Kimba M. Wood of New York.
George Stephanopoulos, the White House spokesman, said that in view of those events candidates for Presidential appointments in the Clinton Administration would probably be disqualified if they had hired illegal aliens in the last six years.
New Standards Imposed
The hiring of illegal aliens was prohibited by a law adopted in November 1986.
Asked if President Clinton would appoint any people who have employed illegal aliens since then, Mr.
Stephanopoulos said, "I think it would make it very difficult, and it would probably be disqualifying, yes." Administration officials said Mr.
Clinton would probably not nominate individuals who hired illegal aliens before November 1986 because people would find it difficult to distinguish between the two situations in political debate.


Though Compliance Lags, Tax Law Is Nothing New
Since 1954 the Federal Insurance Contributions Act has required householders to pay Social Security taxes for baby sitters, gardeners or any other "employees" working in their homes who earn more than $50 in a calendar quarter.
But few have paid them.
"A lot more people know about it now than they did a month ago," said Don Roberts, a spokesman for the Internal Revenue Service, speaking of the requirement.
He said data from the Census Bureau and other sources show that in 1991 only about 1 in 4 people who were required to pay Social Security for household help did so.


Arthur Mann, 71, Teacher Who Wrote On Reform Politics
Arthur Mann, a chronicler of American reform politics, died Sunday at the University of Chicago's Bernard Mitchell Hospital.
A resident of Hyde Park, Ill., he was 71.
His family said his death came after a long illness.


Summations Begin in Sex Abuse Trial
As the Glen Ridge sex assault trial entered its final phases today, a defense lawyer began closing arguments by attacking the credibility of two of the state's expert witnesses and stressing inconsistent findings since 1977 about the mental capabilities of the mildly retarded woman at the heart of the case.
In his two-hour presentation this afternoon, Louis Esposito, who represents 21-year-old Kyle Scherzer, was both folksy, addressing the jurors once as "you guys," and solicitous, cutting short his review of an inch-thick stack of psychological and educational reports.


RESULTS PLUS
SKIING  Tomba Takes to the Sickbed
Alberto Tomba was in bed fighting a bout of flu this morning in Shizukuishi, Japan, while Norway's Kjetil Andre Aamodt took the first-run lead in the men's giant slalom in the World Alpine Ski Championships.
Tomba, the two-time Olympic giant slalom champion, was stricken with the flu Sunday night and spent yesterday in bed. (AP) TENNIS
To the Victor, a Dhow
Third-seeded Karel Novacek of the Czech Republic overcame a comeback attempt by Fabrice Santoro of France yesterday and won the final of the Dubai Open, 6-4, 7-5, in the United Arab Emirates.
Novacek won $142,000 plus a silver dhow, a model of an Arabian ship.
Santoro won $84,000 and a gold khanjar, or dagger. (AP)


TRC Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Failed Experiment Didn't Inspire Einstein
To the Editor:
Contrary to Ian Hinchcliffe and R. Michael Barnett in "Advances in Physics Lie Just Ahead" (letter, Jan. 19), the "failed" Michelson-Morley experiment was not a primary motivation in Einstein's developing the theory of relativity.


Lancaster Colony (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reichmann Joins Soros In New Fund
Making his return to the business world after the collapse of his real estate empire, Paul Reichmann, the former deputy chairman of Olympia &amp; York, has agreed to be an adviser and investor in a new real estate fund tied to George Soros, the well-known fund manager.
Mr.
Soros, who oversees the $3.5 billion Quantum Fund and several related funds, said yesterday that Mr.
Reichmann, as a representative of the Reichmann family, would invest $75 million to $100 million in the venture, which will be called the Quantum Realty Fund.


Fashion Statements Are Spoken Here
The cap seller looked at me as if I'd just returned from Mars aboard Air Nike with Michael Jordan and Bugs Bunny.
The Chicago Bulls cap not only had the team logo but something named "Taz," too.
Who?
I asked.
"The cartoon character, the Tasmanian Devil!" he said.


We Mustn't Give Up Space Flight Dream
To the Editor:
"After Cold War, World's Space Plans Seek a More Down-to-Earth Basis" (Science Times, Jan. 26) supports the conventional wisdom that human space flight served only the political ends of superpower competition and that such flights have little meaning in the post-cold-war era.
I take strong issue with this observation.
The cold war merely provided the political context for piloted space travel, which was ripe for flourishing in any circumstances.
Further, human exploration and development of space will thrive even in the glow of the new world order.


QMS Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Sheraton Names New President
ITT Sheraton yesterday appointed John V. Giovenco, an executive in Hilton Hotels' gambling division, as its president and chief operating officer.
Mr.
Giovenco is to be promoted to chief executive on Jan. 1, 1994, when John Kapioltas is to relinquish that title but continue as chairman.
The move appears to be a direct challenge to the Hilton Hotels Corporation and the Promus Companies, which both have substantial interests in gambling and hotels.


Hazing Remains Secret and Dangerous
To the Editor:
You report that fraternity hazing has gone underground after an incident with racial overtones at Rider College in Lawrenceville, N.J. (Education page, Jan. 27).
Fraternity hazing has always been a clandestine campus activity.
In 1985 we first introduced the health hazard and medico-legal implications of fraternity hazing to the medical community.


Books of The Times; From Gay Themes, a Universal Story of Love
Martin and John  By Dale Peck  228 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $21.
On its simplest level, "Martin and John," Dale Peck's astonishing first novel, recounts the story of a young man's flight from his abusive, homophobic father and his later efforts to come to terms with his lover's death from AIDS.
But if this fiercely written novel offers an indelible portrait of gay life during the plague years, it also opens out to become a universal story about love and loss and the redemptive powers of fiction.
It is a story about the cycles of pain and grief that spiral through people's lives, and the efforts an artist makes to reorder and transcend that hurt.


British Kin, in Iraq, to Press for Release of 2 Men
The families of two Britons accused by Iraq of entering the country illegally arrived here today seeking their release.
But diplomats say Baghdad is unlikely to free the men unless London makes a move.
"Don't expect anything special," said a European charge d'affaires, who asked not to be identified.
"It's quite clear the Iraqis need to have a gesture from London." The families traveled the 620-mile desert highway from Amman, Jordan, to Baghdad hoping the Government of President Saddam Hussein would show flexibility.


Pain of Unrequited Love Afflicts the Rejecter, Too
SINCE Young Werther died from it and Cyrano de Bergerac was so noble about it, unrequited love has been one of the great themes of literature and drama.
Now, at last, unrequited love is getting systematic scrutiny from psychologists.
The first studies to look at the two sides of unrequited love -- the would-be lover and the rejecter -- show there is pain on both sides and, surprisingly, the rejecter often suffers just as much as the rejected.


Time Warner Shows Gains As It Shrinks Merger's Debt
Time Warner Inc. reported a higher fourth-quarter profit yesterday, aided by strong earnings from all of its businesses and refinancings of the huge debt taken on in the 1989 merger of Time Inc. and Warner Communications.
The company said earnings for the fourth quarter were $68 million, up from $45 million a year earlier.
Revenue rose to $3.72 billion, from $3.39 billion for 1991.


8 Players In: Walton and Erving Lead Way to Hall
Julius Erving and Bill Walton, two extraordinary players who helped define the 1970's but also made their mark on the 1980's, were among the eight former players selected yesterday to the Basketball Hall of Fame.
Erving, known worldwide as the inimitable Dr.
J, and Walton, considered by many to be, when healthy, the most multiskilled center in the history of the sport, were elected in their first year of eligibility and will be inducted with the six others on May 10 in Springfield, Mass.


Freshman Is Off Team
Penn State freshman CARY KOLAT, who has helped the Nittany Lions to a No. 1 ranking, was suspended from the team indefinitely Monday after being charged with public drunkenness after a weekend meet.
The wrestler, who is under age 21, is the second suspended by Coach JOHN FRITZ, who does not allow his wrestlers to drink alcohol.
Kolat is ranked No. 5 in the nation at 134 pounds by Amateur Wrestling News. (AP)


METROPOLITAN COLLEGE REPORT
N.Y.U.
They might not be the best team in New York City, but the Purple Violets have the best record (18-1) and can clinch a University Athletic Association championship Friday if they defeat Washington University in St.
Louis.
A victory would also give N.Y.U. the automatic conference berth to the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division III tournament.
The problem, however, is that N.Y.U. has never won at Washington U. But the Purple Violets will carry a nine-game winning streak to St.
Louis as well as a team that relies on depth and all-round scoring.
N.Y.U. has had at least three players score in double figures in every game this season, and five times six players have scored in double figures.


Sally A. Provence, Professor, 76
Sally A. Provence, professor emeritus in the Child Study Center and the Pediatrics Department at Yale University, died on Saturday at the Connecticut Hospice in Branford, Conn.
She was 76 and lived at Branford.
The cause was cancer, said Dr. Albert J. Solnit, a longtime colleague.


Oiler Coach Gets Job
JIM EDDY, fired as Houston's defensive coordinator after the Oilers blew a 35-3 lead over the Buffalo Bills in their playoff opener, is joining the Dallas Cowboys as a defensive assistant.
Houston's defense led the A.F.C. and finished third in the N.F.L. in total defense.
The Oilers also finished third in the league in pass defense and tied for fifth in sacks last season.
Cowboys Coach JIMMY JOHNSON said it will be decided later which position group Eddy will be working with. (AP)


Systems &amp; Computer reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Post's Suitor Says Lawsuit By S.E.C. Won't Stop Him
Steven Hoffenberg said yesterday that he signed a contract over the weekend to buy The New York Post and that the Securities and Exchange Commission suit against him would not stop him from becoming The Post's new owner.
Although the S.E.C. sought a freeze of Mr.
Hoffenberg's personal and business assets, the Federal judge hearing that case yesterday refused to order the freeze immediately and scheduled a hearing for Feb. 24.
Mr.
Hoffenberg could complete his purchase of the newspaper before the court considers the freeze request.


Not All of the Elderly Need Care Insurance
To the Editor:
Some people should not waste their time debating the merits of long-term health care insurance.
It is only useful to those with assets to pass on to their heirs.
Most of those with few assets and low income will spend down their assets rapidly in a nursing home, and Medicaid will pay for the rest of their stay.
As a rule of thumb, people with assets of less than $60,000 and anticipated retirement income of less than $20,000 a year should not strain their budgets to pay premiums on such insurance.


Bowe's Camp Has Eyes on Lewis for Title Bout
Lennox Lewis might not have known it, but yesterday he moved to the head of the class among Riddick Bowe's challengers.
Despite a number of significant obstacles that stand in the way of a Bowe-Lewis heavyweight title fight, the bout that everyone wants to see is suddenly becoming a real possibility.
It could take place as early as June 18 at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nev.


26 States And Fleet Settle Suit
The Fleet Mortgage Group, the country's largest servicer of home mortgages, settled a Federal lawsuit today by agreeing to refund excessive escrow payments made to the company by hundreds of thousands of homeowners across the country.
Attorneys general from 26 states, who had challenged the company's escrow practices in court, estimated that the company would have to refund a total of $150 million to approximately 700,000 mortgage holders.
About 65,000 of the affected mortgages are in New York, 21,000 are in New Jersey and 20,000 are in Connecticut, according to officials in those states.


Arthur Ashe, Model Champion
The rise of Arthur Ashe in tennis, crowned by his Wimbledon victory in 1975, took on the stature of a fable.
He was a black man in a sport that seemed a metaphor for racism -- a sport played by white people in white clothes at white country clubs -- and for a time he was the best there was.
He was also a rare champion who believed that personal success imposes broad responsibilities to humanity.
Mr.
Ashe's life was linked to two of the great social scourges of his day: racism and AIDS, the disease that led to his death last weekend.
He confronted them head on -- driven, until the end, by the unselfish and unswerving conviction that he was duty bound to ease the lives of others who were similarly afflicted.


A.T.&amp; T. Deal on General Magic Disclosed
Even as A.T.&amp; T., Sony, Apple Computer and three other companies were formally announcing their alliance known as General Magic yesterday, an unannounced facet of the deal was stirring the first hints of controversy.
The alliance, as expected, is to develop devices, computer programs and special networks that would carry data like electronic mail and may someday lead to portable Jetsonian devices that also carry voice and video.


Genicom Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3


By Design; Getting Ready for Spring
Right now, fashion-conscious women are thinking about new spring clothes, contemplating such questions as how sheer they want to go.
A good way to start is with what you already own.
Hang on to last fall's long, narrow jacket.
That will be a pivotal piece of your wardrobe, going over the new wispy dresses and softer pants.
Keep your platform-sole shoes and sandals.
They will look even better balancing these lighter-weight fashions.
Don't discard your winter beret.
It will look great topping spring styles.
Cling to your opaque black tights.
They give the concealing finish to diaphanous daytime looks.
The same is true of body-hugging tank tops and striped T-shirts, which make the sheer stuff wearable as well as racy and modern.


Stars and Stripes Forever (or So It Seemed)


Halliburton Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Serbian Artillery Shells Sarajevo But Some Relief Flights Resume
Serbian shells fell today on Sarajevo, the grim capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina, but some aid flights were able to resume.
Serbian gunners on the mountainsides above Sarajevo lobbed artillery rounds into the city's center and three suburban areas, and civil defense officials sounded warnings for people to remain off the streets, the Sarajevo radio said.
An exploding shell killed a child and two women on Sunday as they waited in line for water.


Elsie Bloch, Fabric Stylist, 83
Elsie Coulson Bloch, a fabric stylist and colorist, died on Saturday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
She was 83 and lived in Manhattan and Kempton, Pa.
The cause was heart failure, her family said.


Marvel Entertainment Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


West Side Man to Stay in Hospital Until Hearing
A state appeals court yesterday ordered Larry Hogue, who has for years frightened residents of Manhattan's Upper West Side with his bizarre behavior, to remain in a state mental hospital until a hearing next week.
Last Tuesday, a Queens judge ruled that Mr.
Hogue, a 48-year-old veteran with a long history of mental illness and drug addiction, could be freed from the Creedmoor Psychiatric Center in Queens because he no longer posed an immediate threat to himself or others.
Before he was arrested, Mr.
Hogue had attacked passers-by and cars in the area around West 96th Street and Amsterdam Avenue.


Rangers Get Captain Back, but Only Devils Get on the Winning Track
The Devils and the Rangers went into last weekend's All-Star Game break with miserable memories and no positives.
The Devils had no victories in five games, the Rangers no victories in four.
Both teams were looking to right themselves tonight, and it was the Devils who found a way.
They started the second half of the season with a 5-4 triumph over the Rangers in a game of high intensity before a sellout crowd of 19,040 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Walsh Implies Bush Used Pardons to Avoid Testifying
The Iran-contra prosecutor suggested in a report today that former President George Bush pardoned Caspar W. Weinberger because Mr.
Bush might have been called as a defense witness in a trial of the former Defense Secretary and subjected to "searching questions" about his own conduct.
The prosecutor, Lawrence E. Walsh, made a broad assault on Mr.
Bush for granting executive clemency to Mr.
Weinberger, who was pardoned along with five other Iran-contra figures.
In the report, Mr.
Walsh accused the former President of misusing his constitutional authority to stop a public airing of the facts behind the indictment of Mr.
Weinberger.


Bond Prices Fall as Auction Nears
The prices of Treasury securities fell yesterday as investors and traders prepared for the beginning of the quarterly auctions today.
The auctions begin with the sale of $15.5 billion of three-year notes today and follow with $10.75 billion of 10-year notes tomorrow and $9.25 billion of 30-year notes on Thursday.


Chelsea Residents Travel Uptown to Protest Against Pornography


Northwestern Public Service Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


AIDES GIVE CLINTON BOSNIA PEACE PLAN
Senior aides to President Clinton have presented him with a peace plan for the Balkans that includes the appointment of a special United States envoy to begin negotiations with the warring factions, senior Administration officials said today.
They said the plan would also commit the United States to helping enforce any agreement, although it would not do so alone.
The officials would give few details of the plan, which they said the President had not decided whether to accept.
They said no decision had been made on who the envoy might be, and it was not clear if enforcement efforts would involve American troops.


Review/Television; Revelations About J. Edgar Hoover
The straight-arrow, straight-shooter image that J. Edgar Hoover so successfully polished throughout his long reign as Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation has been much tarnished since his death in 1972.
Particularly damaging have been revelations of his penchant for snooping on the likes of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. and John F. Kennedy for political and private reasons.
"The Secret File on J. Edgar Hoover," tonight's unsparing "Frontline" report, will do nothing to reburnish his reputation.
Drawing on "Official and Confidential," a biography by Anthony Summers that is to be published this month by G. P. Putnam's, the program makes the case that "Hoover was personally corrupt, sexually compromised and tainted by ties to organized crime."


Regal-Beloit reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A headline on Sunday about the relationship of the 1986 immigration law to the situation of Judge Kimba M. Wood referred imprecisely to the law's sanctions.
Before it took effect, there was no legal bar to hiring an illegal immigrant.
Afterward, such hiring, on a small scale, became a civil violation, not a crime.


Hospital Billing Tells Part of an Ugly Story
To the Editor:
"Confusion and Error Are Rife in Hospital Bills" (Health page, Jan. 27), sheds needed light on a widespread abuse.
Unfortunately, you also seem to accredit the alibi of hospitals for routinely engaging in practices that would be seen in most other businesses as unfair and deceptive.


Krug International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


COMPANY NEWS
CSX CORP., Richmond, completed the acquisition of Customized Transportation Inc., a trucking and warehousing company in Jacksonville, Fla.
Terms were not disclosed.
INTERNATIONAL FAMILY ENTERTAINMENT, Virginia Beach, Va., said a group led by Mario Gabelli, a New York financier, had increased its stake in the company's class B common shares to 11.91 percent from 9.76 percent by acquiring shares worth $7 million.


When Nature Turns Deadly: Volcano Survivor Tells Tale
A battered survivor of a scientific disaster has told his story from a hospital bed, recounting how six colleagues lost their lives while searching for better ways to predict when volcanoes are going to blow up.
The six were killed Jan. 14 as they gathered chemical and gravitational clues from the Galeras volcano, which stretches 13,680 feet into the cold, thin air of the Colombian Andes.
Dr.
Stanley N. Williams, 40 years old, a volcanologist at Arizona State University, watched in horror as colleagues inside the crater and on its opposite rim were trapped in a riot of hot boulders and lava and ash.


Thomas Nelson (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


INSIDE
Prosecutor Assails Bush
The Iran-contra prosecutor suggested that President George Bush pardoned Caspar Weinberger because Mr.
Bush did not want to face questions about his conduct.
Page A17.
Military Offers Budget Cuts
The Pentagon proposed budget cuts that include retiring about 10 Navy ships and submarines and cutting about 180 Air Force planes.
Page B6.
Dropping H.I.V. as Exclusion
The Administration is preparing to remove infection with the AIDS virus from the list of conditions that restrict people from entering the United States, officials said.
Page A17.


Computers Taking Wish as Their Command
People now control computers with a keyboard, a mouse or in some cases with spoken commands.
But at Japan's largest computer company, Fujitsu Ltd., and at several other laboratories around the world, researchers are developing ways to control a computer by merely thinking a command.
A New York State Department of Health research team has developed a system that allows users, after some training, to move a cursor slowly up and down or side to side on a computer screen by mental action alone.
University of Illinois psychologists developed a way of allowing people to type, albeit at a rate of only 2.3 characters a minute, by spelling out words in their minds.


Social Security Won't Be Subject To Freeze, White House Decides
Bowing to protests from retirees, the Clinton Administration has decided against freezing cost-of-living increases for Social Security recipients as a way of lowering the Federal budget deficit, a White House spokesman said.
Mr.
Clinton's decision went against the advice of his budget director, Leon E. Panetta, who had advocated a one-year freeze on the adjustments.
The President had been warned by members of Congress that such an idea would go nowhere.


Review/Music; Recalling Arcadia's Artistic Dreamers
To the penurious, apartment-bound New Yorker in February, Arcadia might be a country house in Westchester that someone else takes care of, or perhaps a Vermont snowbank to be looked at, not shoveled through.
To Theocritus and Virgil, it was a place in Greece: rugged mountains surrounding mossy clearings and deep forests, where shepherds sang and made love but by all appearances never worked.
For Marie Antoinette (before revolutionists decided to shorten her a little) Arcadia was a rural cottage a la mode, with milkmaids all in silk.
For two nights and a day on Friday and Saturday, Nicholas McGegan, four other musicians, two singers, two speakers and three lecturers told audiences at the Metropolitan Museum about another set of artistic daydreamers.
Their patron was an expatriate Swedish Queen, and the organization -- founded in Rome in 1690 and consisting of musicians, poets, artists and thinkers -- called itself the Arcadian Academy.
This is also the name of Mr.
McGegan's five-person instrumental group.


Consumer's Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Talk of Madrid; A Plan to Alter the Face Of the Beloved Prado Causes Some Qualms
The Prado has felt neglected of late.
Last year, it lost Picasso's "Guernica" to the new Reina Sofia art center, its planned expansion to the Villahermosa Palace was thwarted by the arrival there of the Thyssen-Bornemisza collection, and endless promises of new space elsewhere have come to nothing.
Now, tired of waiting and inspired by the examples of the Louvre in Paris and the National Gallery in London, the Prado has decided to build its own extension.
As with the Louvre, much of it will be underground, but enough of it will be visible to alter the elegant profile of the late 18th-century neo-classical building.


Serbs Urged to Agree on Bosnia Map
The leader of the Serbs in Bosnia and Herzegovina came under increasing pressure today to accept a critical element in the peace plan for Bosnia.
Members of the Security Council and the Yugoslav and Serbian governments want Radovan Karadzic, the Serbian leader in Bosnia, to accept a map drawn up by former Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance and Lord Owen of Britain that divides Bosnia into 10 autonomous provinces.
They argue that this would make it more difficult for President Clinton to propose a radically different solution more favorable to the Muslims.


E-Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Opera; The Lyric In Chicago Starts Its 'Ring'
Having its own "Ring" cycle is something every self-respecting American opera company now pines for.
The difficulties of putting together appropriate casts and developing coherent interpretations for Wagner's four great works are avidly taken on; a "Ring" has become a sign of accomplishment, seriousness and range.
Seattle was a pioneer in establishing an American "Ring"; San Francisco has one; New York finally has its own at the Metropolitan Opera (and it will return in March and April).
And now the Lyric Opera of Chicago, one of the country's most innovative and accomplished companies, is beginning to put together a cycle, presenting one work a year until the 1996-7 season, when they will be presented in sequence, as Wagner wished.


Corrections
An article in Your Money on Jan. 30 about retirement in Florida misstated the state's annual tax rate on securities and other intangibles.
The tax, which was 0.15 percent in 1992, was raised to 0.2 percent at the start of 1993.


Heroin Pouring Through Porous European Borders
The Lucky S, a Panamanian-registered coaster of no obvious distinction, had cleared the Suez Canal and was heading to Turkey's southeastern port of Bodrum when its luck ran out.
In the early hours of Jan. 7, a Turkish Navy destroyer running without navigation lights tailed the 200-foot vessel in blustery seas and sent agents swarming aboard from rubber boats.
The nine-man Turkish crew was subdued in seconds.


O'Charley's Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Fremont General (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mosinee Paper (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


How Atlanta's Adman Pushes the City to Sell Itself
No one knew quite what to expect last year when Joel Babbit, who had built a reputation as a whiz kid adman, accepted a $350,000 pay cut to take a job at Atlanta City Hall melding the worlds of Air Jordan commercials and municipal finance.
Now they know.
Mr.
Babbit's ideas include raising millions of dollars by renaming streets and parks for corporate sponsors, implanting high-tech advertising in city sidewalks and sticking corporate logos on city garbage trucks.
The City Council took the first step toward Mr.
Babbit's Brave New World last week when it approved the concept of an agreement in which Visa USA would pay $3 million over five years to become the "official preferred credit card of Atlanta."


Eliot Janeway, Economist and Author, Dies at 80
Eliot Janeway, the political economist and author whose career spanned seven decades, died yesterday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 80.
Mr.
Janeway had been in declining health for some years, suffering from diabetes and heart problems, his son Michael said.


CHRONICLE
There was no crossing of party lines when Senator MITCH McCONNELL, Republican of Kentucky, and ELAINE L. CHAO, the president of the United Way of America and former director of the Peace Corps, were married Saturday afternoon in a quiet ceremony in the chapel of the United States Capitol.
"You could say that the Senator is a conservative Republican, and she had appointments in both the Reagan and Bush Administrations, so she's a very good Republican," Scott Sowry, the Senator's press secretary, said yesterday.
The 50-year-old senator, who is divorced, has three daughters, 21, 17 and 14.
This is the first marriage for the bride, 39.


Provident Life &amp; Accident Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Abex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Fashion; The Early Line on Fall Lines
A week after introducing their spring and summer haute couture collections in Paris, many designers sent their pre-fall ready-to-wear collections to New York.
Emanuel Ungaro and Valentino managed to get their advance collections to New York the week before the couture showings.
Though they are for different seasons, both the ready-made and the made-to-order clothes suggested some trends.
Long, gently fitted jackets, diverse skirt lengths and plenty of pants appeared in both, for example, giving a continuum to fashion.


132 on Iranian Airliner Are Killed In Collision With an Air Force Jet
A collision today between an Iran Air passenger jet and a military plane near Teheran Airport killed all 132 people on board the airliner, the official Iranian press agency reported.
The airliner, a Tupolev TU-154 chartered from Russia by Iran Air and carrying 119 passengers and 13 Russian crew members, collided with a Sukhoi jet minutes after takeoff, Iran Air officials said.
The two-man crew of the Sukhoi ejected to safety before crash and were said to be listed in satisfactory condition, according to the press agency.


Lukens Medical reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Morgan's Baton-Wielding Banker
By day, he is one of Gotham's mild-mannered international bankers.
By night, dressed in dark tails and a crisp white tie, his passion is music.
Yet most New York music buffs had not heard Richard Westerfield of J. P. Morgan conduct an orchestra until last week.
In what has turned out to be Lincoln Center's version of a Cinderella story, Mr.
Westerfield is winding up a series of performances tonight with the New York Philharmonic.
Last Wednesday, the 35-year-old conductor was tapped at the last minute to stand in for Erich Leinsdorf, the famed European conductor and a frequent Philharmonic guest conductor, who had to bow out of his scheduled performance because of a back injury.
Stroke of Gusto
Enter Mr.
Westerfield.
With just three rehearsals, he led the 100-plus musicians of the Philharmonic through three pieces, including a complicated tone poem by Richard Strauss, to critical praise -- even if he accidentally tossed his baton into the audience Saturday night in an energetic stroke.


National Sanitary reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Clinton to Lift Ban on H.I.V.-Infected Visitors
The Clinton Administration said today that, as promised, it would soon remove infection with the AIDS virus from the list of conditions that restrict people from entering the United States.
Officials of the Department of Health and Human Services said they were reducing the number of diseases on the list to one, infectious tuberculosis.
The others, including AIDS, syphilis and leprosy, will be eliminated on the grounds that they are not spread casually and that people who have them are not a threat to public health.


Florio Seeks $15.6 Billion In New Budget
Faced with an electorate complaining about governmental gridlock, the Democratic administration outlined today a $15.6 billion budget with no big surprises for the next fiscal year and Republican legislative leaders made only pro forma objections.
Although the Republican leaders who control both houses of the Legislature made it clear that they reserve the right to cut both spending and taxes, the vow was more rhetoric than reality.
In a tight-money year when Gov.
Jim Florio and all legislators are up for election, both parties have an interest in producing a spending plan and avoiding the politically damaging specter of a government that can get nothing done.


Longhorn Steaks (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Demand for Medical Services Increases
The recent frigid weather and an outbreak of the flu have put a strain on the city's medical services -- overloading ambulances and some emergency rooms, and raising fears among hospital officials of a return to the gridlock of 1989 when waits for free beds were as long as four days.
Demand for emergency care usually increases during the depths of winter, but the current levels are higher than expected -- at least 10 to 15 percent higher than last year, said Norman Katz, a spokesman for the Health and Hospitals Corporation, which runs the city's 11 municipal hospitals.


Donors Find Much Somali Aid Stolen
The scene awaiting relief workers was galling yet familiar.
A courtyard that should have been in use as a feeding kitchen was covered with animal waste, with no caldron in sight; the self-appointed elders demanded salaries to haul water they said was six miles away, though the village had a dam and two working wells.
Five days earlier, the Red Cross had given Gorsene's elders a 10-day supply of food for the kitchen that ended up being sold at the market in Baidoa.
The relief organization CARE had delivered hundreds of sacks of wheat to Gorsene, and Goal, an Irish charity, had brought porridge, oil, milk, butter, biscuits, blankets and sugar.


Rev. Robert Hershey, Lutheran Pastor, 83
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert D. Hershey, pastor of the Lutheran Church of the Holy Trinity in Manhattan for 21 years until his retirement in 1974, died Saturday evening at his home near Reading, Pa.
He was 83.
He had been ill with cancer, his family said.


Another Light Camel Challenges Marlboro
The R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company will intensify its assault on Marlboro Lights, the nation's best-selling low-tar cigarette, with a new variety of its Camel brand, Camel Special Lights.
The new cigarette, in three 85- and 100-millimeter styles, will be fully available nationally in April, David N. Iauco, senior vice president of marketing at Reynolds in Winston-Salem, N.C., said yesterday.
Camel Special Lights will have a white tip like Marlboro Lights, he added, rather than the brown "cork" tip of current Camel varieties, and will have a "milder, smoother" taste, more like Marlboro's than Camel's.


GTE Gives Work To Temerlin McClain
The GTE Corporation said yesterday that it had added Temerlin McClain in Dallas to its agency roster, joining DDB Needham Worldwide, which has long done work for GTE.
Temerlin McClain will create advertising for the GTE Telephone Operations division's account for national pay telephones, regional residential and business custom-call plans.
Mike Flanagan, a GTE spokesman in Irving, Tex., confirmed reports of the appointment this week in Advertising Age and Adweek.
"We liked the idea of having another agency bring in creative ideas," he said.
Though he declined to disclose billings, they were estimated at $7 million.


GenCare Health Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


NWNL Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Nobel Laureates Rallying to Burmese's Cause
In an unusual lobbying campaign, the Dalai Lama and several other recipients of the Nobel Peace Prize plan to meet in Thailand next week and travel to the border with Myanmar to demand freedom for Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the dissident who won the 1991 prize and who is now under house arrest in her country.
Organizers of the meeting said today that the others planning to attend the meeting were Archbishop Desmond M. Tutu of South Africa; Oscar Arias Sanchez, the former President of Costa Rica; Mairead Maguire and Betty Williams, who led a campaign to end violence in Northern Ireland, and Adolpho Perez Esquivel of Argentina, who helped expose a wave of Government-sanctioned killings in Argentina in the 1970's.


Street Toilet Equality for Disabled Is the Law
To the Editor:
In "Welcome All Bidders for Street Toilets" (editorial, Jan. 28) you describe the goal of general access for people with disabilities as an "unreachable ideal." New York City, state and Federal law mandate such access for people with disabilities.


Silicon General (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Integon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hemlo Gold Mines reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Player Suspended
COREY BECK was suspended indefinitely yesterday by Arkansas Coach NOLAN RICHARDSON, a day after the Razorbacks' guard was arrested early Sunday for allegedly driving while intoxicated.
Richardson said Beck, a 21-year-old sophomore, will not play against No. 2 Kentucky tomorrow night.
Beck has started 15 of the Razorbacks' 19 games. (AP)


Millrose 60 Was Really 61 1/2
Howard Schmertz, the meet director of the Chemical Bank Millrose Games, was happy with last Friday night's near-sellout crowd and the exciting mile victories by Eamonn Coghlan and Noureddine Morceli.
After the meet, only one thing troubled him -- the slow times in the sprints and hurdles.
Yesterday, Schmertz told how he found the reason.
Unknown to meet officials, someone moved the finish-line camera between 7 and 7:30 P.M.
Friday, so the three 60-meter dashes and the three 60-meter hurdles races actually covered 61 1/2 meters, a difference of almost 5 feet.


ARGENTINA YIELDS NO NEW NAZI DATA
A year ago, President Carlos Saul Menem, amid much pomp and promise, announced that Argentina was "paying its debt to humanity" by releasing all secret files on Nazis who fled here after World War II.
He called on Government agencies to cooperate in turning over the documents.
It seems his orders were not carried out.


Brave New 32-Bit World
IN the world of microprocessors, a 32-bit RISC chip is a powerhouse.
Such chips are typically used in workstations, which are to personal computers what jets are to propeller planes.
Scientists use these powerful machines to create three-dimensional models of molecules, and graphic artists use them to create stunning animations and special effects used in motion pictures.
Some people believe that 32-bit RISC chips, along with another specialized chip called a digital signal processor and a CD-ROM drive, will soon be at the heart of a $700 home entertainment center.
Such a device, called a 3DO Multiplayer, was demonstrated last week at the Demo 93 conference in Indian Wells, Calif.


CHRONICLE
NORMAN MAILER has long wanted to put on a reading of George Bernard Shaw's "Don Juan in Hell," and after a number of false starts, "finally I am doing it," he said yesterday during a break at a rehearsal.
The author is the director and a possible star of the benefit for the Actors Studio being held Monday at Weill Recital Hall at Carnegie Hall.
Mr.
Mailer was also the casting director and in that role, he tapped GAY TALESE to play Don Juan, GORE VIDAL to be the devil, SUSAN SONTAG as Dona Ana and KURT VONNEGUT JR. as the commander.


Tellabs Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The S.E.C. sued Towers Financial and its chairman, Steven Hoffenberg, accusing them of using false financial statements to sell more than $400 million in securities.  [ Page A1. ]
Computers controlled by human thoughts are being developed by Japan's largest computer company, Fujitsu, and at several other laboratories around the world.  [ A1. ]


SCOR U.S. Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Harvard Turns Terriers Aside To Win Beanpot
Tripp Tracy, Harvard's freshman goaltender, was outstanding tonight as the Crimson defeated Boston University, 4-2, to win the Beanpot Tournament at Boston Garden for the first time since 1989.
The Terriers, who are 16-1-1 in their last 18 games, outshot Harvard by 32-23, but only two shots got past Tracy.
Both goals game in power-play situations.


Boston U. Head Pressed on Finances
John R. Silber, the disputatious president of Boston University and a once and possibly future candidate for governor of Massachusetts, now finds himself embattled because of his conspicuous success in improving the university and simultaneously enriching himself.
Dr.
Silber's unusually high income and his close financial ties to some members of the university's board have recently come under intense scrutiny in the Boston press, with an article prominently displayed in one or the other of the city's major newspapers almost every day.


Advanced Technology Laboratories (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  NEW TROUBLES FOR POST SUITOR
The Securities and Exchange Commission has filed a civil suit accusing the New York-based Towers Financial Corporation and its chairman, Steven Hoffenberg, of operating a fraud that used false financial statements to sell more than $400 million in securities.
The accusation appears to raise serious doubts about Mr.
Hoffenberg's bid to purchase The New York Post, calling into question whether he will be considered a viable buyer of the nation's oldest daily newspaper.
A1.
Prospective Post publisher says regulatory problems won't derail purchase of the paper.
B3.
For some Tower investors of modest means, brokers inflated assets, the S.E.C. says.
B3.
AIDS CURRICULUM IN DISPUTE AGAIN
New York State's top education official has ruled that the New York City Board of Education overstepped its authority and infringed on teachers' rights by requiring that all AIDS education stress abstinence as the most effective means of avoiding the disease.
Thomas Sobol, the State Commissioner of Education, overturned a board resolution that he said established a "stopwatch approach to education" by dictating how and when teachers should teach about AIDS.
A1.
FERNANDEZ MAKES APPEAL IN QUEENS
Schools Chancellor Fernandez is targeting Queens in his lobbying effort to change one vote on the New York City School Board and keep his job as the head of the country's largest school system.
In a brief, closed-door meeting with the seven-member board, Mr.
Fernandez responsed to a board critique of his leadership, part of a formal review of his performance.
B2.
COLD AND FLU STRAIN CITY HOSPITALS
The recent frigid weather and an outbreak of the flu have put a strain on New York City's medical services -- overloading ambulances and some emergency rooms, and raising fears among hospital officials of a return to the gridlock of 1989 when waits for beds were as long as four days.
B3.
REGION  NEW REALITIES IN CONNECTICUT  When Congress restored $2 billion last summer to the all-but-scuttled Seawolf submarine program at the Electric Boat shipyard in Groton, Bill Sullivan immediately felt the blip.
His General Motors dealership in nearby New London ended the year selling more cars than any year since 1987, but most of the sales were for used cars.
Similar fault lines are everywhere in Groton, as the most Pentagon-dependent corner of the nation shudders and shakes toward a future after the cold war.
In many ways it is a story of waiting for the worst.
A1.
CLOSING ARGUMENTS IN GLEN RIDGE CASE
As the Glen Ridge, N.J., sex assault trial in Newark entered its final phases, the first of four defense lawyers began closing arguments by attacking the credibility of two of the state's expert witnesses and stressing inconsistent testimony about the mental capabilities of the mildly retarded woman at the heart of the case.
B5.
A DINNER FIGHT, WITH A FEMINIST SLANT
A group of 20 prominent women in Norwalk, including the president of the League of Women Voters, is trying to put an end to what it believes is Connecticut's largest men-only function, the Norwalk Catholic Club's Lincoln Day dinner.
B5.
Our Towns by Joseph Berger B5


No Headline
We don't get a penny from calling Piedmont Park, the largest in Atlanta, Piedmont Park.
I don't think it would hurt anyone or cause any problems if the name was changed to Georgia-Pacific Park, and we got a million dollars a year for it.
But I do know that the million dollars will help a lot of teachers and homeless people and policemen and roads. -- JOEL BABBIT, an aide to Mayor Maynard Jackson.  [ A16:4. ]


Ewing Excites, Exerts and Excels (40 Points)
When it mattered most tonight, the Knicks went to Patrick Ewing.
Ewing went to work.
And as a result, New York went home with another victory.
With Ewing scoring a season-high 40 points, including 10 points in overtime, the streaking Knicks (30-15) held off the Philadelphia 76ers, 120-115, in overtime, at the Spectrum.
It was the Knicks' fifth consecutive victory, tying their longest winning streak of the season, and it was their ninth victory in their last 10 games.


Kuwait City Journal; A V-8 for Victory: It's Kuwait's Way of Celebrating
The usual intrusions of American popular culture, from Madonna to Pizza Hut, are firmly implanted in Kuwait.
But perhaps few foreign countries have embraced with such gusto the American obsession with the car.
To Kuwaitis, who have emerged, since Iraqi troops were forced out, as the largest per capita importers of luxury American sedans outside North America, the car is where courtships are made and lost, where adolescent boys can display their manhood and those of substance affirm their power and affluence.


A Teach-In on Nannies
The Clinton Administration's rejection of a second female candidate for Attorney General has roiled the country, leaving a lot of people angry and frustrated.
Yet the issues are different in the cases of Judge Kimba Wood and Zoe Baird.
Unless the White House and the electorate start to draw some distinctions, appointment of high government officials will become mired in confusion.
The most immediate question is why President Clinton dropped Judge Wood when, unlike Ms.
Baird, she had broken no laws.
The distinctions between the two cases are important.
Zoe Baird knowingly violated the 1986 immigration law by hiring illegal immigrants as household workers.
She considered it a technical violation, consulted her own lawyer and was sponsoring her baby sitter for residency.
Nonetheless, by openly breaking the law she forfeited her claim to a job that required her to uphold the nation's laws and oversee the Immigration and Naturalization Service.


Mainframes Aren't All That Dead
Blamed for I.B.M.'s recent troubles, its very name synonymous with computing's past, the mainframe computer seems to be hurtling toward extinction.
Yet, reports to the contrary, there are still some signs of life in the huge boxlike machines that can cost more than $20 million each.
For example, corporate America's demand for mainframe computing power will increase by about 20 percent this year, estimates the Gartner Group, a consulting firm.


Dow Retreats From Early Gains to Fall 4.60
Stocks were off slightly yesterday, with blue-chip issues ending lower, erasing early gains made on the strength of some of the issues in the Dow Jones industrial average.
Traders said over-the-counter stocks gave way to selling pressure, as investors consolidated their positions after recent gains.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.94
2.87
3.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.94
2.90
3.72
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.09
3.08
3.80
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.93
5.86
6.75
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.19
7.15
7.78
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.30
8.30
8.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.21
6.22
6.75
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Tracking Leads When the Young Disappear; In Many Missing-Children Cases, the Danger Is Often Close to Home
Rosa Glover, a cook at Columbia University, took her son, Shane Anthony Walker, to the playground of a Harlem housing project late in the afternoon on Aug. 10, 1989, and looked away for a few minutes.
Shane was 19 months old.
It was the last time Ms.
Glover saw her son.
The police traced several leads.
They say that calls still trickle in about the case, but they are stumped.


Agricultural Minerals reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fernandez Gets State's Backing On AIDS Study
New York State's top education official has ruled that the New York City Board of Education overstepped its authority and infringed on teachers' rights by requiring that all AIDS education stress abstinence as the most effective means of avoiding the disease.
Thomas Sobol, the State Commissioner of Education, said today that he had overturned a board resolution that he contended established a "stopwatch approach to education" by dictating how and when teachers should teach about AIDS.


Men-Only Event Assailed in Norwalk
George F. Carroll has been a member of the Norwalk Catholic Club for four decades, and each year the 67-year-old lawyer is among 400 men who attend the all-male club's Lincoln Day dinner.
But a group of 20 prominent women in the city, including the president of the League of Women Voters here, are trying to put an end to what they believe is Connecticut's largest men-only function, scheduled this year for Thursday night.
They have organized a separate "Celebrate Women" program for the same night to honor nine local women and draw attention to the Catholic Club's exclusionary practices.


Avoiding Arbitration, Astros Sign Up Three
The Houston Astros executed phase 2 of their winter strategy yesterday, signing three good young players in salary arbitration to three-year contracts, each worth more than $3.4 million a year.
Following up the signing of free-agent pitchers Doug Drabek and Greg Swindell, the Astros locked up Craig Biggio, Ken Caminiti and Steve Finley one year beyond their eligibility for free agency.


Hornet Player Fined
LARRY JOHNSON of the Charlotte Hornets was fined $8,000 by the National Basketball Association yesterday for hitting Milwaukee's ERIC MURDOCK in the head with a forearm.
The incident occurred with less than a minute remaining in the fourth quarter of Friday night's game, a 118-111 victory for Charlotte. (AP)


Giants Complete Coaching Staff
Dan Reeves, the Giants' new head coach, completed his staff today by naming four assistant coaches, including two holdovers from the staff of his deposed predecessor, Ray Handley.
The assistants retained by Reeves were George Sefcik, who will move from wide receivers to running backs, and Dick Rehbein, who will switch from tight ends to wide receivers.
Sefcik had been a Giants assistant for two years, Rehbein for one year.
The 53-year-old Sefcik has been an assistant coach in the National Football League for 21 years, the 37-year-old Rehbein for 15 years.


Solomon Joins N.H.L.
STEPHEN J. SOLOMON, the senior vice-president of sports planning and administration at ABC Sports since 1986, was hired yesterday as the N.H.L.'s new senior vice president.
He will join the league on March 1.
In the newly created position, the 49-year-old Solomon will be responsible for the business operations of the N.H.L., such as the development, planning and coordination of the N.H.L.'s broadcasting, communications, public relations and special events departments, as well as N.H.L.
Enterprises. (AP)


Scientific Treasures Are Being Uncovered In Peat 'Wastelands'
LONG seen as a wasteland to be drained and built on or dug up, peat bogs have only recently begun to be regarded as resources worth preserving.
But just as archeologists, ecologists and other scientists come closer to understanding the mysteries embalmed in bogs, the bogs are disappearing.
Peat bogs are the product of thousands of years of waterlogging.
Frequent rain encourages the development of moss, which, as it dies, accumulates in soggy, oxygen-poor depths as peat.
And buried in these depths are detailed time capsules of human and environmental change reaching back 8,000 years.


Scrappy Reebok Aims at Aloof Nike
Nike Inc. and Reebok International Ltd. rarely get together except for on the floors of retail outlets.
But they shared the air at the Super Show, a four-day sporting goods trade show that ended today.
And while they were on different floors (and in seemingly different worlds), Nike could hardly avoid hearing Reebok's vow to wrest away the title of the czar of athletic footwear -- a title Reebok held for three years ending in 1989 and one that its chief executive boasted it would hold again.


Bridge
A team event that is sometimes played in Britain but is rare on this side of the Atlantic requires players to rotate partnerships, thus diminishing the impact of sophisticated bidding methods.
A New York competition has used this format since 1986, and the winning foursome in play on Saturday was headed by Edgar Kaplan of Manhattan in the event named in memory of his wife, Betty Kaplan.
His teammates were Judy Tucker and Gail Greenberg, both of Manhattan, and Dorothy Truscott of Riverdale, the Bronx.
The event was part of the Greater New York Bridge Association's Newcomers Tournament at the Landmark Education Center at 425 Fifth Avenue in Manhattan.


Israel Army in Gaza Releases 2 Arab Journalists and Aide
The Israeli Army released two Palestinian journalists and their assistant today, a day after they were detained while covering street clashes in the Gaza Strip.
The army said on Sunday that the three men had ignored an order to leave a closed military area, and that they were also being investigated for possible charges of incitement.


Safeway Inc.  reports earnings for 17wks to Jan 2


Times Co. Has Loss for Quarter and Year
The New York Times Company yesterday reported a fourth-quarter loss of $3.7 million and a net loss of $44.7 million for the year.
The losses resulted from several accounting changes, as well as several special factors that were previously disclosed, the company said.
The quarterly loss contrasted with a profit of $34.6 million, or 45 cents a share, in the fourth quarter of 1991, and the yearly loss contrasted with a profit of $47 million, or 61 cents a share, in 1991.


Disks Back Up Books
IT is less and less common these days to publish a computer book without including one or more disks of software.
Some of these collections are genuinely valuable; others rely on overly familiar shareware and freeware.
Since the life of a computer book on a shop's shelf is so short, at three to six months, the publisher may feel that software helps to justify a price of $40 or so for a 300-page paperback.
This is the first of two columns on book-disk combinations with interesting and useful software: this week, the PC; next week, the Macintosh.


Basel Solves Problem Of Too Many Pigeons
BY using slogans like "Feeding pigeons is animal cruelty" and nursing controlled flocks whose eggs were periodically removed, the city of Basel, Switzerland, sharply reduced its pigeon population in four years.
In a report in the Jan. 21 issue of the journal Nature, Dr.
Daniel Haag-Wackernagel of the department of medical biology in the University of Basel's Institute of Pathology pointed out that most cities of the world are grossly overpopulated with pigeons.
The birds live in "slum-like" conditions, he said, causing "a variety of health and environmental problems."


Review/Television; Not a Lot of Laughs: Blacks' Bumpy Road To Comic Stardom
As far as television is concerned, Black History Month isn't likely to come up with a more irresistible treat than "Mo' Funny: Black Comedy in America," a documentary having its premiere on Home Box Office tonight at 9:30.
With Ellen M. Krass as executive producer, Yvonne Smith as writer and director, and Charles Dutton ("Roc") as narrator, the program goes back to the days of minstrel shows and their white performers in blackface to trace a gradual evolution, moving through blatant racism, that leads inexorably to today's superstars, performers like Richard Pryor, Eddie Murphy, Whoopi Goldberg and Martin Lawrence.
Connections are deftly made, showing how the present scene emerges in one way or another from the exaggerated stereotypes that were once the only outlets for black performers.


From coffee beans to cranberries, ingredients are moving to center stage in campaigns.
FOR decades, one of the most popular strategies in advertising has been what industry insiders call the product-as-hero approach.
These ads, most common in categories like automobiles, cereals and detergents, elevate a brand to an object of worship, as opposed to the more typical strategy for products like beer and soft drinks, centering on idealized portrayals of customers and their life styles.
Recently, a new way of heroizing products has begun to emerge in campaigns for consumer staples like food and beverages: the ingredient as hero.
Spawned by trends toward more natural, more healthful, lighter fare, such ads seek to capture shoppers' attention by celebrating what goes into a brand as much as the brand itself.


U.S. Healthcare (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


On My Mind; Aliens: Let Them Work
Harry was a workingman.
He loved the outdoors and was happiest farming, laying track or trapping and trading fur in the snow country.
But when he could not get work he liked, he took work he hated, like painting houses.


U.S.-Canada Trade Talks
Top Clinton Administration and Canadian trade officials met here today for the first time, but they said that they failed to reach any agreements on steel, wheat, lumber and other trade issues that divide them.
Michael Wilson, Canada's Trade Minister, met with Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown and Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative.
Mr.
Wilson and an American official said that the two sides discussed the temporary duties they each recently imposed on steel trade, but the talks did not result in any decision.


When a Volcano Turns Deadly for Those Studying Its Moods
HIS legs broken and jaw wired shut, a battered survivor of one of the worst disasters in the history of scientific fieldwork has recounted from a hospital bed how six colleagues died while searching for better ways to predict when volcanoes are going to blow up.
The six were killed on Jan. 14 as they gathered chemical and gravitational clues in the cone of the Galeras volcano, stretching 13,680 feet into the cold, thin air of the Colombian Andes.
The ground suddenly began to heave.
With a deafening roar, the volcano exploded in a riot of incandescent boulders and lava and ash, some thrown miles high.


International Potter reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Memorial Service for Ashe
A memorial service for Arthur Ashe, the former tennis star who died last Saturday, will be held in New York City on Friday at 1 P.M. at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, 110th Street and Amsterdam Avenue.
Funeral services will be held tomorrow in Richmond, at the Arthur Ashe Jr.
Athletic Center.
The family requested yesterday that in lieu of flowers, contributions should be made to the Arthur Ashe Foundation for the Defeat of AIDS.


No Uranium Peril in Iraqi Desert
To the Editor:
Eric Hoskins has few equals when it comes to making readers of limited scientific literacy the lawful prey of his hyperbole.
"Making the Desert Glow," his tendentious Jan. 21 Op-Ed article, is both effectively horrifying and devoid of true technical discourse.
He exaggerates the radioactivity of depleted uranium artillery shells by a millionfold and reaches the bizarre conclusion that the environmental aftermath of the Persian Gulf war is not Iraq's fault, but ours!


Hotel Occupancy Rate Rises, New Figures Show
The hotel industry appears headed for recovery, industry statistics show.
Figures being distributed this weekshow that the occupancy rate of the nation's hotels, motels and resorts -- from cut-rate to luxury establishments -- rose by 4.6 percent in December, to 48.1 percent from 46 percent in December 1991.


Metall Mining reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A front-page article on Jan. 24 about second-guessing of doctors' decisions by insurers referred incorrectly to the medical director of the Travelers Insurance Company.
He is F. Warren Tingley.


Apple Computer to Roll Out Six New Macintosh Models
In its third big announcement of new products in the last six months, Apple Computer Inc. will introduce six Macintosh computers and two laser printers Tuesday at the MacWorld Expo in Tokyo.
The new machines are all intended to offer higher performance at lower prices than existing Macintosh models, reflecting Apple's resolve to increase its share of the personal computer market.
Apple, based in Cupertino, Calif., said the new machines would be available immediately in the United States, although, as with past Apple product introductions, high demand may cause a backlog for certain models.


Dutch Move to Enact Law Making Euthanasia Easier
The Dutch Parliament is expected to approve on Tuesday the world's least restrictive euthanasia policy, establishing specific rules that would allow a doctor to assist in a suicide or kill a terminally ill patient at the patient's explicit request.
Although ending a patient's life or helping in suicide is illegal, and would remain part of the criminal code, the new rules will protect doctors from prosecution if they notify the coroner of any death they have brought on and provide a detailed account of the circumstances.


Scarsdale Woman Helps Ease the Strain When Cultures Clash
THOSE who fret about the strains between Japanese and Americans should meet Kuniko Katz.
She is a living bridge over those troubled waters.
She is a Japanese woman married to Jeffrey Katz, a Bronx social studies teacher.
Her two children, Danny, 15 years old, and Debbie, 13, attend Japanese weekend schools but they were also bar and bas mitzvahed.
And she has located herself in a town where there have been some awkward misunderstandings between long-rooted Americans and the arriviste Japanese.


Lessons Are Sought In Outbreak of Illness From Tainted Meat
PUBLIC health officials around the country are pondering the lessons of the outbreak of illness from undercooked hamburgers sold by the Jack in the Box fast-food chain.
The outbreak was the largest and most serious of a dangerous bacterium that has struck before and will surely strike again.
After the initial outbreak, which caused the death of a 2-year-old boy, the total number of confirmed and probable cases has risen to 400, Dr.
John M. Kobayashi, the Washington State epidemiologist, said in an interview yesterday.


Winning the Cold War and Losing a Job
Bill Sullivan sells cars for a living, but like everyone else here, he also counts submarines.
When Congress restored $2 billion last summer to the all-but-scuttled Seawolf submarine program at the Electric Boat shipyard just across the Thames River in Groton, Mr.
Sullivan immediately felt the blip.
His General Motors dealership ended the year selling more cars than any year since 1987, even as the recession deepened in Connecticut.
But there was a troubling crack in that increase: much of it came from the used-car lot.
Many new car lines plummeted 35 percent or more in one year.
A Shrinking Behemoth
Similar fault lines are everywhere here, as the most Pentagon-dependent corner of the nation shudders and shakes toward a future after the cold war.
In many ways it is a story of waiting for the worst.
Unemployment is still lower than much of the rest of Connecticut, even though it has more than tripled from the 2 percent that was the norm through the 1980's to 6.5 percent as of December.


To Keep Job, Fernandez Lobbies Queens Officials
After defending his record to the New York City Board of Education yesterday, Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez targeted Queens in his lobbying effort to change one vote on the board and keep his job as the head of the country's largest school system.
At a brief closed-door meeting with the seven-member board, Mr.
Fernandez responded to a critique of his leadership, part of a formal review of his performance.
It was Mr.
Fernandez's last chance to make his case for a new contract before the board convenes tomorrow to decide his fate.
Those who attended the meeting said that it was unusually tranquil and that Mr.
Fernandez's 45-minute presentation and the responses it elicited were measured, professional and even dull.


Classical Music in Review
Apple Hill Chamber Players Symphony Space
The Apple Hill Chamber Players are based on a sprawling farm in East Sullivan, N.H., where every summer they run a chamber-music camp that is open to both talented amateurs and young professionals.
On Saturday evening, the group celebrated the 20th anniversary of its New York debut with a party of almost Wagnerian proportions.


Lorenzo's Oil: A Movie Outruns Science
THE new movie "Lorenzo's Oil" tells how the parents of a child with a rare illness overcame indifference in the medical establishment and, by themselves, invented a cure.
The message is that medical science has become detached from the needs of those it serves, but that individuals can leap bureaucratic impediments to find new cures with their own faith and efforts.


Classical Music in Review
Music of Nils Vigeland Weill Recital Hall
Nils Vigeland, a composer who for several years directed the Bowery Ensemble and now teaches at the Manhattan School of Music, presented four of his recent works last Wednesday evening.
Mr.
Vigeland writes in a style just slightly to the left of academic atonalism, and although his works have made a generally favorable impression in recent years, those he offered on Wednesday were a mixed success.


Patrick Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chaus (Bernard) Inc.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In Reversal, North Korea Bars Nuclear Inspectors
Stepping up its efforts to prevent inspections that may yield clues about the progress of its secret nuclear program, North Korea barred a group of international inspectors last week from several suspected nuclear sites and declared today that it might take "countermeasures of self-defense" if pressure builds from the United States and other nations.
The country's declaration, in a Foreign Ministry statement monitored here, came just as a team of inspectors from the International Atomic Energy Agency returned to Vienna after a largely fruitless two-week visit.


Sierra Semiconductor (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3


Chess
Despite Judit Polgar's 3-2 lead over Boris Spassky in their 10-game exhibition match in Budapest, the 56-year-old former world champion's chances to make a comeback cannot be discounted.
Both Spassky and his 16-year-old opponent have shown great strength in attack, and this means the key to success will be grasping the initiative.
So far, the one who gets White and the advantage of the first move has won all three of the games that have not ended in draws, two for Polgar and one for Spassky.
For the man who was world titleholder from 1968 to 1972, this may mean that he will have to undertake sharp counterattacks as Black because in the remaining five games, he is due for three turns as the second player.


S.E.C. Details Schemes to Sell Towers Notes
When Irma Marcy, a retired teacher in Boonville, N.Y., filled out a financial questionnaire to indicate whether she had enough assets and income to buy Towers Financial Corporation's promissory notes, she listed assets worth $190,000 at most.
These included her home, savings, a small life insurance policy, a loan to her niece and her Pontiac.
As Gary Bohling, the broker who was trying to sell her the notes, later admitted to the Securities and Exchange Commission, she did not qualify.
Her net worth was "lousy," he said, according to the S.E.C.


Sports of The Times; 'People Don't Listen To Losers'
HE is being eulogized now as a hero, a statesman, an inspiration.
And rightly so.
But long before Arthur Ashe emerged in those roles, he was a tennis player.
And without his tennis stature, the world might never have been so aware of him.
Or might never have paid that much attention to him.
"People don't listen to losers," he said after winning the 1968 United States Open.
"Now, when I say something, people listen."


Lindros Is Not Guilty
ERIC LINDROS was found not guilty yesterday of charges he spit beer on a woman on a nightclub dance floor.
Lindros, a 19-year-old who plays for the Philadelphia Flyers, shook hands with his lawyer after Justice RHYS MORGAN issued the acquittal in Oshawa, Ontario.
The judge said defense evidence raised reasonable doubt.
"Being accused of something you didn't commit and gaining that much media attention, I don't think it does anybody much good," Lindros said.
"I know I never did it and I had people to back me up. It felt good."


Q&amp;A
Catching a Germ
Q.
Ogden Nash wrote:
Do you, my poppet, feel infirm?
You probably contain a germ.
Can one germ really make you sick?
A.
The number of microbes needed to make someone sick depends on the infective organism and varies greatly, said Dr.
Robert Quackenbush, a bacteriologist at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases in Bethesda, Md.
"The most infective is shigella," Dr.
Quackenbush said.
In some cases, only 1 or perhaps 1 to 10 bacteria would be enough to cause a form of dysentery called shigellosis, he said.
The disease germ, which is closely related to E. coli, a common bacterium in the gut, lurks in the feces of infected people and can be very easily spread.
It is an increasing problem in institutions like day-care centers and nursing homes if hands are not washed religiously.
Infected people should be cared for in isolation until their feces are found to be free of the causative bacteria, medical authorities say.
A rarer disease called Q fever is caused by an organism called Coxiella burnetti that is also infectious in fairly low numbers, Dr.
Quackenbush said.
It is often spread by dust contaminated by infected farm animals.
Dr.
Quackenbush pointed out that certain strains of infective microbes are more virulent than others, even within the same species.


International Flavors &amp; Fragrances Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hasbro Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Lucky to Have a Meal, He's Now the Best in Breed
He's a wrinkled conversation piece, a canine survivor of an ancient Chinese breed that nearly went extinct after Communism outlawed pets, and yesterday he made history by becoming the first Shar-Pei to win best of breed at the Westminster Kennel Club dog show.
Ch.
Dor Mon's Chin Ho, with his standard purplish black tongue and sandpapery coat, traveled all the way from Eagle Creek, Ore., to compete at Madison Square Garden in his first Westminster show.
Yesterday morning the 15-month-old dog defeated 43 other Shar-Peis for the privilege of representing his breed in the non-sporting group competition last night, in which he failed to earn a placing.


Navratilova Drops Out
MARTINA NAVRATILOVA, the nine-time Wimbledon champion, will miss this year's French Open and will play in a grass court tournament at Beckenham, England, organizers said yesterday.
Navratilova, ranked fifth in the world, skipped the Australian Open but last week upset No. 2-ranked Steffi Graf on the way to winning the Toray Pan Pacific tournament at Yokohama, Japan.
Navratilova will use the May 31-June 6 Beckenham grass court event to prepare for Wimbledon. (AP)


Spaghetti Warehouse reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3


Lincoln Telecomm (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Grace (W.R.) &amp; Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Aztar Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Stephen Augustine, Retail Executive, 35
Stephen Augustine, a vice president of Bloomingdale's, died on Friday at New York University Hospital.
He was 35 and lived in New York City.
Friends said the cause was heart failure.


No Reason to Fire the Chancellor
New York City's Board of Education meets tomorrow for a likely up-or-down vote on whether to retain Chancellor Joseph Fernandez.
The dispute over his future risks chaos, for reasons that are simply not good enough.
Whatever narrower concerns have brought the board to this point, its most important responsibility is to a million city schoolchildren.
A vote to replace Mr.
Fernandez now would gravely betray their interests.
As head of the nation's largest school system, the chancellor administers 119,000 staff members, including teachers and principals working in 1,000 school buildings in 32 local districts.
The system's dependence on the State Legislature and City Hall for funding and, often, policy-making authority requires that the chancellor be a seasoned educator, public advocate and political strategist.


Linamar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gillette Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Erling D. Naess, 91; Led Anglo-Norness, A Big Ship Company
Erling Dekke Naess, a former chairman of the Anglo-Norness Shipping Company, a tanker fleet, died Sunday at his home in Bermuda.
He was 91.
His son Michael said Mr. Naess died of complications from kidney failure.


Gay Values, Truly Conservative
Perhaps the most depressing part of the last few weeks has been how predictably the politics of the military gay ban played itself out.
By and large, lifting the ban was portrayed as a liberal measure, prompted by the usual interest groups and framed within a crude paradigm of civil rights.
The opposition rested its final argument on the simple fear of homosexuals, on those intangible emotions the Joint Chiefs of Staff describe as morale.


Hoyas on Downhill Path, Even in Upstate New York
Syracuse 76, Georgetown 61
SYRACUSE, Feb. 8 (AP) -- Georgetown lost its fourth straight Big East game as Adrian Autry, scoreless in the teams' first meeting, scored 25 points tonight to carry Syracuse to a 76-61 victory.


In Suit, G.M. Accuses NBC of Rigging Crash Tests
In a defamation suit filed in Indiana, the General Motors Corporation today accused NBC and an independent testing laboratory of rigging crash tests for a network broadcast so that certain pickup trucks would appear vulnerable to gas-tank explosions in collisions from the side.
Saying "blatant deception" was used in a Nov. 17 broadcast of the NBC program "Dateline," Harry J. Pearce, G.M.'s executive vice president and general counsel, asserted that model rocket engines had been taped to the bottom of the test vehicles and ignited by radio transmitters just before impact to help produce a fire.
Mr.
Pearce was flanked by two damaged pickup trucks that G.M. said were used in the tests.
He said G.M. workers retrieved the trucks from junkyards near the test site.


Network Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lawmakers in Virginia Reject A Compromise on Gun Sales
The Virginia Governor today abandoned a campaign to limit people to buying one handgun a month, but his new plan to allow additional gun purchases was immediately rebuffed by the state's House of Delegates.
Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder this morning announced a proposal under which customers could buy an unlimited number of handguns after obtaining special permits from the state.
He said the new plan kept the spirit of the original.
"The public will understand I would not sign on to something if I thought it was a loophole," the Democratic Governor said.


Man Beaten by Hasidim in December Is Arrested on Burglary Charges


Classical Music in Review
Shlomo Mintz Violinist 92d Street Y
Eminently typical of the composer, the Shostakovich Violin Sonata contrasts desperate shrieks of fortissimo bravura with downcast soliloquies in slow motion.
These two varieties of tone, hot and cold, come easily to Shlomo Mintz.
His rendition of the sonata on Saturday night joined its extremities with assurance.
While the accompaniment by Itamar Golan, a pianist, was casual and sometimes crude, the essential drama came across.
Mr.
Mintz has recorded this music for the Erato label, on a disk that also includes his outstanding interpretation of Shostakovich's valedictory Viola Sonata.


Old Republic International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Executive Brief: HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES; Old-Fashioned Liberals (And Without Apology)
"H.H.S." used to be the Department of Health and Human Services.
But now, employees say, the abbreviation stands for Hillary's Health Service.
And "H.C.F.A." used to be the Health Care Financing Administration, the agency that runs Medicare and Medicaid.
But now White House officials say it means "Hillary can fix anything."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15 DUTCH TO APPROVE EUTHANASIA
The Dutch Parliament is to approve new rules allowing doctors to assist in suicides or kill terminally ill patients at the patients' explicit request.
A1 MIND OVER COMPUTER
A Japanese computer company and several laboratories are developing ways to control computers with thinking commands.
A1


Bolsa Chica (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Classical Music in Review
Leontovych String Quartet The Frick Collection
The Leontovych String Quartet, from Ukraine, does not play in the high-gloss style popular among young American quartets.
But its uncommonly involving readings of the Shostakovich Eighth Quartet (Op. 110) and the Tchaikovsky Second Quartet (Op. 22) on Sunday evening reminded a listener that although highly polished surfaces may charm, the alchemy that makes music thrive takes place at deeper levels.


Transactions
Baseball  National League
ATLANTA BRAVES -- Agreed to terms with Greg Olson, catcher, on a one-year contract.
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Agreed to terms with Craig Biggio, second baseman; Ken Caminiti, third baseman; and Steve Finley, outfielder, on three-year contracts.


S.E.C. Is Suing Buyer Seeking New York Post
The Securities and Exchange Commission filed a civil suit yesterday accusing the New York-based Towers Financial Corporation and its chairman, Steven Hoffenberg, of operating a fraud that used false financial statements to sell more than $400 million in securities.
The accusation appears to raise serious doubts about Mr.
Hoffenberg's bid to purchase The New York Post, calling into question whether he will be considered a viable buyer of the nation's oldest daily newspaper, although he said yesterday that he planned to proceed.  [ Page B3. ]


Dreyers Grand Ice Cream (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Patterns
The French fashion establishment is coming apart at the seams.
Pierre Berge, who 20 years ago united designers showing in France into one group called the Chambre Syndicale, was voted out of its presidency on Thursday.
Within a day he had announced plans to begin a rival group, starting with the designer Yves Saint Laurent, who has been Mr.
Berge's business partner for 30 years.
Member No. 2?
Karl Lagerfeld, a frequent Berge rival, who designs for Chanel, Chloe and his own label.
In the unlikely event that no other designers joined, the power of Mr.
Berge and Lagerfeld alone would be enough to bring press and buyers to Paris.
But the betting is that the rift will start a rout, with the younger designers and those who have remained independent of intrusive financial backers rushing to sign on with the breakaway group.


Market Place; In tough times for drug stocks, praise for Schering-Plough.
SWIMMING against a tide of investor skepticism about drug companies, the Schering-Plough Corporation recently reported 20 percent growth in earnings per share for 1992.
Although these results were sweetened by a 7 percent reduction in shares outstanding, operating income did rise 15 percent and profits were up 12 percent.
Few if any analysts advise buying pharmaceutical stocks at a time of growing pressures from large buyers for discounts and threats of Government price restraints.
But several offered guarded praise for Schering-Plough.


Leo Manso Dies; Collagist, Painter And Teacher, 78
Leo Manso, an abstract painter and collagist, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 78 and also kept a home in Provincetown, Mass.
His wife, Blanche, said the cause was heart failure.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the decision of Carol M. Browner, Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, to remove herself from decisions involving an Ohio incinerator misstated the role of an environmental advocacy group in opposing the incinerator.
The group, Citizen Action, had been tangentially involved in efforts to prevent the incinerator from opening; it is not party to a lawsuit to block the opening.


Keane Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Liberty Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


2 PEPSICO UNITS IN MEXICAN FOOD VENTURE
Two divisions of Pepsico Inc. are combining to add a Mexican flavor to supermarket shelves in the spring.


Foodmaker Net Jumps In Quarter
Foodmaker Inc., the operator and franchisor of the Jack in the Box chain of fast-food restaurants, yesterday reported a more than fourfold increase in profit despite setting aside $750,000 to deal with costs associated with an outbreak of food poisoning in its restaurants that caused the death of one child.
The company, which halted advertising for Jack in the Box products after the food poisoning outbreak, said that it planned to "resume aggressive product-oriented marketing shortly." It said sales had recently run 30 percent to 35 percent below the prior year's comparable period.


Russ Berrie &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Washington Post Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3


Pentagon Offers New Budget Cuts
Acting under orders from Defense Secretary Les Aspin, the Pentagon today submitted plans for a new round of budget cuts that would include retiring about 10 Navy ships and submarines, cutting about 180 Air Force planes and canceling a $27 billion communications satellite program, Pentagon officials said.
But some of the proposals involve items sure to run into resistance from Congress or from Mr.
Aspin, who was a Congressman from Wisconsin before becoming Defense Secretary.


ANHEUSER-BUSCH COS. (N)
The Anheuser-Busch Companies said yesterday that sales and earnings for 1992 had broken company records for the 16th conseutive year, with operating earnings rising by 5.8 percent, to $994.2 million.
But accounting changes for retirement benefits and income taxes reduced net income to $917.5 million, a slight dip from $939.8 million in 1991.
For the fourth quarter, the accounting changes raised operating expenses by $15.8 million and lowered operating income by three-tenths of a percent, to $309.3 million


Tucker Drilling (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Public Service Co. of North Carolina (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Roto-Rooter Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mitterrand Is First Western Leader to Visit Vietnam Since 1975


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Feb. 5
Jan. 29
Feb. 7
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.2
6.7
Distillate production, daily
2.9
2.9
2.7
Gasoline stocks
234.3
234.1
228.3
Distillate stocks
126.2
133.3
122.5
Crude imports, daily
6.5
6.7
4.8
Product imports, daily
1.9
1.3
1.5
Crude stocks
332.1
326.8
334.9
Crude production, daily
7.1
7.1
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
84.5
85.3
81.6
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Congress, Untie Yourself
It's no secret that the U.S.
Congress is inefficient.
The real mystery is how it gets anything done at all.
Thirty committees and -- count 'em -- 77 subcommittees picked at pieces of last year's defense budget.
Forty committees and subcommittees demand a say in energy legislation.
The original Clean Air Act covered a page and a half; the latest renewal filled 313 pages.
Checked, balanced and featherbedded to the point of stasis, Congress must reform not only its dubious campaign fund-raising practices but the way it works -- or doesn't.
And Congress senses it.
Seared by the hot breath of public contempt, the Senate and House have done what comes naturally.
They have formed yet another committee.


General Re reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Russia's Gay Men Step Out of Soviet-Era Shadows
After decades of enduring persecution and intimidation in the old Soviet Union, homosexuals in Russia are emerging into the open for the first time, even though they say they continue to feel mistreated and threatened by hostile public attitudes and by old laws that remain on the books.
Today, gay groups are officially registered and gay newspapers are published under municipal government laws.
In addition, a handful of homosexuals organized a demonstration in front of the United States Embassy at the time of President Clinton's inauguration last month.


Bush Industries Inc. reports earnings for 14wks to Jan 2


JOINT CHIEFS' HEAD IS SAID TO REQUEST EARLY RETIREMENT
Gen.
Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, has told Defense Secretary Les Aspin that he would like to leave office two or three months before the end of his term, in part because he does not want to defend budget cuts that he believes are too big, several close associates said today.
General Powell told former Defense Secretary Dick Cheney months ago that he wanted to leave before his term expired on Sept. 30, explaining then that he wanted to give his successor more influence this summer in shaping the Pentagon's long-term budget, associates said.
He had also told Mr.
Cheney he would not serve a third two-year term as chairman, even if President George Bush was re-elected.
Public Disagreements
But friends and associates said General Powell's desire to retire early, while partly for personal reasons, was reinforced by several extraordinary public disagreements between the Joint Chiefs and President Clinton over homosexuals in the military and reductions in military spending and troop levels.
Mr.
Clinton wants to cut spending by $60 billion more than Mr.
Bush had recommended by 1997 and troop strength by 200,000 more than General Powell favors.


Reuters Holdings Plc (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


How Dangerous to the Heart Is Anger? Perhaps Not Very
CHRONIC hostility and a cynical, suspicious temperament, while surely making life a sour enterprise, may not be the terrible health hazards that many scientists believe, a new study suggests.
Researchers at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., who examined the 20-year medical histories of 620 patients found that those people who scored on the high end of a classic psychological test measuring hostility did not have a greater risk of heart disease than others of their age and sex.


Books of The Times; A Cold Warrior Turns a Cold Eye on the U.S.
Around the Cragged Hill  A Personal and Political Philosophy  By George F. Kennan  272 pages.
W.
W.
Norton. $22.95.
Is George F. Kennan living in the nostalgic past?
Or is he saying something we don't care to hear about our dire present?
The answers to both questions appear to be yes in "Around the Cragged Hill," his latest and most provocative study of the troublesome nature of people and nations and the ameliorating power and glory of religion.
With a dozen books of diplomatic history and memoirs behind him, Mr.
Kennan, the 88-year-old former Ambassador to the Soviet Union and first head of the State Department's policy planning staff, is regarded as one of the country's wise men.
Because of his role as a scholar at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, N.J., for many years, he has been able to think about governments and the governed at a comfortable distance from the hurly-burly in the real world of urban America.
Although his views are presented behind a scrim of modesty, "Around the Cragged Hill" contains controversial opinions and challenging solutions.


Moog Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cameco Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Topics of The Times; The Rose Garden Rondo
With some judicious sleight-of-hand, President Clinton has honored the letter of a campaign promise to cut the White House staff by 25 percent.
By winnowing out 350 workers, and eliminating chauffeur-driven limousines for three senior officials, he has struck a symbolic blow against perks and for frugality.
The conjuring feat came in defining the White House staff.
Justifiably, Mr.
Clinton has exempted 800 budget workers and trade negotiators, on grounds that they serve the Cabinet, leaving roughly 1,400 workers in the pool to be cut.
But (See? Nothing up my sleeve!) his list of 350 cuts includes 70 people on temporary assignment from other agencies.


International Aluminum reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Eating Well
Michael Franks knows a good promotion when he sees one.
Each of the four California restaurants in which he is a partner makes some connection with healthful eating, no matter how subtle.
"We are in a fairly affluent area," Mr.
Franks said, "and low fat is the direction a lot of food is going."


Byrd Leaving For Oklahoma
Dennis Byrd, the Jets defensive end who has been partly paralyzed since he broke his neck in a game Nov. 29, will be transferred from Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan to a rehabilitation center in Oklahoma on Friday.
Byrd, a native Oklahoman, will continue his recovery as an outpatient at St.
John's Rehabilitation Center in Tulsa under the guidance of Dr.
Annie Venugopal.
His progress at Mount Sinai has been substantial, according to Dr.
Kristjan Ranarsson, chairman of the department of rehabilitation medicine at Mount Sinai.


Chris-Craft Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Colonial Cos. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Vitry-aux-Loges Journal; In the Forest of Orleans, Unneighborly Snarls
By Claude Bardin's own account, an internal voice led her first to California, where she was "miraculously" cured of cancer, then to India, where she met her spiritual guide, and finally to the Forest of Orleans, where she set up a healing center.
But soon after arriving here in 1987, the 48-year-old Parisian began to hear other voices, this time those of villagers murmuring that she was running a sect given to bizarre rituals.
"A few centuries ago," a local woman told her darkly, "people like you were burned at the stake."


Erving Still Soars Above the Rest
After the American Basketball Association had gasped its final breath, after the Nets, it was never quite the same for the Erving family.
The older, established National Basketball Association seemed colder, corporate, more business than passion.
"When he went to Philadelphia, they considered him an outsider," Julius Erving's wife, Turquoise, was saying yesterday.
"It was their league. There wasn't the togetherness. There wasn't the respect."


Letterman's Choice: New York. Maybe.
The producers of David Letterman's television show and CBS executives say they have agreed that the show will stay in New York if questions about studio space can be resolved.
"We expect no definitive announcement for a few days," Ann Morfogen, the vice president for communications for CBS, said yesterday after a meeting of network officials and the Letterman producers, who have been considering a move to Los Angeles when the show switches to CBS this summer.
"We are presently reviewing a few studio-space questions and logistics."


Independent Insurance Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


I.O.C. Acting to Keep Disputes Out of Court
In an effort to head off another lawsuit as thorny as the litigation by Butch Reynolds, the International Olympic Committee is setting up a roving arbitration system and may force athletes to agree beforehand to recognize its authority if they wish to compete in events under the Olympic umbrella.
Juan Antonio Samaranch, the president of the I.O.C., outlined the plan yesterday during a breakfast with reporters and Olympic officials at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in Manhattan.
A system based on the existing arbitration tribunal in Lausanne, Switzerland, would be made available to athletes in every country, with the approval of all national sports federations.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Beanpot Tournament
Winning the Beanpot championship was "the first of our goals," said Ted Drury, the Harvard captain and winner of the tournament's most valuable player award.
The Crimson defeated Boston University, 4-2, in a splendid match on Monday night that held the attention of the usual capacity crowd of 14,448 at Boston Garden.


Kaiser Aluminum reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Pop; Giving a Teen-Age Audience The Safe Sex It Craves
Chayanne's show at Radio City Music Hall on Friday night was a big tease, both completely about sex and yet totally unsexual.
Chayanne (Elmer Figueroa Arce, actually), a hunky 22-year-old pop star from Puerto Rico, does some heavy flirting with the teen-age girls who jam his concerts.
He'll take off his motorcycle jacket and shirt, and do some mild bumping and grinding with his two female dancers.
He'll sweat a lot, and go down on his knees, and kiss the girls who jump up on stage to hug him.
But deep down, sex isn't the issue.
He wants somebody to love, and song after song lets his listeners know that they're safe and secure with him, even if he takes them on a midnight motorcycle ride down to the beach.


Haiti Removes Obstacles to U.N. Observer Mission
State Department and United Nations officials said today that Haiti's military-backed Government had dropped its objections to the deployment of hundreds of foreign human rights observers as a first step in international efforts aimed at restoring democracy to Haiti.
The announcement, which was followed by a public confirmation by Haiti's provisional Prime Minister, Marc L. Bazin, came five days after the Haitian authorities angrily rejected the sending of the human rights monitors as an unacceptable infringement on the country's sovereignty.


Sports of The Times; Ashe's Long Journey Back Home
IT took Arthur Ashe Jr. 49 years to travel the two miles from where he grew up on Sledd Street here to the Governor of Virginia's Executive Mansion, where yesterday his body lay in state, and where thousands of people, black and white, lined up for five blocks to pay their respects.
Ashe didn't go straight down Brook Road to the mansion on Ninth Street sitting in the back of the bus, as he might have as a boy, as he would have been required to by Jim Crow edict in the 1940's and 50's.
Ashe took the long way, he took the hard way, and went in the opposite direction, around the world.


Wooden Cutting Boards Found Safer Than Plastic
EVERY now and then a scientific finding flies in the face of conventional wisdom.
And so it was with an accidental discovery by microbiologists at the University of Wisconsin's Food Research Institute that wooden cutting boards kill food-poisoning bacteria that survive very nicely on the plastic boards that have been widely promoted for years as safer than wood.
The scientists, Dean O. Cliver and Nese O. Ak, stumbled upon the finding while seeking ways to decontaminate wooden boards and make them as "safe" as plastic.
Much to their surprise, they found that when boards were purposely contaminated with organisms like Salmonella, Listeria and Escherichia coli that are common causes of food poisoning, 99.9 percent of the bacteria died off within three minutes on the wooden boards, while none died on the plastic ones.


Wrestling Health-Care Costs to the Mat
From his third-floor office in a sleek building near the domed Capitol of California, Tom J. Elkin is a commander in the war against the ever-rising costs of health care.
"I know what is a reasonable price for a compact disk or a refrigerator," he said.
"But what is accessible health care worth? I don't know yet what a fair price is for the product we're buying. That's what we're after."


G.M. Blocked From Closing Auto Plant
Faced with the loss of their jobs, more than 2,500 auto workers won a reprieve today when a Michigan judge blocked the General Motors Corporation from closing an assembly plant in Ypsilanti, Mich.
The ruling is the second big legal setback recently for G.M., which last week lost a product liability case in Atlanta.


An Evert Event
Names may not be everything, but CHRIS EVERT seemed suitably impressed yesterday at the formal unveiling of the official trophy for the Matrix Essentials Evert Cup, which will be held in Indian Wells, Calif., from Feb. 22-28.
She was also, perhaps, a bit puzzled.
The Evert Cup, it turns out, is no cup at all, but a truncated chunk of Baccarat crystal that wouldn't hold so much as a sip of champagne.


Judge Upholds Certain Hospital Charges
Granting a temporary respite to New York State's hospitals, a Federal judge ruled yesterday that private insurance companies will, for the time being, have to continue paying certain charges on their customers' hospital bills.
In his opinion, Judge Louis J. Freeh of Federal District Court in Manhattan said that the hospitals would suffer "irreparable harm" unless he allowed them to continue collecting the money, which comes from a 13 percent additional charge on hospital bills.
The charges are paid by commercial insurers and bring the hospitals a total of $160 million a year.


Dwyer Retires as Coach At Manhattan College
FRED DWYER, Manhattan's track and field coach since 1969, announced his retirement yesterday, effective at the end of the season.
"I'm going to be 62 years old soon and it's time to retire," said Dwyer, the N.C.A.A.
Coach of the Year in 1973 and the national outdoor mile champion in 1954.
"It's time I just relaxed and enjoyed life."


TBC Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Detroit Forgoes Import Curbs
The Detroit auto makers decided not to file unfair trade complaints seeking steep new duties on imported cars.
The move will spare consumers, who would have faced higher car prices.
Business Day, page D1.


Highlights in Jazz To Open New Series
The Count Basie Orchestra, led by Frank Foster, is to open the 21st season of the Highlights in Jazz series tomorrow at 8 P.M. at the Pace Downtown Theater of Pace University, 3 Spruce Street in lower Manhattan.
Tickets are $15; $11 for students.


Ewing Is an All-Star For Sixth Straight Year
When you're hot, you're hot, and Patrick Ewing has been hot.
Yesterday, Ewing was named to the Eastern Conference All-Star team for the sixth consecutive year, and for the seventh time in his eight-year National Basketball Association career.
That announcement came after Monday night's performance in Philadelphia, in which Ewing continued his recent dominance with a season-high 40 points, helping the Knicks to their fifth consecutive victory.


No Cuts in City For Chauffeurs
With President Clinton's cuts in White House staff privileges, there will now be more chauffeur-driven cars for staff members at New York City Hall than at the White House.
President Clinton reduced the number of chauffeur-driven cars from six to three, reserving them for his chief of staff, national security adviser and deputy national security adviser.


William (Slew) Hester, 80, U.S. Tennis Executive
William (Slew) Hester, the gruff-drawling tennis official who almost singlehandedly wrenched the United States Open from its cramped roots in Forest Hills and transplanted it to a sprawling new National Tennis Center in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, died Monday night at his home in Jackson, Miss.
He was 80.
His family said the cause of death was congestive heart failure after a 20-year bout with rheumatoid arthritis.


Review/Film; For a Prague Eccentric, Porcelain Is a Passion
One of the few things than can easily be said about "Utz," Bruce Chatwin's short, eccentric novel about a Czechoslovak baron obsessed with collecting porcelain figurines, is that it does not suggest itself as ready-made movie material.
This odd tale is quite serious about its Meissen monkeys and Buddhas and commedia dell'arte caricatures, a thousand of which have been lovingly accumulated by Utz in his tiny Prague apartment.
Utz's collection, no less bizarre and daunting on screen than it was on the page, is seen as the very essence of his nature.
It is a nature that transcends ordinary notions of morality or behavior.
"He detested violence, yet welcomed the cataclysms that flung fresh works of art onto the market," Mr.
Chatwin wrote of a man who had thus benefited from Kristallnacht and the stock market crash of 1929.
"Wars, pogroms and revolutions," says Utz (played expertly by Armin Mueller-Stahl), "offer excellent opportunities for the collector."


Woman Who Is Miami Prosecutor Joins Clinton List for Justice Dept.
Still laboring after two embarrassing public fumbles to find an acceptable female nominee for Attorney General, President Clinton has added a leading prosecutor to the list of those under consideration.
Mr.
Clinton met this evening with Janet Reno, the 54-year-old State Attorney for Dade County, Fla., White House officials said.
Ms.
Reno flew here Monday from Miami for the interview.


Karnishovas Scores 32 to Power Pirates
For nearly four weeks, the Seton Hall Pirates had searched in vain for someone to lead them out of an ever-deepening valley of despair.
Beginning with a loss to Pittsburgh on Jan. 16 and ending with a heartbreaking loss at the buzzer to Boston College last Saturday, the Pirates had dropped five of their last seven games.


Los Angeles Journal; Near Riots' Ashes, a Museum Based on Tolerance
Not far from the heart of last spring's riots, where the charred ruins of looted businesses provide daily reminders of social discord, a museum opened today in defiance of hate.
The Museum of Tolerance, a $50 million undertaking of the Simon Wiesenthal Center, opened as many feared that the city was again on the brink of upheaval.


Odd Couples of the Kitchen: When Sweet Marries Spice
THIS Sunday, some sweethearts will open heart-shaped boxes of chocolates, pick one, take a bite and taste -- not caramel, cordial cherry or raspberry cream, but curry.
Or Earl Grey tea.
Or black pepper.
This is not a lover's prank but an example of freewheeling, unexpected flavoring.
Ice cream, cakes, tarts and hot chocolate drinks are also being flavored with surprising herbs and spices.
Some chefs are even anointing savory dishes like duck and lobster with hints of vanilla and chocolate.


Public &amp; Private; Asking the Questions
The Clinton Administration is sick to death of it.
The President ran on the economy, but all anyone wants to talk about these days is who's taking care of the kids of the candidates for attorney general.
So it seems fitting to take a break from the witch hunts surrounding who paid what when to the sitter to discuss a pressing economic issue.


Aquanautics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mastercard Adopts 'Smart Money' Label
The new advertising campaign for Mastercard International, due Feb. 28 from its new agency, Ammirati &amp; Puris in New York, will replace the long-running theme "Master the moment" with this slogan: "Mastercard. It's more than a credit card. It's smart money."


First Brands Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bridge
Beginners learn to hold up winners in the opponent's suit when defending.
It takes them much longer to learn that a holdup is often an error.
In general, one should not hold up without a clear purpose, a guideline that East failed to observe on the diagramed deal.
The occasion was the 1992 Epson Worldwide Bridge Contest, played last June, and the South player was 88-year-old Dr.
Sidney Sadovsky of Riverdale, the Bronx, one of the oldest Epson competitors in the world.
His partner was his daughter, Barbara Metselaar of Scarsdale, N.Y., and they correctly stopped short of a hopeless slam.
Some pairs overreached, failing to appreciate that the ace and king of clubs were missing.


GMIS Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Maxxam Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Where Do Lonely Hearts Go? To the Video Store for Advice
VALENTINE'S DAY is just four days away, and lots of Americans have lots to be nervous about.
There is love unrequited. Love on the wane. Love without hope, and love not at all.


Why Dredging in Newark Bay Must Proceed
To the Editor:
You report Jan. 27 that the Environmental Protection Agency has suspended the dredging permit for Newark Bay that the Corps of Engineers granted the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
You quote an Environmental Defense Fund staff scientist, saying that the permit to dredge access lanes to the container terminal berths in Port Newark and Elizabeth, N.J., "would set the stage for hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of cubic yards of material to be disposed of at dump sites."


Big Three Won't Seek Car Tariffs
Under pressure from foreign auto makers and facing some opposition from the Clinton Administration, the chief executives of Detroit's Big Three announced today that they had decided not to file complaints of unfair trade that would seek steep duties on imported cars.
The decision is a boon for consumers, to the extent that they are spared higher prices, and for the Clinton Administration, which would have been forced by Federal law to decide the cases quickly.
The Administration is being accused both by some in the United States and by many abroad of protectionist leanings.


By Upholding Death Sentence, Court Appears to Shift Direction
For only the third time in 34 opinions, the New Jersey Supreme Court today upheld a death sentence under the state's 11 year-old death penalty statute.
The court's latest ruling, the third consecutive opinion upholding a death sentence, appears to evince a change in the court's attitude toward capital punishment, said Mark Friedman, an assistant deputy state public defender who represented the defendant in the latest case.


Adac Laboratories (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


The Mother of All Debates
The women's movement and the Clinton Administration have already let women down.
Where are the marchers in solidarity with Zoe Baird and Judge Kimba Wood?
When abortion was illegal, women in America took to the streets to proclaim that the man-made law forced them into criminality.
They carried signs proclaiming they had had abortions.
Where is such solidarity now?


Brunswick Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Yes, Immigration Law Reaches Into Your Home; It Needs Changing
To the Editor:
Zoe Baird was not sponsoring her Peruvian household workers for citizenship.
An applicant for citizenship is already a permanent resident of the United States and thus entitled to work.
She was sponsoring them for legal permanent residence.


Market Place; Towers Financial's S.E.C. dispute is more than technical.
THE dispute between the Towers Financial Corporation, whose chairman wants to take over The New York Post, and the Securities and Exchange Commission, has been painted as a dispute over accounting methods and technical securities laws.
But it is much more than that.
If the S.E.C.'s allegations are true, Towers begins to look very much like a classic Ponzi scheme, in which early investors are paid with the proceeds from later investors.


International Thoroughbred Breeders reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Opera; 'Meistersinger' Cast Changes
Otto Schenk's new production of Wagner's "Meistersinger von Nurnberg" at the Metropolitan Opera underwent two significant cast changes on Saturday evening, which will be reflected tonight in its final performance of the season.
Ben Heppner, a rising Canadian tenor, took over the role of Walther.
So convincingly Wagnerian of girth is Mr.
Heppner that his voice seemed anomalously small at first.
But he was evidently pacing himself wisely, for he appeared to grow stronger and more assured as the evening wore on, in contrast to many around him.


Elwood R. Quesada, First F.A.A. Chief, Dies at 88
Lieut.
Gen.
Elwood Richard Quesada, retired, a World War II fighter pilot who became the first head of the Federal Aviation Administration, died yesterday at Jupiter Hospital in Jupiter, Fla.
He was 88 and lived in Hobe Sound, Fla.
His family said he died of heart failure.


Velcro Industries (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Revival Meeting Tonight For Clinton the Populist
Seeking to re-establish his credentials as a populist, President Clinton will travel here on Wednesday to revive a popular event from last year's campaign that he wants to make a staple of the modern Presidency: the televised town meeting.
Mr.
Clinton will answer questions from audiences picked by WXYZ, the ABC affiliate that is staging the event in this Detroit suburb, and satellite-linked stations in Miami, Atlanta and Seattle that will participate.


Owens Award to Shcherbo
Vitaly Shcherbo, the gymnast from Belarus who won six gold medals at the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain, received the Jesse Owens International Trophy Award yesterday for excellence in athletic performance and promotion of cooperation between nations.
Shcherbo was selected for the award by a worldwide panel of sports experts assembled by the International Amateur Athletic Association, beating out Kevin Young and Jackie Joyner-Kersee, American track stars who won gold medals in the Olympics.


United American Healthcare Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Comdata Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Instrument Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Outback Steakhouse (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reds Fans Looking Beyond Controversy
On opening day of the 1993 baseball season, Marge Schott, the owner of the Reds, won't be sitting in her usual box beside the first-base dugout here at Riverfront Stadium, chain-smoking and signing autographs with a dog-paw print.
For the first month of the baseball season, she has been banished to the executive suite upstairs.


LABORITE TARGET: EUROPEAN TREATY
The Labor Party has decided to oppose the Conservative Government on a key point that could complicate and even threaten Britain's ratification of the treaty to achieve monetary and political unity in Europe.
In an interview in The Times of London today, the Labor Party leader, John Smith, also held out the prospect of an alliance with rebellious Conservative "Euroskeptics" who want to scuttle the treaty altogether.


Food Notes
A New Roasted Garlic Oil
Of the few garlic-flavored oils on the market, none have the mellow, slightly smoky pungency that characterizes the new Consorzio roasted garlic oil created by Michael Chiarello of Tra Vigne Restaurant in St.
Helena, Calif.
This is a golden olive oil that packs an enormous amount of aroma and flavor in just a few drops.


PHM Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cephalon Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Riverwood International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Best in Show Needs Little Intro: It's Robert
The dog acknowledged as the best in the land last year became the best at Westminster last night.
Ch.
Salilyn's Condor, an English springer spaniel, won its breed in the afternoon, captured the sporting group in the evening and was judged best in show as the 117th Westminster Kennel Club show ended a two-day run in Madison Square Garden.


The Machines of a New Sole
By 1973, the year of the New York Knicks' last N.B.A. title, most of the team had switched to the latest fashion trend: leather basketball shoes.
But Bill Bradley, the Knicks' star forward and a future Senator, known for the accuracy of his jump shot but not for his speed afoot, was still pick-and-rolling in his canvas Chuck Taylor All-Star sneakers.
Chuck Taylors had served Mr.
Bradley and several previous generations of basketball players quite well, and many were loath to give them up for newer types of shoes.
So, too, was the maker of Chuck Taylors, Converse Inc., whose slowness to adapt to the high-tech high-attitude game of basketball shoes helped Nike and Reebok International fast-break past the company in the 1980's.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Feb. 1 about an analyst for Raymond James &amp; Associates who sold his shares of Cascade International stock included an incorrect figure obtained from the firm for the total proceeds.
The analyst, Bert Boksen, sold 47,700 shares between May 1991 and September 1991 for a total of $459,694 and a profit of $345,544, the company said.


Falling Biotech
Biogen Inc., like other biotechnology stocks, enjoyed tremendous success before a run-up in prices ended investors appetite at the end of 1992.
Since January, Biogen shares have fallen 26.6 percent.


I.R.S. to Allow Deductions From Past on Home Offices
The Internal Revenue Service has announced that it will not disallow deductions for home offices taken for 1991 and prior years, if taxpayers followed earlier guidelines issued by the agency.
The announcement came after a Supreme Court decision last month that supported the I.R.S. interpretation of the law governing home offices.
The decision worried taxpayers who thought they would be forced to amend previous tax returns.


Dynamics Research reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Karnishovas Scores 32 to Power Pirates
For nearly four weeks, the Seton Hall Pirates had searched in vain for someone to lead them out of an ever-deepening valley of despair.
Beginning with a loss to Pittsburgh on Jan. 16 and ending with a heartbreaking loss at the buzzer to Boston College last Saturday, the Pirates had dropped five of their last seven games.


The Pop Life
Selling Cars and a Song
In trying to sell a car, Volkswagen sold a song.
It started when the auto maker was looking around for "something that felt or looked European" as a backdrop for a television commercial for its Passat model, said Greg Stein, Volkswagen's United States advertising manager.
Someone at the company's advertising agency, DDB Needham, had heard the song "Harry's Game" in the 1992 film "Patriot Games" and thought it might work.


Study Sees Dip In Investment From Abroad
Foreign investment in companies and real estate in New York City slowed substantially in the early 1990's, although not as sharply as the decline experienced throughout the country, a new study shows.
The study, conducted for the Dinkins administration, found that there were 75 transactions involving foreign companies in New York City in 1991, the lowest level since 1977.
Throughout the 1980's, there were about 100 such deals each year.


Clinton Said to Consider Sending Troops to Bosnia
The Clinton Administration intends to announce later this week, possibly as early as Thursday, the broad outline of a peace plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina that could include the use of United States ground troops to enforce the settlement, a senior White House official said tonight.
The official, who spoke on the condition of anonimity, said the possible deployment of United States troops as part of an international peacekeeping force was one of several military options being considered by the Administration and its European allies in ongoing discussions.


Review/Opera; How Bellini's Second Thoughts Were Really First
Our fond belief in immutable masterpieces might have given Bellini and his opera-writing colleagues considerable puzzlement.
Bellini, like others around him and like Mozart before him, created particular sounds for particular voices.
When a certain singer was not available for the production at hand, Bellini altered his ideas for the singer that was.
Such is the history of "La Straniera." The composer's fourth opera, written in 1828, was originally conceived for Giovanni Battista Rubini, owner of the high, liquid tenor apparatus then in operatic favor.
Bellini had also written "Il Pirata" with Rubini's voice in mind, but when it became clear that the tenor was not free to sing the premiere of "La Straniera" at La Scala in Milan, the tenor role of Arturo was composed in a downward version for the tenor Domenico Reina.


Cannon Express Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Topics of The Times; Mr. Stein's Mystery Letter
Among leading aspirants in New York City's upcoming mayoral race, only City Council President Andrew Stein has shunned reasonable limits on campaign contributions and spending.
He has refused to participate in the city's voluntary system of public campaign financing, which imposes such limits.
This week provided an early glimpse of the race Mr.
Stein is waging with his political checks.
His campaign sent out a mailing to about 3,000 gay rights activists assailing Mayor David Dinkins's record on issues of concern to gay men and lesbians.


Action Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Executive Changes
BLOCKBUSTER ENTERTAINMENT CORP., Fort Lauderdale, Fla., appointed James L. Hilmer senior vice president and chief marketing officer.
BOWNE &amp; CO., New York, the financial printer, said John Penhollow would join it as director of Edgar services.
Mr.
Penhollow has been head of the team at the Securities and Exchange Commission developing the Edgar (electronic data gathering, analysis and retrieval) system that is to go into widespread operation this year.


BHC Communciations reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Yes, Immigration Law Reaches Into Your Home
To the Editor:
The first paragraph of "Reconsider Aliens Law in Light of Baird Case," Charles Gordon's Jan. 22 letter on United States immigration law and the hiring of illegal aliens in light of the case of President Clinton's nominee for Attorney General, is basically factual, but the balance is not.


Less Is Key to an Insurer's Success
As many insurance companies fret over the prospect of losing their health business under health-care reform, one quietly growing insurer here, the UNUM Corporation, seems destined to prosper if some widely expected proposals emerge from Hillary Clinton's office this spring.
For the last several years, UNUM has flourished as a result of its decision to abandon the traditional health-care insurance business and focus on add-on benefits.
It is now the nation's leading group disability insurer and packages an array of benefits for employers that range from dental to group life to coverage for eyeglasses.


Benefits for Spouses No Longer Make Sense
To the Editor:
In the debate over the entitlement of gay and lesbian domestic partners to the same benefits available to spouses, it seems to me that questions of equal rights as between gay and straight couples are obscuring the more fundamental question of what rights any couple has in the first place.
Or, to put it more emotively, why should an employer be compelled to provide medical coverage or any other benefit for a nonemployee?


What's Up on 5th Avenue? A Studio Store
Tiffany &amp; Company, Van Cleef &amp; Arpels and Bulgari are getting a new neighbor.
Bugs Bunny.
The long-vacant fourth corner of New York's retail epicenter -- Fifth Avenue and 57th Street -- has been leased to an incongruous newcomer: the Warner Bros.
Studio Store, joining the three celebrated jewelers.


Florio, a Budget Proposal And an Election Platform
In a year in which both he and all 120 members of the State Legislature face re-election, Gov.
Jim Florio used much of his annual budget address today to trumpet the successes of his first term in office and to set the platform on which he is expected to seek a second term.
Leading politicians agreed that it was definitely an election-year presentation, although they disagreed about whether that was good or bad.
Mr.
Florio's speech and his budget won cautious praise from the Republicans who control the Legislature, which must approve the spending plan, though it came under immediate attack from two candidates for the Republican nomination for governor -- Christine Todd Whitman and Cary Edwards.


Companies Struggle to Adjust As U.S. Cuts Military Budget
Connecticut is home to an estimated 1,800 to 3,100 military contractors and subcontractors, and all are struggling to figure out how to survive the end of the cold war.
Many will shrink; some will disappear, unable to find a new niche.
Dozens have already perished.
Even contractors that have diversified or landed foreign military customers are being hit harder by the Pentagon cuts than they had ever expected.


Allou Health &amp; Beauty reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fewer TV Messages During Prime Time
A periodic monitoring of the proliferation of commercials, promotions and other nonprogramming material on television has found a decrease in this so-called clutter during certain times of the day but noticeable increases during others.


A Health-Care Theory Hatched in Fireside Chats
The basic theory of managed competition in health care was developed by an informal group of health experts who call themselves the Jackson Hole Group, after the Wyoming city where they meet periodically at the home of Dr.
Paul M. Ellwood, a doctor and leading health economist.
The main theorist has perhaps been Alain C. Enthoven, a professor at the Stanford University Business School.
But over the last three years the concept has been refined around the fireplace of Dr.
Ellwood's house, where guests have included academics, public officials and leaders of the insurance and health industries.


Metropolitan Diary
VALENTINE'S DAY
February fourteen is the day of the  Great Marriage Compromise.
My husband, who  hates to shop, and even worse,  still doesn't know my size,  and maybe, even the color of my eyes,  will go to the local candy store,  and buy a fancy cardboard heart  filled with chocolates.
I will make a big to-do, and  he will grin with pleasure  and we will gobble them all up.
This box will replace  the box that has been on show  for a year,  which replaced the  box that had been on show  the year before,  and so on  and so on.
STEPHANIE KAPLAN COHEN


Sailor Enters No Plea in Killing of Gay Shipmate
An American sailor charged with battering a gay shipmate to death entered no plea today at the first hearing of his closely watched case, as the Navy disclosed that the defendant says he was fending off an unwelcome sexual advance.
The sailor, Airman Apprentice Terry M. Helvey, 20, said he was seeking a civilian lawyer for his criminal trial, which appears likely to drag out many of the stereotypes and arguments against permitting homosexuals in the military.


Ryder System Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First Mortgage Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Whirlpool Corp. (N)
With record levels of revenues in three of its home appliance divisions, the Whirlpool Corporation reported a 55 percent increase in fourth-quarter earnings yesterday, to $62 million, and a 21 percent increase in earnings for the year, to $205 million from $170 million.
The company said that the 1992 fourth-quarter results included a pretax charge of $18 million for the reorganization of the company's financial unit and for improvements in its Whirlpool Europe division.


Cigarette makers encourage smokers to wear their favorite brands on their sleeves.
WHO'S going to clothe America this spring?
Donna Karan, Ralph Lauren, Philip Morris, L. L. Bean, R. J. Reynolds . . .
Don't laugh.
The nation's largest tobacco marketers are undertaking their most extensive efforts ever to entice Americans into wearing their cigarette brand names.
It is estimated that they will spend upward of $300 million this year to persuade consumers to collect proofs of purchase or coupons redeemable for clothing and other merchandise.


Osmonics Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Spectrum Control (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Maritrans Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Phone Company Buys Entry Into Cable Television Business
In the first transaction of its kind, a telephone company has acquired a cable television system, signaling the start of a race between the two industries to dominate the delivery of communication services of all kinds to the home.
Both industries want to use their elaborate networks to provide movies on demand, hundreds of channels of television programming and on-line electronic libraries.
And advances in technologies, blurring the distinctions between what the two industries can do, have set off a Darwinian contest.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  MORE MIGRANTS FOR EUROPE
Poverty and civil war, from Yugoslavia to Somalia to Sri Lanka, have led hundreds of thousands of people to flee to Western Europe.
In the last 10 years, the number of migrants seeking asylum in Western Europe has risen tenfold.
A1  U.S.
WEIGHS BOSNIA FORCE
The Clinton Administration intends to announce later this week, possibly as early as Thursday, the broad outline of a peace plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina that could include the use of United States ground troops, a senior White House official said.
A6  U.N.
CHIEF FAULTS MUSLIMS
The United Nations Secretary General threw his weight behind the Bosnia peace initiative President Clinton has criticized as favoring the Serbs and blamed the lack of progress in the peace talks mainly on the intransigence of the Muslim side.
A7  GAY RUSSIANS STILL THREATENED
After decades of enduring persecution and intimidation in the old Soviet Union, homosexuals are emerging into the open for the first time in Russia even though they say they continue to feel mistreated and threatened by hostile public attitudes and by longtime laws.
A3  YELTSIN BOWS TO PRESSURE
Bowing to growing pressure from all but the dwindling minority of democratic reformers, President Yeltsin announced hat he was prepared to scrap a constitutional referendum if other means could be found to resolve the paralyzing power struggles with Parliament.
A5  EUTHANASIA FOES IN NETHERLANDS
Though the Netherlands has approved euthanasia under strict medical and ethical guidelines, about 11 percent of Dutch doctors remain opposed to the practice of ending a terminal patient's life.
A10  LABOR VS.
TORIES ON SOCIAL PACT
Britain's Labor Party has decided to oppose the Conservative Government on a key point on social issues that could complicate and even threaten Britain's ratification of the treaty to achieve monetary and political unity in Europe.
A11  UGANDA'S POOR SEE THE POPE
They came across the Uganda bush with more hope than shoes to see the Pope in a place where faith might seem a tenuous proposition at best, denied by calamities tumbling one upon the other.
A9  Mitterrand became the first Western leader to visit Hanoi since 1975.
A8  Brazilian satellite launched from B-52 bomber.
A13  Haiti dropped opposition to rights observers.
A14  Vitry-aux-Loges Journal: A spiritual center ran afoul of townsfolk.
A4  National A16-21, D21  POWELL PLANS EARLY DEPARTURE  The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff has told the Defense Secretary that he wants to leave office before the end of his term in September, in part because he and the Secretary disagree on budget policy.
A1  CLINTON ANNOUNCES STAFF CUTS  The President kept his campaign promise to trim his staff by 25 percent, but only by defining the White House in unusually narrow terms and having the ax fall most heavily on the lowest-paid employees.
A1  Clinton reorganized the drug-war office, and won praise.
A20  Clinton travels to Detroit today for a televised "town meeting." A20  A female prosecutor is a candidate for Attorney General.
A20  The Baird-Wood episode is no hot topic at the A.B.A. convention.
A20  NBC SETTLES TRUCK TEST DISPUTE  NBC News announced that it had settled a defamation lawsuit brought by General Motors over the network's demonstration of a fiery pickup truck crash test on the "Dateline NBC" program.
A1  COMMUNICATIONS-RACE MILESTONE  For the first time a telephone company has acquired a cable television system, signaling the coming competition between the two industries to dominate the delivery of communications services of all kinds to the home.
A1  PROTOTYPE IN HEALTH-CARE DRIVE  Of all the approaches advanced for controlling health-care costs, perhaps none is more hotly debated than "managed competition," the notion that costs can be controlled by forcing providers to compete with one another under government supervision.
Now the success of a California agency known as Calpers suggests that the approach may hold great promise.
A1  A study cited enormous costs in life-prolonging cancer treatment.
D21  WHEN THE AX FALLS ON THE POOR  Researchers found that cash-starved states had made sharp cuts in welfare programs in the last two years, weakening society's safety net and in some cases even promoting homelessness.
A16  A BESIEGED VETERAN LAWMAKER  In nearly 40 years in politics, Dan Rostenkowski has usually known where he is going.
Now, subjected to the scrutiny of a Federal grand jury, he cannot be sure even which path he is on.
A21  MANHUNT IN SHOOTINGS AT C.I.A.
The F.B.I. said it had undertaken a worldwide search for a Pakistani immigrant identified as the prime suspect in shootings that killed two people outside C.I.A. headquarters last month.
A17  HEARING IN DEATH OF GAY SAILOR  A sailor charged with the fatal beating of a gay shipmate entered no plea at the first hearing of his closely watched case.
The Navy, meanwhile, said the defendant was contending that he had been fending off an unwelcome sexual advance.
A18  The Navy has found evidence of cheating by 28 midshipmen.
A18  Los Angeles Journal: A museum that defies hate.
A16  Education Page B10  Neil L. Rudenstine has persuaded Harvard to begin changing its shape.
Campus Journal: Brigham Young offers study in 54 languages.
Metro Digest B1  THE FIGHT OVER FERNANDEZ  With the fate of Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez hanging in the balance, his supporters and opponents waged a last-minute campaign through public demonstrations and private persuasion to influence votes on the Board of Education.
A1  Neediest Cases B4  Business Digest D1  Living Section C1-10  For Julia Child, an intimate dinner for 500.
C1  Odd couples of the kitchen: when sweet marries spice.
C1  At lunch with Carol Vaness: it's not over till the slim lady sings.
C1  Health Page C12-13  Anger may not underly heart risks after all, big study says.
C12  Personal Health: New health worries for DES offspring.
C12  Arts/Entertainment C14-20  Sports B11-16  Obituaries D22-23  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials  Congress, untie yourself.
Time, at last, to recognize Angola.
Topics: The Rose Garden rondo.
Letters  Anna Quindlen: Asking the questions.
Erica Jong: Conspiracy of silence on child care.
Judith Resnik: Minor child care slips, big gains.
Mary Frances Berry: The father's hour.


Low-Fat, Spicy Noodles
THIS dish is a low-fat version of a recipe Germaine Swanson, who owns Germaine's in Washington,. gave me years ago.
Her Singapore noodles called for copious quantities of oil.
For this recipe, the oil has been reduced considerably.
Intense flavor is provided by ginger, garlic, coriander, cumin and hot chilies.
If you cannot find Vietnamese or Thai rice noodles, use fresh eggless fettuccine.
A cucumber salad offers a cooling contrast.
Singapore Noodles
1 1-inch piece fresh or frozen ginger  1 large clove garlic  8 ounces peeled baby carrots  3 large leeks  8 ounces flank steak  1 teaspoon canola oil  1/2 teaspoon ground coriander  1/4 to 1/2 teaspoon hot-pepper flakes  1 teaspoon ground cumin  8 ounces rice noodles  1 tablespoon cornstarch  1 cup no-salt-added beef stock.
1. Bring water to boil in covered pot for noodles.
2.
With food processor on, put ginger and garlic through feed tube to mince; remove and set aside.
3.
Cut carrots in quarters.
Trim green part from leeks.
Wash white part of leeks, and put carrots and leeks in food processor.
Chop finely by pulsing.
4. Cut beef against the grain into thin slices.
5.
Heat oil in nonstick skillet; saute ginger and garlic for a few seconds.
Add coriander, hot-pepper flakes and cumin, and stir-fry a few seconds.
Remove and set aside.
6.
Add beef to skillet and brown on both sides; add carrots and leeks and saute a minute or two.
7. Cook noodles.
8.
Mix cornstarch with a little beef stock and then combine all stock to make mixture smooth.
Add to skillet with reserved seasonings.
Cook over medium heat until mixture thickens.
9. Drain noodles and stir in.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving:
815 calories, 15 grams fat, 65 milligrams cholesterol, 190 milligrams sodium, 30 grams protein, 140 grams carbohydrate.
Gingery Cucumbers  2 medium-size Kirby cucumbers  1 teaspoon chopped or grated fresh or frozen ginger  2 teaspoons apple cider vinegar  1/2 teaspoon sugar  1/4 teaspoon sesame oil.
1. Scrub and trim cucumbers, but do not peel. Slice thinly.
2.
Chop or grate ginger and place in serving bowl with vinegar, sugar and sesame oil.
Stir in cucumbers.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving:
50 calories, 1 gram fat, 0 milligrams cholesterol, 6 milligrams sodium, 2 grams protein, 10 grams carbohydrate.


6th Match Game a Draw For Polgar and Spassky
Judit Polgar and Boris Spassky agreed to a draw today after the 43d move in the sixth game of their exhibition chess match.


KOREAN EXECUTIVE IS LEAVING POLITICS
The billionaire politician Chung Ju Yung announced his retirement from politics today, three days after he was indicted on charges of embezzlement and election-law violations.
"I am retiring from politics to concentrate on business," said the 77-year-old founder and former chairman of the Hyundai Group, South Korea's largest conglomerate.
Federal prosecutors charged Mr.
Chung with illegally diverting funds and manpower from Hyundai to his presidential campaign.


Nine Score and Four Years and Still Looking Good


CHRONICLE
JEAN S. HARRIS, who won her freedom on January 22 after serving almost 12 years for the murder of Dr.
Herman Tarnower, the diet-book author and her longtime lover, released a letter to the press yesterday through her lawyer, Michael Kennedy, in lieu of holding a news conference.
"My office has gotten literally hundreds of requests for interviews and it would have been virtually impossible to comply with all of them," Mr.
Kennedy said yesterday.
"So she decided to issue a statement she hoped would answer some of the questions she thought people had in mind."


Lewis Camp Says Bring On $10 Million Offer
Both sides talked last night, but two hours of negotiations designed to bring Riddick Bowe and Lennox Lewis together for a heavyweight title fight didn't appear to produce much more than a negative response from Rock Newman, Bowe's manager.
Depending on who was doing the late-night analysis, the discussions either went well or dissolved miserably.


Islanders Fumble A Chance To Gain 3d
Although they built a 3-0 lead in the first period tonight, the Islanders didn't really show their biggest burst of energy until the second period.
It came from Mark Fitzpatrick, their goalie, after Montreal scored the first of five unanswered goals in a 5-3 Canadiens victory at Nassau Coliseum.
Moments after Paul Dipietro knocked a loose rebound into the net, Fitzpatrick stormed around Mark Faucette, the referee.
He slammed his stick.
He jumped up and down on his big goalie skates.
He shouted.
He inisted that Gilbert Dionne had bumped into him and should have been penalized.


PAKISTANI SOUGHT IN C.I.A. SHOOTINGS
The Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Fairfax County police said today that they had begun a worldwide search for a Pakistani immigrant whom they identified as the prime suspect in a shooting rampage outside the headquarters last month of the Central Intelligence Agency.
The assailant killed two people and wounded three others on Jan. 25 as C.I.A. employees waited in their cars to turn into the agency's headquarters during the morning rush hour.
In announcing the search for the immigrant, Mir Amail Kansi, 28, the authorities said they had no idea what his motive could have been.


Blackstone Leads Group Bid For Canada Grocery Chain
In what would be one of the largest leveraged buyouts so far this decade, a unit of the Blackstone Group, an American investment bank, said yesterday that it and a Montreal-based group were seeking to acquire Univa, the second-largest supermarket chain in Canada, for about $1.25 billion in cash and debt.
Blackstone Capital Partners L.P. and Unigesco Inc., the Montreal group, are the principals in the transaction.
Blackstone Capital is a New York-based investment fund.
Unigesco is Univa's largest shareholder, with a 26 percent stake.


Jays' Wells Takes a Cut
Toronto pitcher DAVID WELLS had an unusual experience yesterday.
He took a pay cut, agreeing to a $2.05 million salary, $13,000 less than his 1992 salary of $2,063,000.
It could have been worse; the Blue Jays had put in $1.8 million for arbitration.
Wells, who last season had a 7-9 record and a 5.40 earned run average, had asked for $2.3 million.
JOHN OLERUD, another member of the World Series champions, raised his salary from $387,500 to $1,487,500, or $12,500 below the midpoint of the arbitration figures.


On Kennedy Biography
To the Editor:
Nigel Hamilton's tale of woe and persecution in "A Plea to the Kennedys" (Op-Ed, Jan. 22) contains exaggerations and distortions, including serious misstatements about my own views.
Mr.
Hamilton writes that in 1990 I "extolled" lectures he had given on John F. Kennedy's early years.
There was much in those lectures to which I objected.


New York Pension Fund Targets A.&amp; P. Management
New York State's Comptroller announced today that the state's $56 billion pension plan would begin a campaign of aggressive shareholder action against companies deemed to be poor performers in the stock market, starting with the Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company.
The Comptroller, Edward V. Regan, said the pension fund would probably move against five to 15 companies by the end of the year.
He said the fund would oppose the re-election of corporate directors and seek to force companies to include critiques by major long-term shareholders, like pension funds, in their annual proxy statements.


Acme Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Mercury Air Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Aiding Neediest to Cope When Times Get Tough
Just over a year ago, Althea S. was forced to quit her her job as a sales coordinator when her company moved.
"I was sad and depressed leaving a job I really liked, and especially at that time of year," she said recently.
"It was really hard though I was supplemented by a job for the Christmas season."


Spacelabs Medical Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Israel Raises Cry of Islamic Radicalism
To the Editor:
I wonder why Ehud Yaari in "A Safe Haven for Hamas in America" (Op-Ed, Jan. 27), despite obvious access to abundant Israeli intelligence data, fails to mention the well-known fact that Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin himself helped finance and encourage the Muslim Brotherhood in the occupied territories in the 1970's as a counterweight to the Palestine Liberation Organization.


The Job Is What You Make It


Adia Services (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Maxim Integrated Prod.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Service Corp. International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Time, at Last, to Recognize Angola
A U.S.-brokered agreement two years ago appeared to promise Angola the peace it deserves after decades of bloody bush war.
Yet Washington has continued to shun diplomatic ties with the formerly Marxist regime in Luanda.
It's time to end the anomaly.
Under the agreement, right-wing rebels led by Jonas Savimbi pledged to surrender their arms if the leftist Government submitted to free elections.
Mr.
Savimbi boasted that he could easily beat President Jose Eduardo dos Santos.
But when ballots were counted last September in what foreign observers found to be a fair election, Mr. dos Santos led with 49.6 percent, and his ruling party with 58 percent in parliamentary voting.


Andros Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 24


No Headline
"What they wanted was a very, very plain stool. Go figure. I think they're so wrapped up in the Presidential image." -- DIANE FIOLEK-MANDEL, a television designer, on White House preferences for a Clinton town meeting.  [ A20:5. ]


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.87
2.94
3.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.92
2.94
3.73
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.09
3.81
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.97
5.93
6.78
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.20
7.19
7.78
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.30
8.30
8.88
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.20
6.21
6.75
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Meca Software Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Daly Must Deal With Detroit
For Coach Chuck Daly of the Nets, this will be a difficult week emotionally.
Tonight, his team will be host to the Detroit Pistons at Byrne Meadowlands Arena in the first regular-season meeting between the team Daly coaches now and the one he coached for nine splendid seasons from 1983 to 1992.
On Friday night, the Nets will visit the Pistons, playing before the fans who embraced Daly as Detroit won N.B.A. titles in 1989 and 1990.


DH Technology (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Recalling Path of Life and One of Loss
FOUR weeks after Jose Rosa was shot to death on Newkirk Avenue, the Brooklyn street is now decorated in his memory.
There is a big red heart painted on the asphalt over the 25-year-old dead man's nickname, "Trouble." Smaller letters spell out the names of his admirers and there are the initials, UNTB, for "Untouchables," a gang, and RIP, for "Rest in Peace."
Among those mourning is Jean Chapoteau, who is 23 years old and knew Mr.
Rosa since childhood.
Mr.
Chapoteau was never a gang member.
In fact he is an architect who graduated from Pratt in August.
But he was a friend who painted his own memorial to Mr.
Rosa on a warehouse wall, the flag of Puerto Rico and a rose.


An Old-Time Valentine's Message: Short, Sweet and Crunchy
ONCE upon a Valentine's Day, in the fourth grade of St.
Rose of Lima Elementary School in York, Pa., 9-year-old Edward opened his clenched, sweaty fist and shyly presented his classmate Patricia with a small, pale-yellow heart-shaped candy imprinted with the plea, Be Mine.
Much to Edward's trembling surprise, Patricia reached into her pencil box, removed a similarly shaped candy, this one pale green, and thrust it at the eager lad.
Its message: Goodbye.
Patricia then flashed her braces, popped Edward's offering into her mouth, chomped it to bits and with a saucy toss of her pigtails went on her way, leaving her admirer with a broken heart of his own.


Doctors Get Poor Marks in Nutrition
A nationwide survey has found that even doctors who were taught the fundamentals of nutrition in medical school and who hold a favorable attitude toward the subject are unlikely to use basic nutrition in their encounters with patients.
The survey, published in this month's issue of The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, examined the attitudes and practices of 3,416 doctors who responded to a mailed questionnaire.


States Cutting or Freezing Their Cash Welfare Benefits
Faced with severe budget deficits, state governments have made sharp cuts in cash welfare programs in the last two years, weakening society's safety net and in some cases even promoting homelessness, according to a report made public today.
The report, by two private research groups, said the cuts in some states would "hit the poor more sharply" than the Federal reductions of the early 1980's.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Lewis Leads Celtics  Reggie Lewis scored 20 points and the Boston Celtics outrebounded Milwaukee by 48-26 en route to a 104-92 victory over the Bucks last night at Hartford.
Lewis hit four free throws in the final 1 minute 45 seconds and Xavier McDaniel, who had 18 points, added six free throws during that span. (AP)
Cavaliers 107, Hornets 103: Brad Daugherty had 28 points and 17 rebounds as Cleveland won its fifth consecutive game, beating the Hornets at Charlotte.
With the Hornets trailing by 105-102, Larry Johnson was fouled with 1.1 seconds left.
After making the first, he intentionally missed the second, but the Cavaliers gained possession.
Larry Nance's foul shot with 0.8 seconds left made it 106-103. (AP)
Spurs 112, Clippers 97: David Robinson had 25 points and 13 rebounds and Dale Ellis scored 20 points as San Antonio beat Los Angeles for its 15th victory in 16 games.
Sean Elliott added 18 points for the Spurs, who claimed their 12th consecutive homecourt victory. (AP)
Heat 106, Pistons 105: John Salley scored 23 points and came up with the key defensive play, helping Miami beat his former team, Detroit.
The victory was the Heat's first at the Palace in Auburn Hills, Mich.
N.H.L.
Lightning Stops Leafs  Brian Bradley, fresh off his All-Star appearance in Montreal, scored his 34th goal of the season, lifting the Tampa Bay Lightning over the Toronto Maple Leafs, 3-1, at Tampa, Fla.
Bradley tried to redirect Bob Beers's slap shot, then lifted the rebound into the top of the net for the game winner at 7:13 of the third period. (AP)
Canucks 5, Nordiques 1: Pavel Bure scored his 45th and 46th goals to break a club record as Vancouver beat the Nordiques at Quebec.
Bure, who had gone five games without a goal, scored late in the second period before adding his 46th of the season into an empty net in the closing minutes.
The goal broke a team season mark of 45 set by Tony Tanti in 1983-84. (AP)
Capitals 3, North Stars 2: Dale Hunter got a little help from Minnesota goalie Jon Casey to score his second goal of the game 6:32 into the third period for Washington at Bloomington, Minn.
The victory ended Washington's 0-3-2 streak without a victory.(AP) TRACK AND FIELD Kiptanui Just Off the Mark  Moses Kiptanui missed his world-indoor record in the 3,000 meters by only 1.15 seconds yesterday in Stockholm, clocking 7 minutes 38.46 seconds at the DN Games.
The Kenyan, whose time was the second fastest in history indoors, ran alone for most of the way.
Kiptanui set the indoor mark of 7:37.31 last winter. (AP) SKIING Norwegian Takes Slalom  Kjetil Andre Aamodt of Norway, forced to wait out a wind blast, blew away the field yesterday to win the men's giant slalom in the world Alpine championships at Shizukuishi, Japan.
The 21-year-old Aamodt became the first double medalist of the championships by completing two runs in 2 minutes 15.36 seconds.
Aamodt, the combined silver medalist, had to wait a day for gold, however, when the second run was canceled because of high wind.
The delay didn't matter a bit as Aamodt beat runner-up Rainer Salzgeber of Austria by 87-hundredths of a second. (AP)


Microwave Cooking
FROM time to time, I have read menus and chefs' recipes for Valentine's Day dinner.
I always thought that if I made the dishes I would be exhausted, sweaty, stuffed and in no condition for romance.
Here instead is a gala and mildly expensive, but easily prepared, dinner for two that should enhance romance.
Fortunately, most of it can be coolly and quickly made ahead of time in the microwave oven.
Before you begin, put a bottle of champagne in the refrigerator; serve it before, during and after the meal.
Set the table the day before; buy some candy and choose flowers for a small (remember, just for two) bouquet for the table.


MacMillan Bloedel (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Delrina Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Humphrey Treatment
Miami Dolphins running back BOBBY HUMPHREY said yesterday he would enter a sports rehabilitation center in Birmingham, Ala., for evaluation of a gunshot wound to his right thigh.
Humphrey was injured in a shooting near Alabaster, Ala., Monday morning.
Doctors at Shelby Medical Center removed a .38-caliber bullet from his upper right thigh.


Sears Ends Year With Huge Loss
Swallowing $5.48 billion worth of restructuring charges, accounting changes and extraordinary insurance claims, Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company yesterday reported a $1.8 billion loss for the fourth quarter and a $3.9 billion loss for the year.
Sears had forewarned Wall Street that its 1992 financial statements would be awash in red ink, so few were surprised at the results.
Sears stock fell only 12.5 cents a share on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, closing at $49.375.
Factors Cited in Losses
Among the factors causing the losses was a $1.65 billion loss at the Allstate Insurance unit, which was battered by Hurricane Andrew and other natural disasters; a $1.72 billion charge against earnings at the the merchandising group, which announced plans last month to close its catalogue operations, shutter 113 stores and eliminate 50,000 jobs, and a $1.87 billion noncash charge to adopt new accounting methods for the cost of employee retirement and other benefits.


Surgery for Mets' Vitko
Mets right-hander JOE VITKO had surgery yesterday to remove calcium deposits from his right elbow, and the team said he would be sidelined for about three months.


Fernandez Faces Uphill Fight In Bid to Remain Chancellor
With the fate of Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez hanging in the balance yesterday, his supporters and opponents waged a last-minute campaign through public demonstrations and private persuasion to influence votes on the New York City Board of Education.
Mayor David N. Dinkins declared at a news conference at City Hall that Mr.
Fernandez was one of the "best educators in the country" but then acknowledged that in the face of mounting opposition to the Chancellor, the administration was now asking only for a one-year extension of Mr.
Fernandez's contract.


Councilman Dear Settles Suit Over Misuse of Charitable Funds
New York City Councilman Noach Dear has agreed to repay more than $37,000 to a private foundation that paid for expenses like telephones in his home and trips abroad by his children, under a civil settlement announced yesterday by Robert Abrams, the New York Attorney General.
Richard Barr, a spokesman for Mr.
Abrams, said yesterday that Mr.
Dear, a conservative Brooklyn Democrat elected in 1982, broke laws governing charities when he used money from a foundation he helped create to pay for expenses ranging from calls from his car phone to a plane ticket for his wife.
Mr.
Dear set up the foundation to assist Jews in the Soviet Union.
No Criminal Charges
In a news conference yesterday, Mr.
Dear played down the civil settlement, emphasizing that the investigation had not resulted in criminal charges.
"They found that I did nothing criminally wrong," he said, adding that the settlement meant the issue of possible misconduct was "over with."


CHRONICLE
MARVIN MITCHELSON, the flamboyant divorce lawyer who originated the concept of "palimony," was convicted of four felony counts of Federal tax evasion yesterday in Los Angeles.
He was ordered into custody by Judge William Keller of Federal District Court in Los Angeles immediately after the verdict.
Shortly after being led away by marshals, The Associated Press reported, he complained of chest pains and was taken to White Memorial Medical Center .
Mr.
Mitchelson, lawyer for such personalities as Joan Collins, Bianca Jagger and Roxanne Pulitzer, faces up to 12 years in prison and a fine of $1 million.
A man who answered the phone at the office of his lawyer, John Mitchell of San Diego, said yesterday there would be no comment on the case.


D.R. Horton Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Harold Taylor, Novel Educator And College President, Dies at 78
Harold Taylor, an innovative educator who became a college president at 30 and said, "What is wrong with a great deal of higher education in America is that it is simply boring," died yesterday at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 78.
His family attributed his death to natural causes.
He lived in Manhattan and Holderness, N.H.


NBC Settles Truck Crash Lawsuit, Saying Test Was 'Inappropriate'
In an extraordinary public confession, NBC acknowledged last night that it had erred in broadcasting a report that purported to show a General Motors truck bursting into flame as a result of a collision.
On Monday, the General Motors Corporation sued the network over the report, which was broadcast in November on "Dateline NBC," saying the report was defamatory because "sparking devices" were used.


Yeltsin Backs Away From a Vote on Powers
Bowing to growing pressure from all but the dwindling minority of democratic reformers, President Boris N. Yeltsin announced today that he was prepared to scrap a constitutional referendum if other means could be found to resolve the paralyzing power struggles with Parliament.
The referendum had been scheduled for April 11 to decide the basic principles of a new constitution.
It was originally announced last December as the key element in a compromise between Mr.
Yeltsin and Speaker of the Parliament, Ruslan Khasbulatov, after their struggles at the Congress of People's Deputies last December threatened to become a political war.


United Television Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reinventing Harvard: A New President Tries To Unite Its Schools
In 18 months as president of Harvard University, Neil L. Rudenstine has moved swiftly to reshape the campus's famously disparate schools into a more unified university, and he has pushed the faculty to focus on five major challenges confronting the nation.
"He is the first president at Harvard that I know who has tried to manage the institution," said Robert Keohane, a professor of government.


Nets Fail to Land an All-Star Position
Ignored, dissed and dismissed.
That's how some members of the Nets felt today after the National Basketball Association All-Star teams were announced and no Nets players were named.
The reserves were announced for both the Eastern and Western Conference teams that will compete in the 43d annual game to be played on Feb. 21 at the Delta Center in Salt Lake City.
Patrick Ewing was picked from the Knicks.
But none made it from the Nets, and that left some of them talking about politics and a lack of respect.


This Spaniel Is a Breed Apart for 3d Year in Row
He bears not the slightest resemblance to Santa Claus, but the judges say he just might be the jolliest canine to ever commandeer a dog show.
Not so coincidentally, he's also built a reputation as the most impeccable spaniel in the business, hence his domination yesterday at the Westminster Kennel Club show, where he took best-of-breed accolades for the third straight year, put up a successful defense of his sporting group title and then crafted the ultimate dog show swan song by going best in show on the very cusp of his retirement.
When Ch.
Salilyn's Condor, the grinning 5-year-old English springer spaniel who defeated more dogs (115,651) on the 1992 circuit than any other, romps through the show ring, he has the same effect as a mood elevator.


Infinity Broadcasting (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Central Vermont Public Service reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ex-Employee Accuses Prospective Buyer of The Post of Bias
The prospective buyer of The New York Post was accused yesterday by a former Post employee of being prejudiced against blacks and homosexuals.
The accusation prompted an angry denial from the buyer, Steven Hoffenberg, who called the allegations "outrageous, disgusting lies."
The accusations against Mr.
Hoffenberg came from Mike McAlary, a former Post columnist now working for The Daily News, as he testified in State Supreme Court in Manhattan in a suit brought by the Post, which is seeking a court order to bar the columnist and other former Post employees from working for The News.


Crown Cork &amp; Seal reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Success Reported in Luring Teachers Through Ads
In another sign of revived interest in teaching, a nationwide recruiting organization has reported that 720,000 people have called its toll-free number in four years and that a substantial number of them have become teachers.
Many of those who wanted to teach were from groups in short supply in American classrooms -- members of minorities, men and people with postgraduate degrees.


Topping Leaving Times Co. To Administer the Pulitzers
Seymour Topping, the director of editorial development for The New York Times Company and a former managing editor of The New York Times, has been named the administrator of the Pulitzer Prizes.
The appointment was announced yesterday by Michael I. Sovern, the president of Columbia University, which awards the annual prizes in journalism, drama, letters and music.
The administrator for the 19-member Pulitzer Prize Board supervises the selection of jurors and the judging of entries.


Smith, Rangers' Coach, Playing 'I've Got a Secret'
The main reason the Rangers changed coaches last month, putting Ron Smith in place of Roger Neilson, was to employ a system suitable to the strengths of the players.
So far, not so good.
"We're trying to keep it a secret," Smith said of the new system, during a break this afternoon at the Rangers' training center.


New Owners For Herman's Sports Chain
Herman's World of Sporting Goods, the country's largest sporting goods retail chain, will return to domestic hands.
The British owner of the 259-store chain, Isosceles P.L.C. of London, announced yesterday that it had agreed to sell Herman's to a group of American investors.


Elan Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Questar Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


AT LUNCH WITH -- Carol Vaness; It's Not Over Till the Slim Lady Sings
Carol Vaness, diva, sat at her neighborhood hamburger place, unapologetically eating a cheeseburger and enjoying her day off from the gym.
Gone was the woman who, four months and 43 pounds earlier, had delivered a series of self-deprecating fat-lady jokes ("Do I look tubercular to you?") as she prepared for a highlight of her career: the opening-night performance of the Metropolitan Opera's season.
In her place was someone who talked about finding balance between professional acclaim and personal happiness, who could not contain her giddiness about walking into the Gap and actually buying a pair of jeans marked "slim."


Identity Crisis for London's Theater District
Harold Pinter's drama "No Man's Land," which opened on Feb. 8 in the West End, is the latest longshot entry in the London theatrical sweepstakes that, over the last year, have seen more losers than winners.
More than a dozen ambitious plays and musicals have swept onto the West End stage -- some, like the Pinter play, coming off successful runs in London's small fringe theaters -- only to disappear without a trace, starved by half-full houses in spite of strong and often enthusiastic critical reviews.


For Julia Child, an Intimate Dinner for 500
Such a simple idea.
Have a bunch of friends get together and say thank you to Julia Child.
A love-in with nine multi-starred chefs from France and another 60-or-so Americans who cook French food.
A celebration of the woman who 30 years ago this month burst onto the television screen and into millions of kitchens, armed with a stout rolling pin and a distinctive high-pitched voice that has been imitated by everyone from Jean Stapleton to "Saturday Night Live." Before Mrs.
Child was finished she had taught several generations of Americans the difference between brioche and croissants.
The dinner for 500 on Sunday night at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Marina del Rey, near Los Angeles, was the 30th public celebration of Mrs.
Child's 80th birthday.
The others parties were held to raise money for the American Institute of Wine and Food, which Mrs.
Child founded.


Roosevelt Raceway Fraud Case Is Sent Back to Federal Court
After almost six years of controversy, a Federal court will hear claims that the owners of Roosevelt Raceway engaged in fraud when they obtained $54 million in tax-free development bonds to buy the property.
The owners had promised to continue operating the track, but within four years, they shut it down and put the property on the market for development.


Game Maker With Unsinkable Spirit
The mood was upbeat the other day at the opening of the American International Toy Fair in New York.
Strange beings posed for pictures outside the Toy Center on Fifth Avenue.
Movie stars promoted a film and related toy products.
And the chairman of the Toy Manufacturers of America, Harry J. Pearce, reported that 1992 sales had greatly exceeded expectations, rising more than 19 percent, to $15.3 billion.
While Hasbro, Mattel, Tyco and Fisher-Price played the major roles in that growth, Karen J. Fried had a hand in it as well.
Though her sales were modest, about $100,000, her tenacity strikes the most basic chord in American enterprise: With a good idea, boundless energy and a little luck, she is trying to turn a dream into a lucrative reality.
Kernel of an Idea
Her adventure began two years ago at a dinner party in Miami.
Ms.
Fried, who is 30, and some friends were playing an oral word game in which they took turns giving clues for a two-word, rhyming phrase: Wet winner?
Damp champ.
Land grabber?
Acre taker.
Back home in New York, she introduced the game to her friends, who enjoyed it as much as she had.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Boston University and its president, John R. Silber, referred incorrectly in some copies to a Nobel Prize poet on the faculty.
He is Derek Walcott.


Robert Half International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fleming Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


U.N. CHIEF BACKING VANCE-OWEN PLAN
The United Nations Secretary General threw his support today behind a disputed peace proposal for Bosnia and Herzegovina and parted ways with the United States by blaming the Muslim delegation for the lack of progress in negotiations.
In a report to the Security Council, Secretary General Boutros Boutros- Ghali suggested some revisions to grant more land to Muslims and guarantee that Serbs would not turn their superior military might against them if they signed the accord.


Odetics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In Europe's Upheaval, Doors Close to Foreigners
Poverty and civil war, from Yugoslavia to Somalia to Sri Lanka, have led hundreds of thousands of people to flee to Western Europe.
In the last 10 years, the number of migrants seeking asylum in Western Europe has risen tenfold.
But the prosperous countries, caught in a global recession, are increasingly unwilling to accept ever larger numbers of migrants.
They are tightening immigration procedures and defining with greater rigor the concept of "asylum," traditionally a safe haven abroad from political or social persecution at home.


Next to Sell Hardware Side And Focus on Its Software
After months of rumor and speculation, Next Inc. said today that it would leave the computer hardware business and concentrate on its Nextstep operating system software.
Next is selling its hardware business to Canon Inc., the Japanese electronics company, for an undisclosed amount, and plans to complete the transition by May 25.
Canon had previously invested $120 million in equity in Next and another $55 million in debt.
Next has 530 employees, of whom 230 will be laid off in the transition; 200 will remain with the software company, and 100 will go to Canon.


Excerpts From Statement
Following are excerpts from a statement read last night by Jane Pauley and Stone Phillips, anchors of "Dateline NBC," apologizing for a report on a demonstration crash of a General Motors pickup truck: JANE PAULEY First and most importantly, we want to emphasize that what we characterized in the November "Dateline" segment as an unscientific demonstration was inappropriate and does not support the position that G.M.'s CK trucks are defective.
Specifically, NBC's contractor did put incendiary devices under the trucks to insure that there would be a fire if gasoline were released from the truck's gas tank.
NBC personnel knew this before we heard the program but the public was not informed because consultants at the scene told us the devices did not start the fire.
We agree with G.M. that we should have told our viewers about these devices.
We acknowledge the placing of the incendiary devices under the truck was a bad idea from start to finish.
. . .


A Big-City Chief in a Small Town; Entering a Tranquil World After a Career of Excitement
The images of Paul Ragonese's distinguished, 17-year career as a New York City police officer flicker like the trailer for a Mel Gibson action movie.
There he is seven years ago, crawling under a toppled, 35-ton crane in mid-Manhattan to comfort a woman pinned beneath it for hours, her legs crushed.
There he is again, this time in a flooded elevator shaft on Madison Avenue, fashioning a garden hose into a snorkel and then wading with it over to a trapped maintenance worker so that he can breathe until further help arrives.
The next scene is at an abortion clinic, where he uses the scissors on his Swiss Army knife to tinker with a bomb, wired to 15 sticks of dynamite, which he disarms with only 11 seconds to spare.


Broadcaster Is Honored
CHUCK THOMPSON, the longtime broadcaster for the Baltimore Orioles, has been named the 1993 recipient of the Hall of Fame's Ford C. Frick Award for broadcasting.
Thompson, who does Oriole games on radio, will be presented with the award on Aug. 1 during the hall's induction ceremonies at Cooperstown, N.Y. (AP)


60-Minute Gourmet
THE technique of cooking meat and seafood en papillote, or in parchment paper, is centuries old in French cuisine.
This practice not only helps food retain moisture, but it also concentrates flavors in somewhat the way a pressure cooker does.
Not least of all, cooking in paper packets makes neat individual portions and leaves no mess in the oven.
When I was a young cook in Paris, we prepared all kinds of dishes, particularly seafood, in hand-cut rounds of parchment paper.
The thick, fibrous paper rarely got soggy, even when cooking juices accumulated inside.
Most cooks today use aluminum foil, for it is easier to mold and even more durable.


Personal Health
MORE than two decades ago, the alarming discovery of a rare vaginal cancer in eight young women first alerted doctors to the dangers of prescribing the synthetic hormone diethylstilbestrol (DES) in pregnancy.
The cancers, which occurred in girls who had been exposed to DES before birth, provided the first known example in people of the induction of cancer by a substance that crossed the placenta.
Now researchers say that vaginal cancer, though very serious and possibly life-threatening, could be the least of the problems linked to prenatal exposure to DES, an estrogen-like drug that was given to three million to six million pregnant women in the hope of preventing miscarriage.


Experts Welcome Clinton's Move on Drug Policy Office
In sharply reducing the staffing of the Office of National Drug Control Policy yesterday and declaring that the directorship of the office was being elevated to Cabinet level, President Clinton won the praise of Congressional drug specialists and other experts in the field.
"This is just what the doctor ordered," said Representative Charles E. Schumer, the Brooklyn Democrat who heads the House subcommittee on crime and criminal justice, which oversees operations of the Drug Enforcement Administration.


Karnishovas Scores 32 to Power Pirates
For nearly four weeks, the Seton Hall Pirates had searched in vain for someone to lead them out of an ever-deepening valley of despair.
Beginning with a loss to Pittsburgh on Jan. 16 and ending with a heartbreaking loss at the buzzer to Boston College last Saturday, the Pirates had dropped five of their last seven games.


Hahn Automotive reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CLINTON TRIMMING LOWER-LEVEL AIDES
President Clinton, saying he wanted a "leaner but more effective" White House, announced today that he was keeping a campaign promise to trim his staff by 25 percent.
His cuts will save $10 million, a 5 percent reduction in White House costs, and fall most heavily on the staff's lowest paid employees, who do not hold political posts.
The cut of 350 jobs allowed Mr.
Clinton to achieve the 25 percent rate because he exempted hundreds of military communications personnel at to the White House, as well as the Trade Representative's Office and the Office of Management and Budget.
Both offices are part of the executive office of the President.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
A telephone company acquired a cable television system for the first time, starting a race by the two industries to dominate home communication services.
Southwestern Bell will pay $650 million to Hauser Communications for two systems.  [ Page A1. ]
NBC settled a defamation lawsuit brought by General Motors.
The network apologized on the air for an improper "demonstration" of how G.M. pickup trucks caught fire in crashes.  [ A1. ]


Orbit International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tanknology Environmental Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kroger Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


INSIDE
U.N. Chief Backs Bosnia Plan
The United Nations Secretary General backed a peace proposal for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and differed with President Clinton.
Page A7.
Gay Russians and Fears
After decades of persecution, homosexuals in Russia are emerging into the open, even though they say they continue to feel threatened.
Page A3.
On Patrol in Woodstock
Why is a decorated big-city police officer now chief in a small town that chafes at authority?
Page B1.


Dow Drops 22.96 Points to Close at 3,414.58
Stock prices fell broadly in active trading yesterday, as the market continued its consolidation after last week's sharp gains.
Blue-chip issues recovered some early losses in late trading, but the Dow Jones industrial average closed down 22.96 points, to 3,414.58.
At its low point of the day, the Dow was off 29.71 points.


Islander Sale Seems Close
Negotiations for the sale of the Islanders have accelerated over the last week.
An agreement for John Pickett to sell the team to Charles Dolan could be imminent.
"That is my understanding," said Robert Rosenthal, one of two co-chairmen of the team.
Pickett and Dolan, who controls SportsChannel, the cable television station that buys rights to Islanders games, signed a letter of intent last summer, but negotiations lagged until recently.
Rosenthal is one of four executives who began managing the team this season after loaning the franchise an unspecified sum of money.
They have an option to buy up to 50 percent under a previous, separate deal with Pickett.


News Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


United Seeks Relief from F.A.A. Move
United Airlines asked the Federal Aviation Administration yesterday not to reallocate 52 of its takeoff and landing slots at O'Hare International Airport in Chicago to foreign airlines.
In its filing with the F.A.A., Stephen M. Wolf, chairman and chief executive of United and its parent, the UAL Corporation, said that shifting United's slots to foreign carriers would violate the Federal Aviation Act "by discriminating against domestic service and U.S. communities and consumers in favor of international service."


SLM International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Good News Is Bad for Bond Prices
The Treasury market got a light jolt of good economic news yesterday afternoon that was enough to push prices of notes and bonds down a little after the first of the Treasury's three quarterly auctions this week went well.
But the Treasury market has retained most of the big gains of the January rally despite the fact that President Clinton has yet to present a clearly detailed deficit reduction plan and now appears to be dropping some of the toughest ideas he has considered.


Palestinian Distortions
To the Editor:
Your review of "Journey to the Occupied Lands" on public television's "Frontline" series states that the 90-minute documentary, which gives a Palestinian-eye view of life under military occupation, "invites rebuttal." We heed your words.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BRITISH AIRPORT AUTHORITIES P.L.C., London, said it had agreed to buy Federal Express Corp.'s cargo handling facilities at Heathrow Airport for $7.2 million.
GTE CORP., Stamford, Conn., said its government systems unit had received a $52.4 million contract to develop a command and control system for the Army.


Tultex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


For Rostenkowski, Maybe Glory, Maybe Disgrace
In nearly 40 years in politics, Dan Rostenkowski has usually known where he is going, but now he cannot be sure what path he is on and where it leads in the history of Congress.
The road he hopes he is on, toward presiding over passage of a national health-care program, "would really be a tremendous trophy to hang on the wall of a so-called machine, city politician," he said.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Todd Frohwirth, pitcher, on a one-year contract.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
BATTLE RAGES OVER FERNANDEZ  With the fate of Schools Chancellor Fernandez hanging in the balance, his supporters and opponents waged a last-minute campaign through public demonstrations and private persuasion to influence votes on the Board of Education.
A1.
DINKINS CRITICIZES STEIN ON MAILING
Mayor Dinkins criticized City Council President Stein after Mr.
Stein acknowledged that his campaign organization had mailed an anonymous pamphlet to gay-rights advocates attacking the Mayor's record.
Mr.
Dinkins asserted that when the two men ran against each other for Manhattan Borough President in 1981, Mr.
Stein also sent out campaign literature without his name attached to it.
Mr.
Stein defended his actions in both cases.
B3.
TRUMP TOWER, TIFFANY'S AND BUGS BUNNY
The long-vacant fourth corner of New York's retail epicenter -- Fifth Avenue and 57th Street -- has been leased to an incongruous newcomer: the Warner Bros.
Studio Store, which will brim with Tweety Bird sequined jackets, Daffy Duck golf balls and other products.
B3.
POST SUITOR'S FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENT
If S.E.C. allegations are true, Towers Financial, whose chairman wants to take over The New York Post, may resemble a classic Ponzi scheme, in which initial investors are paid with the proceeds from subsequent investors.
Business Day, page D8.
Prospective Post owner accused by former employee of being prejudiced.
B4.
Letterman producers say they will stay in New York if some questions can be resolved.
C15.
REGION  SURVIVAL IN CONNECTICUT  Connecticut is home to an estimated 1,800 to 3,100 military contractors and subcontractors, and all are struggling to figure out how to survive the end of the cold war.
Many will shrink; some will disappear, unable to find a new niche.
Dozens have already perished.
Every company has its own strategy for survival.
B6.
HARSH WORDS IN GLEN RIDGE CASE
A defense lawyer sharply criticized the mother of the mildly retarded woman at the center of the Glen Ridge sex assault trial, contending that she was partly to blame for the sexual encounter that led to the trial of four former high school football players.
B8.
FLORIO'S AGENDA, BUDGET AND OTHERWISE
In a year in which both he and all 120 members of the State Legislature face re-election, Governor Florio used much of his annual budget address to trumpet the successes of his first term in office and to set the platform on which he is expected to seek a second term.
B8.
COURT TO HEAR ROOSEVELT RACEWAY CASE
After almost six years of controversy, a Federal court will hear claims that the owners of Roosevelt Raceway engaged in fraud when they obtained tax-free bonds to buy the property.
B8.
DEATH SENTENCE UPHELD IN NEW JERSEY
For only the third time in 34 opinions, the New Jersey Supreme Court has upheld a death sentence under the state's death penalty statute.
B8.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman B3
Neediest Cases B4
Chronicle B9


For the Depressed, It Isn't All in the Mind
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 28 book review of "Understanding Depression" by Donald F. Klein and Paul H. Wender does not serve the interests of the 30 million depressives and manic-depressives in this country whose lives may depend on the wisdom and knowledge of devoted physicians like its authors.


Trimas Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Industrial Funding (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Wine Talk
SEBASTIANI COUNTRY wines are a popular by-the-glass wine in some moderately priced restaurants, usually for $4.50 or $5 a four-ounce glass.
Retail price of the wine is about $9 a 52-ounce magnum.
That works out to 13 glasses, or $58.50 a bottle.
And the restaurants don't pay $9.
Beaujolais retails for about $6 a bottle.
Few restaurants in New York sell it for less than $18.
Some charge more.
And again, the restaurants' cost is well below $6.


The Mother of All Debates; The Father's Hour
Women are right to feel frustrated and astounded that Zoe Baird and Kimba Wood, President Clinton's selections for Attorney General, should withdraw over matters relating to child care.
They are justifiably angry with talk shows, the President and the Senate, but there is a deeper current at issue here: the tradition of "mother care" for children.
The nominations ran into difficulty because women still accept principal responsibility for child care.
How children are cared for seems natural to ask of a woman and not a man.
The solution is to establish an understanding that care is the responsibility of a father and mother -- as it was in early America.


Review/Television; A Friendly Mayberry Get-Together
Now that ABC is faring comfortably with "Matlock," a series canceled by NBC, what can CBS possibly do to compete in the Andy Griffith sweepstakes?
Well, how about going back to Mayberry, N.C., and pushing the nostalgia button for an hourlong special called "The Andy Griffith Show Reunion"?
As it happens, it's on CBS at 8 tonight.
The character of Sheriff Andy Taylor was introduced on Danny Thomas's "Make Room for Daddy" series.
The date was Feb. 15, 1960.
Mr.
Griffith's portrayal of the sweet-natured, drawl-dripping sheriff proved so ingratiating that CBS got "The Andy Griffith Show" ready for its premiere that October.
It ran for eight years, and there are those who swear it has been available in reruns, on one channel or another, ever since.


Dutch Parliament Approves Law Permitting Euthanasia
Herbert Cohen, who has a family practice, holds that doctors should be allowed to end the lives of their patients in certain cases.
For more than 10 years in the village of Capelle, he said, he has brought on the end for some people and helped others kill themselves to relieve their suffering.
Dr.
Karel Gunning, a family doctor in nearby Rotterdam, calls this murder.
He did so again today after the Dutch Parliament approved by a 91 to 45 vote a law that sanctioned euthanasia under strict conditions, after two decades of tormented national debate.


Review/Theater; For a Dysfunctional Family, the Pizza Man Cometh
In Tom Donaghy's "Down the Shore," everything is dysfunctional: marriages, schools, the church, even the aluminum siding business.
As a result, individuals are forced to take drastic measures: a father abandons his family to join the homeless on the street.
Mr.
Donaghy's play is a desperation comedy about a state of everyday madness.
It takes awhile to become acclimated to the author's hip, disjointed dialogue, a cross between David Mamet and "Wayne's World." But the one-act play (at the Atlantic Theater Company) soon grooves into its own reflexive rhythm.
The play is ingrained in the argot of a teen-age subculture, as represented by an acid-tongued urchin (Kathryn Erbe).
She has perfected her survival tactics.
As wary as a cat, she is careful about not getting too close to anyone, including her boyfriend (Todd Weeks), who delivers pizza.
He passes for normal in this depressed Philadelphia suburb, though anywhere else he might be considered an outsider.


Entergy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Thriving Redmen Make It Look Easy
The sensation was even stranger than the sight of St.
John's alone in first place more than halfway through the Big East basketball season.
A 73-64 victory over Providence at the Civic Center tonight was so uncharacteristically comfortable that there was hardly anything to say at halftime.
There was no need to look at videotape to make corrections.
"I'm not going to change anything," said Brian Mahoney, the coach of the Redmen, who was speaking of the night but could also have meant the season.


St. Jude Medical (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Book Notes
Anxiety at Random House
In May, Random House is scheduled to publish "Queer in America: Sex, the Media and the Closets of Power," by Michelangelo Signorile, a gay journalist who is a proponent of "outing," or publicly identifying homosexuals and lesbians, particularly public figures, who have concealed their sexual orientation.


Donald L. Miller, 69, Painter and Illustrator
Donald Lloyd Miller, the artist whose mural dominates the main lobby of the Martin Luther King Jr.
Memorial Library in Washington, died on Sunday at Mountainside Hospital in Montclair, N.J.
He was 69 and had lived in Montclair since he was a child.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Dinkins Criticizes Stein Over Campaign Mailing
Mayor David N. Dinkins criticized City Council President Andrew J. Stein yesterday after Mr.
Stein acknowledged that his campaign organization had produced and mailed an anonymous pamphlet to gay-rights advocates attacking the Mayor's record.
Mr.
Dinkins called the mailing "sad and unfortunate," and asserted that when the two men ran against each other for Manhattan Borough President in 1981, Mr.
Stein also sent out campaign literature without his name attached to it.


Perrigo Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


American Restaurant Partners reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Metro-North Offers Riders Dinners to Go
Weary commuters will soon have something to look forward to after their train ride home besides cold leftovers: meals prepared by a Metro-North concessionaire that will be waiting for them on the platform and can be popped into a microwave oven at home.
Starting on Wednesday at four train stations, the concessionaire Gourmet to Go of Great Neck, L.I., will be selling packaged dishes like chicken marsala, penne primavera and beef goulash from 4:30 to 8 P.M. at a cost of $7 to $12.
The menu will change daily.
Fresh-cut flowers will also be available for those who want to dress up their take-home meals.


Lawyer Faults Retarded Woman's Mother in Abuse Case
A defense lawyer sharply criticized the mother of the mildly retarded woman at the center of the Glen Ridge sex assault trial today, contending that she was partly to blame for the sexual encounter that led to the trial of four former high school football players.
"The one word I got sick of hearing -- she's vulnerable," said Michael Querques in a scornful allusion to the mother's defense of her 21-year-old daughter during her trial testimony.
Then, using the second person pronoun as if he were talking directly to the mother and not the jury, Mr.
Querques added: "What did you do about her vulnerability -- you didn't warn anybody. You share part of the blame."


Modest Decline Continues In Yields Offered by Banks
Yields to be offered at banks on money market accounts and certificates of deposit in the week beginning today suggest a continuing modest decline.
In the New York market, average six-month certificate yields are lower than at 20 major banks across the country, while money market yields are about the same everywhere.
According to the latest survey by The Bank Rate Monitor, yields on money market accounts in the New York area are down an average of a basis point, or one-hundredth of a percentage point, to 2.66 percent.
Analysts note that the slide in money market account yields is now nearly two months old.
Mixed Moves on C.D.'s
The average New York rate for three-month certificates of deposit dropped a basis point, to 2.76 percent, while the average yield on six-month certificates rose a basis point, to 2.96 percent.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the screening of Clinton Administration job candidates to determine if they had hired illegal immigrants or violated household employment tax laws referred incompletely in some copies to the most recent candidate for Attorney General.
She is Judge Kimba M. Wood.
Because of another editing error, the article also referred ambiguously to Judge Wood's tax history.
She did pay such taxes for her domestic help.


Kuwait Raises Oil Production
A Kuwaiti oil official said tonight that his country expected its production to reach 2 million barrels a day this summer for the first time since Iraq invaded on Aug. 2, 1990.
Nader H. Sultan, president of the refining and marketing subsidiary of the Kuwait Petroleum Corporation, also said at a meeting of oil executives here that the Kuwait oil industry must increase its "spare" capacity to higher levels.
Kuwait had been producing 1.7 million barrels a day, Mr.
Sultan said.


Cubic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Women Want Earlier Start
Tired of being dwarfed by the National Collegiate Athletic Association men's basketball tournament, the N.C.A.A.
Women's Basketball Committee is considering starting its season earlier so the women's championship doesn't coincide with the weekend of the men's Final Four.
Speaking at a press conference at a midtown hotel, Judy Nelson, outgoing chairwoman of the Division I women's basketball committee, said she wanted a schedule change.
Nelson suggested women's play starting in November, with the season ending at least two weeks before the men's championship game.


7 Countries Set London Talks
Finance ministers and central bank officials from the seven leading industrialized nations will meet here on Feb. 27 for an informal discussion of the world's economic problems, the British Government said today.


Campus Journal; Learning 54 Languages With a Missionary's Zeal
From distant countries they bring back fresh insights and a love of language and culture so strong that here at Brigham Young University, education is a great feast of language.
There are nearly 30,000 students at "the Y," as this Mormon university perched on the Wasatch Mountains is known, and at any one time about 10,000 of them are studying one of 54 languages.


Marvel Entertainment Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Goodyear Tire &amp; Rubber Co. (N)
Accounting charges caused a 16.7 percent drop in fourth-quarter earnings for the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company and a loss for the year, the company said yesterday.
Even so, sales in the quarter rose 5.3 percent, to a record $2.93 billion, from $2.78 billion a year earlier.
Before the extraordinary items, Goodyear had fourth-quarter income of $102.8 million, compared with $99.3 million for the corresponding period in 1991.


Carter Hawley Hale Selects Storehouse's Top Executive
Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc. said today that David L. Dworkin, a veteran retail executive, would become president and chief executive of the department store chain, effective April 1.
Mr.
Dworkin, who is now chairman and chief executive of Storehouse P.L.C., a London-based retailer, will succeed Philip M. Hawley, who has said he plans to retire.


Pope Finds Faith Glows in Uganda's Squalor
They came across the bush with more hope than shoes today to see the Pope in a place where faith might seem a tenuous proposition at best, denied by calamities tumbling one upon the other.
The cattle have been stolen here and the people blighted by AIDS.
Just about all of Africa's woes of poverty and war and decline seem etched on the broken visage of this east Ugandan town.
The stores are empty, the buildings stained dark with decay, mocking the modernity they were once supposed to herald.


At Bar Meeting, Muttering About Justice Slot
Partly because fame is fleeting and attention spans short, and partly because Zoe Baird and Judge Kimba M. Wood have never been insiders at the American Bar Association, one had to strain even to hear their names at the latest gathering of the bar group here this week.
Schedules for the gatherings are set months in advance, so nothing was on the formal agenda concerning President Clinton's tortured search for an Attorney General and the two women's roles in it.
What talk there was of the Attorney General problem was confined to the corridors, and as the convention progressed, indignation seemed to yield to impatience.
Problem Called 'Passe'
By Monday night, Caralee T. Neville, a trial judge from Minneapolis, was calling the imbroglio "sort of passe." "Everyone thinks it's time we just get someone in that office," she said at a reception in the Massachusetts Statehouse.
Gathering twice a year, with many smaller conclaves in between, the bar association is, in the words of Evan Davis, onetime counsel to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York, "a very family kind of organization."
It is a family, moreover, to which neither Ms.
Baird nor Judge Wood has strong blood ties.
Ms.
Baird's only arguably memorable appearance here, for instance, came last summer, when she spoke on "quality billing versus hourly billing."
All told, there were far more pockets of pity for Judge Wood who, everyone seemed to agree, earned far less and acted far more properly but was treated far more shabbily by the Clinton Administration than was Ms.
Baird.
"I was uneasy about Zoe Baird, because an Attorney General has to be cleaner than clean," said Barbara M. Mayden of New York, one of those who was still worked up over the subject.
"But what happened to Kimba Wood sent people reeling. It's like the Administration cut and run."
But bar members seemed far more sympathetic to Brooksley E. Born of Washington, the bar governor who was conspicuously passed over for Attorney General, than to either Ms.
Baird or Judge Wood, who sits on the Federal District Court in New York.
And they talked as much about Jamie S. Gorelick, another Washington lawyer and bar association stalwart on the latest Clinton list, as of any of the also-rans.
One lawyer called the 42-year-old Ms.
Gorelick, who represents the District of Columbia Bar Association in the A.B.A.'s House of Delegates, "Zoe with a green card."
If conversations on the topic were peculiarly passionless, they were also surprisingly diffuse.
Quickly, they spilled over from the specifics of the two cases to the hazards of hiring undocumented help, the pitfalls of seeking public office in an age of poorly defined and ever-changing morality, and the clumsiness of the Administration and its own house counsel.
Black Eye for Lawyers
Some people lamented what they deemed as yet another black eye for the legal profession.
"Here we are, a noble profession, that wants to be part of the Clinton effort, and yet here's our department, the
Justice
Department, and they can't find anybody clean enough to run it," said Llewelyn G. Pritchard of Seattle. "Everyone they pick has some fatal flaw."
Robert N. Sayler, a Washington lawyer whose partner, Charles Ruff, also fell headlong on the issue of failing to pay Social Security taxes for a woman in his employ, called the experience "terribly embarrassing."
"I don't think it follows from the facts but the public thinks, 'We always said lawyers were sleazy, and this proves it two more times,' " he said.
The drama also provided humorous campaign fodder for bar politicians.
Campaigning for chairman of the House of Delegates, Hector Reichard Jr. of San Juan, P.R., assured bar members that he had never hired any illegal aliens from the United States mainland.


Hughes Resources Inc. reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


Skiing; Centers Accommodate the Cross-Country Boom
For many cross-country centers in northern New England and New York, the last week has seen the best snow cover in recent years.
Unlike Alpine ski areas, most cross-country centers do not have snowmaking to make up for lack of snow and to repair damage to snow after rainy periods.
"This season, it has not been easy for skiers to find where the snow is in the East," said Chris Frado, executive director of the Cross Country Ski Areas Association, a national group with headquarters in Winchester, N.H.
"There has been snow, but some of it was too light -- you need wet snow to hold on the trails -- so there is continuing interest in snowmaking at cross-country centers."


Foreign Affairs; Taking the Lead, Timidly
Finally, the U.S. has accepted a leadership role in the Balkan crisis.
That is the main point of the modest diplomatic initiatives unveiled yesterday by Secretary of State Warren Christopher.
Reversing the largely rhetorical and passive stance of the Bush Administration, President Clinton has now committed the U.S. to finding a comprehensive plan to combat the deadly virus of nationalism that threatens to obliterate hope for a new world order.


BDM International Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Grainger (W.W.) Inc. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


'Plan B' Is Really 'Plan A'
For the first time since the collapse of the Soviet Union, Moscow is moving into the center of the diplomatic arena as a result of President Clinton's conclusion that Russia can exert significant influence, for better or worse, over the fate of the United States plan to end the civil war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
By making clear today that it wants to involve President Boris N. Yeltsin in the search for a Balkan settlement, the Clinton Administration appears to be seeking both to persuade Moscow to pressure the Serbs to compromise and to insure that Russia does not use its Security Council veto to obstruct the plan.


Atlantis Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Text of Fernandez's Statement: 'Building a Brighter Future'
Following is the text of Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez's written statement issued after the New York City Board of Education voted 4 to 3 not to extend his contract.
Last Wednesday, I was given the option to withdraw even before a formal evaluation of my performance as Chancellor took place.
I refused.
I insisted that the board fulfill its statutory responsibility to evaluate the Chancellor and decide whether or not to offer an extension of my contract beyond June 1993.


Joseph Donnelly, 86, Ex-Medical Director
Dr.
Joseph P. Donnelly, a former medical director of the Margaret Hague Maternity Hospital in Jersey City and past president of New Jersey Blue Shield, died on Tuesday at Christ Hospital in Jersey City.
He was 86.
His family said his death followed a long illness.


A 'Good Man' Who Transcended Sport
There were more than 6,500 people in the Arthur Ashe Athletic Center, sitting, standing, fanning themselves with programs on a warm winter day and stopping to wipe their eyes with handkerchiefs.
They came for a funeral service this afternoon, fittingly called "A Celebration of the Life of Arthur Robert Ashe Jr.," and clearly more suited for a statesman than for a man once simply ranked as the best tennis player in the world.
Decidedly, Ashe, who died Saturday at 49 of the complications of AIDS, was being celebrated last for being a tennis champion.
Mostly, he was recalled as a dignified, courageous and "good man," the term used by Andrew Young, the former United States delegate to the United Nations, who delivered the eulogy.
"Everything Arthur Ashe did, he did for a group or cause bigger than himself," said Young.


Ora Smith, 92, a Leading Expert And Researcher on Potatoes, Dies
Ora Smith, for many years the world's leading expert on potatoes, died on Feb. 4 at a nursing home in Ithaca, N.Y.
He was 92.
His family said the cause was pneumonia.


Duke Defense Digs In to Force Victory
Georgia Tech's zone defense was designed to avoid foul trouble and cut down Duke's penetration.
The alignment also lulled the Blue Devils into playing passively.
And to make matters worse for the nation's third-ranked team, point guard Bobby Hurley never did find his shooting touch, missing eight of nine attempts and depriving Duke of one of its strongest weapons against the zone.


Aon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jones Apparel Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  FERNANDEZ REMOVED AS SCHOOLS CHIEF
The New York City Board of Education voted to oust Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez when his contract expires in June, capping a week of furious quarreling over the future of the public school system and its top official.
A1.
EFFECTS OF DISMISSAL WILL BE WIDESPREAD
The ouster of Joseph A. Fernandez could have ramifications from elementary school classes to the hallways of Albany and Washington.
A1.


Random House Closing a Division
Random House Inc. said yesterday that it was closing its troubled Turtle Bay Books division, which was started just over two years ago by Joni Evans, the former publisher of the Random House adult trade division.
As a result, Ms.
Evans ended her often-turbulent five-year relationship with the New York publishing giant.


4 Women Considered for Attorney General
President Clinton and his aides are still focusing their search for an Attorney General on a woman, officials involved in the process said today.
These officials said background checks were under way on three possible candidates: Janet Reno, a veteran state prosecutor in Miami; Rya W. Zobel, a Federal district judge in Massachusetts, and Diana E. Murphy, a Federal district judge in Minnesota.


Acuson Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Critic's Notebook; Truth or Consequences in TV News
In a breathing space between the servings of crow and humble pie that he downed on behalf of NBC News Tuesday night, Stone Phillips reassured viewers that the contested "Dateline" program about the propensity of some General Motors pickup trucks to burst into fire in a collision had presented "all sides of the controversy." He was like a man gulping a quick Alka-Seltzer toward the end of a "swallow the whole thing" meal.
The retraction was delivered as part of a deal to forestall a costly legal crash for the network.
Its Nov. 17 report, "Waiting to Explode," showed tests concocted with the help of incendiary devices -- not standard General Motors equipment -- that were placed under the trucks to encourage a fire if gasoline should flow from ruptured gas tanks.
Viewers were not told about this exciting accessory.


Fire the Board of Education
By a 4-to-3 vote, New York City's central Board of Education has ousted Schools Chancellor Joseph Fernandez.
That's the wrong result for the system and for the city.
Changing chancellors doesn't get at the heart of the problem.
It's the board, not Mr.
Fernandez, that deserves to be fired.
Mr.
Fernandez has his flaws.
At yesterday's public meeting before the formal vote not to renew his contract, many speakers faulted his leadership style as arrogant, abrasive or aloof.


Clinton Tells Cabinet to Cut Work Force and Privileges
President Clinton ordered his Cabinet officers today to slash 100,000 jobs from the Federal work force over the next four years, to cut back executive perquisites and to dissolve obscure Government commissions like the Advisory Panel for the Dictionary of Occupational Titles.
If all the reductions were carried out, Mr.
Clinton said, they would save $9 billion over four years.
He provided no documentation to back up that number.


50 Objects That Blur the Line Between Form and Function
CAN a vase, a chair or a table be art?
"Art and Application," a show of 50 objects, two by each of 25 artists, explores that question.
The exhibition runs through March 20 at the Turbulence gallery in Greenwich Village.
"Each artist was asked to do a piece of fine art and a functional piece," said Rick Kaufmann, the co-curator of the show with Christine Ollier, a partner in the gallery.
"It was a subjective situation. Is it art or is it furniture? We want to break down the distinction where it is no longer a question."


People
*
Thomas H. Hartman was named advertising director at Elle magazine, New York, succeeding Stephanie Smith, now advertising director at Harper's Bazaar magazine, New York.
Mr.
Hartman was previously vice president and publisher at D magazine, Dallas.


CHRONICLE
It is an eclectic group of New Yorkers who will be honored tonight by the Citizens Committee for New York City at a dinner-dance in the Waldorf-Astoria.
Patrick Daly, the elementary-school principal in Red Hook, Brooklyn, who was shot to death in December while searching for a pupil, and GLORIA BROWN WISE, the founder and director of Co-op City's Youth Activities Committee, will share the John V. Lindsay Prize for Race and Ethnic Relations.
In 1960, Ms.
Wise, who was then the president of the student body at Bennett College in Greensboro, N.C., was the first woman to sit in at the local Woolworth's lunch counter.
HENRY R. KRAVIS, the financier, will get the New Yorker for New York award, and PERCY E. SUTTON, the founder of the Inner City Broadcasting Corporation and a former Manhattan Borough President, will receive the Marietta Tree Award for Public Service.


Nabors Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Marching Blind Into Bosnia
As if his first three weeks had not been bumpy enough, President Clinton now places a tentative foot on the slippery slope of military engagement.
Is anyone around the Oval Office reading history books?
It is endemic to the office that Presidents come in full of illusions about the ease of projecting military force.
They almost always regret their first sallies into combat.
The kind of power that a President commands brings with it the temptation to act before he has had time to grow wise and careful in its use.


Pro Bono Accounts
*
Americares, New Canaan, Conn., to CME KHBB Advertising, Chicago, to handle the disaster relief and humanitarian aid organization's account, previously at Leo Burnett, Chicago.


Traders Guess Wrong in Note Sale
Every once in a while, Wall Street's primary dealers seem to talk themselves into a disaster.
Yesterday was one of those days, as the Treasury's 10-year note auction did not meet dealers' expectations, and the ensuing selloff pulled prices down sharply in the rest of the market.
An hour after the auction results were announced at 2 P.M., the price of the current 7.625 percent 30-year bond was off 3/4 point and the yield had jumped to more than 7.26 percent, from 7.20 on Tuesday.
By late in the day, the bond had recovered some but was still off 23/32 , to yield 7.25 percent.


Fassel Joins Broncos As Offensive Coach
The Denver Broncos hired JIM FASSEL as offensive coordinator yesterday.
Fassel left the Giants when they discharged RAY HANDLEY as head coach at the end of the year.
He was quarterbacks coach for the Giants in 1991 and offensive coordinator last year.
DAN REEVES, the former Denver coach, replaced Handley, and WADE PHILLIPS took Reeves's job.


Fernandez Silently Sits In Real-Life People's Court
One by one, they stepped up to the microphone to speak their minds about the Chancellor.
Some praised him as a savior; others condemned him as a failure.
They referred to Scripture and quoted from musical lyrics.
They described him admiringly in Spanish and blisteringly in English.
Some became so enraged that they had to be dragged from the mike by guards, and some became so upset with the tone of the comments that they pleaded with the audience for tolerance.
In an extraordinary five-hour session, 79 New Yorkers from every walk of life, hospital workers and firefighters, politicians and community leaders, offered their personal report cards on the tenure of Joseph A. Fernandez.
Amid catcalls, cheers and boos, they vented their feelings on everything from the Chancellor's policy on condom distribution to his attitude toward parents -- and, in the process, laid out their varied visions for the future of the school system.


Grants Available for Design Projects
The New York State Council on the Arts has announced that it will have money available for architects, designers, photographers and scholars under its seventh annual independent-projects awards.
The money will be given for work on projects about the "designed environment."
"The budget is still undetermined," said Anne Van Ingen, director of the council's architecture, planning and design program.
The deadline for applications is March 1.
Final decisions will be made in July by an advisory panel that includes Michael Bierut, a graphic designer and partner at Pentagram Design in Manhattan, and Billie Tsien, an architect in Manhattan.


EDS CORP. (N)
The EDS Corporation, the computer services concern owned by the General Motors Corporation, reported record earnings and revenue for the fourth quarter and year, surpassing $8 billion in annual revenue for the first time.
For the quarter revenue was up almost 3 percent, and earnings were up more than 14 percent.
Revenue attributable to operations at G.M., meanwhile, dropped to $3.35 billion for 1992, compared with $3.36 billion a year earlier.


COMPANY BRIEFS
MORRISON KNUDSEN CORP., Boise, Idaho, said it might decide to pay about $25 million for the 51 percent of McConnell Dowell, an Australian construction company, that it does not already own.
SUPERMARKETS GENERAL HOLDINGS, Woodbridge, N.J., is considering a recapitalization that may include an initial public offering of common stock in its subsidiary Supermarkets General Corporation, which runs Pathmark supermarkets and drugstores and Rickel Home Centers in the Northeast.


What to Do About the Homeless Mentally Ill?; Outpatient Solutions
To the Editor:
Following a recent murder allegedly by a "mentally ill chemical abuser," some articles and your Jan. 22 editorial raise the question of involuntary commitment for such people.
Your editorial calls for review of New York State commitment laws.
While such review is certainly warranted, the following issues are important considerations.


Where Did You Put the Romance, Honey?; The Family Way
AS Valentine's Day approaches, thoughts turn to creating the proper mood at home.
After all, who has the time or money to go out?
But has the reality of mortgages and children, of renovation and no time for anything but a pizza in front of the television set, overtaken the fantasy of soft pillows and warm colors in a bedroom cooled only by a slow overhead fan?


Guerrilla Newspaper in Peru Tries to Dehumanize Enemy
Opening the pages of El Diario newspaper here, a reader enters a strange world peopled by "reptile Fujimori," "wimpering revisionists" and "animal generals with worm-eaten brains."
The clandestine newspaper is a beacon of hope to guerrillas of the Shining Path movement, and the object of study by linguists analyzing the language for insights into revolutionary psychology.


Positive Charge
Semiconductor and computer stocks, among the top performers of 1992, may be headed higher.
The S.&amp; P. electronics and semiconductor index rose after the chip industry's book-to-bill-ratio hit a five-year high in January.
The closely watched ratio showed that for every $100 of products shipped, $119 of new orders was received.


Pope, in the Sudan, Assails Religious Persecution
Comparing the plight of Christians in the Sudan to that of Jesus on the cross, Pope John Paul II called repeatedly today for this country's Islamic leaders to cease what he called religious persecution of Christians and to end "the terrible harvest of suffering" caused by civil war in the south.
The Pope's unusually stark imagery and unequivocal insistence on minority rights and religious freedoms in the predominantly Muslim Sudan evoked centuries of conflict between Christians and Muslims in this region.
The conflict has become even sharper here as the Sudan's leaders have aligned themselves with the forces of Islamic fundamentalism, particularly in Iran.


No Lemieux for Penguins, but No Scoring for Sagging Rangers
Mark Messier likes to deal with the Rangers' current winless streak in this manner: He talks about the team's exciting new system.
He talks about individual improvements.
He talks about the terrific attitude and promising work ethic.
Then, he acknowledges the little mistakes that keep all this wonderful stuff from resulting in a victory.
Then, he concedes that the system isn't working well enough.
Yet.
And "yet" is the crucial word here.
Messier is clearly not ready to call for changes, even if the Rangers are in the midst of their worst slump in this slump-filled season.


Southern Electronics (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Excerpts From Clinton's Question-and-Answer Session on TV
Following are excerpts from a televised question-and-answer session with President Clinton in Southfield, Mich., and studio audiences there and in three other cities, as transcribed by The New York Times: CLINTON.
Let me first of all thank all of you for being here in Michigan, and thank our audiences in Washington and Georgia and Florida for joining us, and all the people across this country who are watching this event.
I started doing these televised town meetings a year ago in New Hampshire.
Between June and November I did nine that were televised alone, including one here at this station.
And I wanted to come out of the White House three weeks to the day after I became President because I can see now after only three weeks how easy it is for a President to get out of touch, to be caught up in the trappings of Washington and basically to be told by people that nothing needs to be changed, or you can't change things.


And Now, Let Your Lips Do The Dialing
In one of the most significant advances for telephone customers since touch-tone dialing, people will soon be able to dial a telephone number by speaking the name of whomever they are calling.
The voice service would allow each member of a household to compile a separate voice directory of dozens of names.
When a wife says "Mom," the phone will recognize only her voice and call her mother; when her child says "Mom," the phone will call only his mother.


An Uphill Fight for Jazz In 20 Years of Concerts
Twenty years ago a young Assistant Attorney General for New York State, Jack Kleinsinger, had an idea whose time had not only come but gone as well.
Mr.
Kleinsinger, who will celebrate the 20th anniversary of his first Highlights in Jazz concert tonight with a show by the Count Basie Orchestra at the Downtown Theater of Pace University, was a jazz fan stuck right in the middle of jazz's greatest depression.
Clubs around the city were folding, mainstream jazz seemed hopelessly traditional to taste-makers, and a new generation of expressionistic musicians had lost the older audience while rock had stolen younger potential listeners.
And jazz concerts were a thing of the distant past.
So he decided to put one on.
"I had gotten to be friends with Bucky Pizzarelli after spending time at Dick Gibson's jazz party in Colorado," Mr.
Kleinsinger recalled the other day.
"He said to me: 'You know, you're really comfortable with musicians, and you really love the music. You should do a concert.' So I did."
The first show, featuring the saxophonists Zoot Sims and Al Cohn, the drummer Bobby Rosengarden, the trumpeter Joe Newman and Mr.
Pizzarelli on guitar (Mr. Kleinsinger couldn't afford to rent a piano) was at the Theater de Lys, now the Lucille Lortel, on Christopher Street.
The Daily News panned it ("Jazz at de Lys a Cliched Thing" ran the headline) and The New York Times praised it ("Jazz Series Pilot Lifts Fans' Hopes").
Mr.
Kleinsinger never looked back, and 142 concerts later, roughly seven a year, he's still at it, producing the longest-running jazz series New York has ever seen.
A Demographic Mix
From the start, he did something unusual.
His concerts have been not only racially and sexually mixed, but have also featured performers of widely disparate ages.
A typical show might have an octogenarian or two, at least one woman, perhaps a young musician from Germany (looking bewildered), and some be-boppers.
Everyone plays "Sweet Georgia Brown," one of the octogenarians sings an obscure pop song and the audience leaves ecstatic.
The concerts are nearly always sold out, and if they aren't the extra tickets are donated to the Harlem School of the Arts and La Guardia High School for the Performing Arts.
He has a base audience of 350 who come to every show, and 400 or so more tickets are quickly taken by the 5,000 or so people on his mailing list.
Those who come aren't likely to be jazz club habitues.
They're often older and have some nostalgic connection with the musicians performing.
"It's a funny audience in that Doc Cheatham and Milt Hinton would be bigger draws than Wynton Marsalis and Ron Carter," Mr.
Kleinsinger said.
"For the most part they're people who loved jazz when they were younger and prefer the older forms of jazz, including be-bop. They want to hear songs they know and they like the jam session format. They remember Jazz at the Philharmonic and clubs like Central Plaza, where they'd see guys sitting in."
Before and after each show and during the intermission, friends who haven't seen each other for a month hug or shake hands, and chat.
The musicians amble around during intermission, and the audience greets them like old friends. 'Celebration of the Mainstream'
For Phil Schaap, a radio disk jockey who spent eight years working the sound system for Mr.
Kleinsinger's concerts, each one is a joyful event.
"It's a monthly celebration of the mainstream," he said.
"It's like a clubhouse meeting, and when the meetings are successful, which they always are, everybody reaffirms the deal. The club is Jazz New York and Jack has a chapter of it."
The concerts are a way into the past, providing a clue to how jazz used to function as pop culture.
"I'm aware that a lot of people come with a spouse or a date, somebody who isn't a jazz lover and has to be entertained," Mr.
Kleinsinger said.
But there is nothing condescending about them, either.
Mr.
Kleinsinger knows which musicians still retain the ability to connect with an audience in a different way, one that mixes the excitement of musical virtuosity with charisma.
"I was drawn to jazz because the musicians were larger-than-life figures like movies stars," he said.
"Satch and Dizzy and Lady Day and others were colorful, vibrant personalities. When you did meet them they rarely let you down. Zoot Sims was exactly how I thought he should be. People like Clark Terry, Dizzy, Milt Hinton, these are great human beings who are gifted entertainers and musicians, all extremely aware of the audience and what the audience needs and deserves." A Way of Growing Up
The interest in jazz came early to Mr.
Kleinsinger, who at 56 is retired and teaches special courses in law and jazz to seventh graders at Intermediate School 52 in Inwood and spends one day a week working at the Parking Violations Bureau.
His cousin, George Kleinsinger, was a composer who wrote "Tubby the Tuba." Mr.
Kleinsinger grew up in New York, and as a child he went to the Roxy, the Paramount, the Apollo and other theaters to hear the music.
"I still have all the records I first bought," he said.
"The first one was a Red Norvo 78, featuring Vic Dickenson and Joe Thomas, two of my favorites. The first LP was 'Battle of the Bands,' on Capitol, with Dizzy, and Benny Carter and Charlie Barnett."
When he would find himself bored at Newport Jazz Festivals, he would sketch out perfect concert lineups.
The Highlights in Jazz concerts have featured Dizzy Gillespie, Stan Getz, Milt Hinton, Doc Cheatham, Zoot Sims, Al Cohn, Lionel Hampton, Red Rodney, Dorothy Donegan, Roy Eldridge, Buddy Tate, James Moody, Jimmy Heath, Maxine Sullivan, Hank Jones, Dick Hyman, Marty Napoleon, Vic Dickenson, George Duvivier, Jon Faddis and hundreds of others.
Even when the shows sell out, Mr.
Kleinsinger says, they do not pay for themselves.
He manages to cover expenses with grant money from the National Endowment for the Arts and the New York State Council on the Arts and by having jazz cruises, jazz brunches and just about anything else with the name jazz in the title.
"Actually, the beauty of the system is that I don't make a living at it, that I have another means of support," Mr.
Kleinsinger said.
"We finish in the black, but just barely, with $1,000 or so left over at the end of the year. The musicians play for way below their normal price, and I don't really pay anybody else. But everybody loves it, so I'm going to do it until the day I die."


Where Did You Put the Romance, Honey?; Under the Rainbow
AS Valentine's Day approaches, thoughts turn to creating the proper mood at home.
After all, who has the time or money to go out?
But has the reality of mortgages and children, of renovation and no time for anything but a pizza in front of the television set, overtaken the fantasy of soft pillows and warm colors in a bedroom cooled only by a slow overhead fan?


Essay; Justice in Contempt
Did the Bush Department of Jus tice eager to avoid embarrassing Saddam Hussein or his bankers in 1989 -- make a conscious effort
not
to find out what the CIA knew about the huge fraud discovered at the Atlanta branch of the Banca Lavoro?
The staff of the Senate Select Intelligence Committee was suckered by excuses from key Justice officials that they were too busy responding to their in-house "investigator" to answer the Senate, precisely why the patsy prosecutor was hired.
But the recent Senate report adds useful new evidence to the Iraqgate scandal.


COMPANY NEWS: Corporate Green Warrior; Sun Oil Takes Environmental Pledge
The Valdez Principles, a code of corporate environmental conduct devised after the 1989 Alaskan oil spill, won its first major corporate endorsement yesterday.
And the company that signed on is an oil company.
The Sun Company of Philadelphia, the 12th-largest oil company in the United States, became the first Fortune 500 company to endorse the principles.
Fifty smaller companies have already backed them.


Advertising; Coca-Cola's New Campaign Shakes Up Madison Avenue
What happens when the world's most famous brand shakes up Madison Avenue by hiring Hollywood's most powerful talent agency to collaborate with its longtime advertising agency?
If the initial results are any indication, the ad-making process could be in for significant and systemic changes.
At a news conference yesterday in New York, the Coca-Cola Company introduced the 1993 campaign for its flagship brand, called Coca-Cola Classic in America and Coca-Cola in 195 other countries.
The campaign is as extraordinary for who created and produced it as for its unexpected freshness, breadth and playfulness.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Phish Roseland
"Why Reduce Your Possibilities?" read a T-shirt worn by a well-scrubbed fan at Phish's sold-out concert on Friday night.
That sentiment's utopian tone suggests that anything but a total embrace of life's freedoms would be foolish; yet it ignores the real limitations that present-day America imposes upon anyone below the upper middle class.
Music reflecting this blithe attitude supposedly expresses a nonconformist view, but often its self-absorption deadens the impact of its experiments.


Golf; Couples Tries to Get Mind Back on Game
After his moonshot of a year in 1992, Fred Couples would prefer to maintain a steady orbit of excellence in 1993.
Couples had the greatest season of his career.
He won the Masters and two other tournaments, was the leading money winner with $1,344,188, won the Vardon Trophy with a 69.38 stroke average and was voted by his peers as the PGA Tour's player of the year for a second straight time.


Books of The Times; Peering Into a Dismal 21st Century
Preparing for the 21st Century By Paul Kennedy Illustrated. Random House. $25.
In his previous book, "The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers: Economic Change and Military Conflict from 1500 to 2000," Paul Kennedy brought us the bad news that nations rising to supremacy by winning wars tend to get overextended in a way that undermines the source of their wealth, and that the United States is undergoing such a decline.
Mr.
Kennedy, who teaches history at Yale, didn't think the fall-off necessarily had to end with a crash.
He just meant to sound a warning so that leaders could soften the landing.


Paifong Robert Cheng, A Former Diplomat, 93
Paifong Robert Cheng, a former Foreign Service Officer of the Nationalist Chinese Government, died on Friday at his home in Queens.
He was 93.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, his family said.
A native of Guangzhou, Mr.
Cheng attended Canton College and studied English at Queens College Secondary School in Hong Kong.
He served for a year in the Chinese Army and then was invited to go to France as a "worker-student" by the Franco-Chinese Education Association.


Anacomp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ford Lost $7.4 Billion Last Year
The Ford Motor Company posted an $840.3 million fourth-quarter loss today and a $7.4 billion loss for the year, largely reflecting accounting changes and one-time charges against earnings.
Without the special charges, however, Ford's yearly results were an improvement over 1991, when the nation's No. 2 auto maker also posted huge losses.


Stewart Information Services(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Star Athlete Held in Theft of Exams
Just last month, the Thomaston High School basketball team seemed on its way to another state championship.
But that was before Thomas Santopietro, the team's star, who had been averaging 33 points a game, was accused of stealing midterm exams with a teammate and a third student.
Since then, the team has lost six straight games, dashing any hopes of a championship season.
And this old factory town eight miles north of Waterbury, once the home of the Seth Thomas clock company, has had to come to terms with a troubling crime.


Carlisle Plastics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Anderson Expl. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Law Failed to Stem Illegal Immigration, Panel Says
With the Clinton Administration still smarting from the problems with the child-care arrangements of Zoe Baird and Judge Kimba M. Wood, a new Government report contends that illegal immigration continues unchecked and is making a mockery of a 1986 law that was intended to curb it.
Foreigners who seek low-wage jobs -- working in homes, cleaning office buildings, doing the heavy lifting on construction crews, sewing in garment shops, bringing in the nation's fruit and vegetable harvests -- are rarely competing with Americans for those jobs.


Dibrell Bros. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
I.B.M. is said to be preparing to cut its work force this year by far more than the 25,000 people it had previously announced.
Analysts and consultants say the company plans to cut 40,000 or more people this year, mostly in the marketing and support staff.
I.B.M. denied it was weighing broader cuts.  [ Page D1. ]
Leslie Fay, the dressmaker accused of inflating profits, has a reputation for being loosely managed, which may come to haunt one of the most storied companies in the garment district.  [ D1. ]


Patriots Make Cuts
In one of the first player moves made by Coach BILL PARCELLS, safety RANDY ROBBINS, who started 15 games for New England last season, was among five players cut by the Patriots.
Also placed on waivers were wide receiver-kick returner WALTER STANLEY, linebacker RICHARD TARDITS, offensive guard SCOTT BOWLES and defensive back JOHN GRANBY.
Robbins signed with the Patriots before last season as a Plan B free agent after spending his other eight seasons with Denver.
He had 45 tackles and 2 interceptions.
Stanley, a seven-year veteran, signed as a free agent two weeks into the season and saw duty mainly as a kick returner.
He also caught three passes. (AP)


Molson Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rare Syndrome Differs From H.I.V., Scientists Say
Several new reports being published today affirm the rarity of a mysterious syndrome in which patients develop an AIDS-like illness without evidence of infection with the two viruses that are known to cause AIDS -- H.I.V.-1 and H.I.V.-2.
The syndrome is characterized by an extremely low number of special immune cells, known as CD4 cells, that are virtually depleted by AIDS.
The syndrome is known as idiopathic CD4 T-lymphocytopenia, or ILC.


New Jersey Steel (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Viacom Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Accounts
*
Fruit of the Loom Inc., Bowling Green, Ky., to Leo Burnett Ltd., Toronto, to handle its account in Canada, previously at Grey Advertising, Montreal.
Burnett already handles the apparel manufacturer's accounts in America, Mexico and several European markets, which were also previously at Grey.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Tiger Electronics Inc., Vernon Hills, Ill., to Young &amp; Rubicam New York, to handle its national broadcast media buying account, previously at Bohbot Communications, New York.
And Summit Media Group, New York, was awarded Tiger's local and print media buying account, also previously handled by Bohbot.
Billings for each agency were estimated at $11 million.


Currents; Silver Spoons of the Proletarian Type
JOY RASKIN'S silver utensils do double duty.
Salad servers hold vinegar and oil in their handles, and spoons dispense tea or aspirin.
Some utensils incorporate test tubes; others, thermometers for fevers or laboratory experiments (shown above).
Some items are more practical and functional than others.
For eating thick shakes, Miss Raskin made an 11-inch contraption incorporating a glass tube and a silver bowl.
It can be used for stirring or sipping.


Stick With Governor Weicker's Budget
Gov.
Lowell Weicker's new budget is just a hair shy of the new spending cap that he opposed but that Connecticut's voters ratified overwhelmingly last November.
On paper, he has left no room for the Legislature to add more spending or subtract taxes.
But lo and behold, members are flirting with plans to skirt the ceiling.
Mr.
Weicker does well to resist that pressure.
Arbitrary caps invite scheming to exempt expenses from the limits.
In this case, there's been talk of adding to the "distressed" cities that get uncapped state aid.


Coach Won't Return


A Store Thrives Selling Whatever It Is You Have to Have
For the last 30 years, it's been one of
the
places to go when one is desperate for that particular thingamajig or whatchamacallit.
In fact, Gracious Home, the housewares and hardware emporium that is situated at 1220 and 1217 Third Avenue -- on both sides of the avenue between 70th and 71st streets, has thrived on helping people buy all the bits and pieces that they simply cannot live without for one more minute: things like switch plates in 70 colors, vacuum-cleaner bags, replacement glass coffee decanters and an array of window cleaners, including Windex, Work Site, Glass Plus and Glass Wax.


SPS Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Judge Will Hold a Hearing Before a Post Sale Is Completed
A Federal judge said yesterday that he would hold a hearing on whether to freeze the assets of Steven Hoffenberg before Mr.
Hoffenberg completed his purchase of The New York Post.
The action appears to raise an additional obstacle to the purchase because the hearing could cast doubts on the financial ability of Mr.
Hoffenberg to complete the deal.


TRAVELERS CORP. (N)
The Travelers Corporation yesterday reported a net loss of $589 million in the fourth quarter, partly as a result of real estate losses.
Revenue dropped 34.6 percent, to $1.7 billion.
The Hartford-based company attributed its losses for the quarter primarily to an addition of $735 million to real estate reserves.
Travelers' results were also affected by an after-tax charge of $59 million for additional costs incurred from Hurricane Andrew and $79 million related to litigation and assessments for insurance-industry guarantee funds.


Aftereffects of an Ouster
While Joseph A. Fernandez may have brought his ouster on himself through an abrasive style and political misjudgments, his departure as New York City Schools Chancellor could haunt the Board of Education for years to come.
The ouster could make it difficult to attract top talent and raises questions about the future of the board itself.
The board members who voted not to retain his services yesterday argue that Mr.
Fernandez is himself to blame and could easily be replaced by another top-caliber educator in a quick nationwide search.


Currents; New Panache For Old Sneakers
LIKE jazz, basketball glorifies improvisation.
With this in mind, Homer Jackson of Philadelphia and Lloyd Lawrence of New York invited 25 other artists and designers to use an instrument of the court -- the sneaker -- as a focal point for art.
The exhibition, "High Flying," which opens in Philadelphia tomorrow, includes "In Memory of My Grandma," shown at left, which is an ironing board that Jerome Robinson of Philadelphia made to honor his grandmother, who ironed clothes to help put him through college.
Mr.
Robinson transformed the board into an African shield with vibrant paint, bones, bits of steel and, of course, sneakers.


Corrections
An article last Thursday about a new test for newborns, to detect the virus that causes AIDS, referred incompletely to the findings regarding various groups of children.
As the article stated, the test was accurate for all 29 babies born to H.I.V.-infected women who were evaluated; for a group of 78 children aged 6 days to 13 years, the test was 80 percent accurate.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.81
2.90
x.xx
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.92
2.92
x.xx
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.10
x.xx
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.04
5.97
x.xx
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.25
7.20
x.xx
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.30
8.30
x.xx
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.20
6.20
x.xx
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Braves and Smoltz Agree to $16 Million
When the Atlanta Braves signed Greg Maddux two months ago, they were credited with having put together the best starting pitching rotation in the major leagues.
Now they have the best-paid one as well.
The Braves completed a two-month signing spree yesterday, reaching agreement with John Smoltz on a four-year contract worth $16 million.
They signed Maddux on Dec. 9 for five years and $28 million, and in between, they locked up Tom Glavine's services with a four-year, $20.5 million contract.


La-Z-Boy Chair reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 23


Atmos Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Nature's Embrace Is Found to Be Inspirational


Howard Osborne, Fashion Executive, 47
Howard Osborne, a former sales executive in the fashion industry, died on Sunday at the Danbury Hospital in Danbury, Conn., where he lived.
He was 47.
His family said he had been ill for a long time.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Shirley Bassey  Carnegie Hall Through tonight
"Sit back, relax, and let me do all the work," Shirley Bassey commanded the audience at Tuesday's opening performance of a three-night engagement.
The big-voiced belter proceeded to introduce George Harrison's "Something" as "a very old song of the Beatles," and then to declaim it with a roof-raising ferocity.


Budd Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Goodrich (B.F.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Police Panel Investigates Officer Trial
A mayoral commission on police corruption is investigating charges that officers in the Internal Affairs Division tried to quash a detective's sexual harassment claim in 1990 and then, when she pursued the complaint, filed false charges against her in revenge.
The detective, Andra Vizuete, a 13-year veteran, charged that the head of the division at the time, Chief William Carney, ordered her to drop the charge or risk repercussions.
Mr.
Carney is now deputy chief in the newly formed Internal Affairs Bureau, which investigates corruption in the Police Department.
Chief Carney has denied the charges.


Informix Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Glen Ridge Defense Summary: Immoral, but Not a Crime
Defense lawyers said today that the sexual acts at issue in the Glen Ridge sex-assault trial were indecent and immoral.
But they argued that they were not crimes.
"I have never said what they did was right," Michael Querques, one of the defense lawyers, said of the four former Glen Ridge football players accused of assaulting a mildly retarded schoolmate with a broom handle and a fungo baseball bat nearly four years ago.
But he added: "What they did was not criminal in nature. To let the exaggeration of indecent conduct rise to the level of any degree of crime is an injustice on the facts of this case."


Fernandez's Summary: "Fought for Children'
Joseph A. Fernandez began his day yesterday as he does every workday: with a huddle before dawn in his 10th-floor Brooklyn office with his closest aides.
But this time, what he and his aides discussed was how he would publicly respond to a resolution that would end his term as Chancellor of the nation's largest school system.


Diasonics Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


3 Sides Battle for Territory in Bosnia and Croatia
Battles between Serbian and Muslim forces in eastern Bosnia and Herzegovina have reportedly exacted a heavy toll in the last 24 hours, killing 54 people and wounding 109.
Radio reports from Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, told today of fighting in the Drina River basin near Srebrenica and Zvornik, where Serbs are trying to drive Muslims loyal to Bosnia away from an important road connecting Serbia and Serb-held swaths of the Bosnian heartland.


Carmike Cinemas reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


HOME IMPROVEMENT
PLASTER has a reasonably well deserved reputation for being difficult to repair.
But while major damage and the restoration of fine old work is best left to professional plasterers, knowledgeable amateurs can usually repair cracks and small holes, up to about eight inches across.
Evaluating the cause of plaster damage is important.
Brown stains, crumbling plaster or powdery surface residue are signs of water damage.
Unless the source of the moisture is found and the condition corrected if necessary (the damage may be from old problems already fixed), the plaster may continue to deteriorate despite repair.


Atom Agency Said to Issue Demand to North Korea
Intensifying a standoff with North Korea over its suspected nuclear bomb project, the head of the International Atomic Energy Agency has decided to issue an unusual demand that the country immediately open two mysterious buildings to inspection, Western diplomats say.
The action marks the first time that the agency, a United Nations affiliate, has invoked an extraordinary procedure called a "special inspection" to compel the opening of a site that a country has not declared as part of any nuclear program.


Allou Health &amp; Beauty reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kodak Adds 20 Products In Big Shift
With the idea that photography should be simpler, easier and more enjoyable for picture takers of all ages and experience levels, the Eastman Kodak Company yesterday unveiled 20 products, most of them cameras and film.
In a sharp strategy shift, Kodak designed the products to appeal to specific age groups and photography professionals, rather than using a mass-market approach -- a tactic that has produced only modest growth for the company in recent years.
After sales increases of 15.2 percent in 1987 and 28 percent in 1988, Kodak's sales rose 8 percent in 1989, 2.8 percent in 1990, 2.7 percent in 1991 and 4 percent last year.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Rosemary Clooney Rainbow and Stars 30 Rockefeller Plaza 65th Floor Through Feb. 27
One word that describes Rosemary Clooney at 64 is balance.
The singer, who is playing her fifth engagement in five years at Rainbow and Stars, occupies an exact middle ground between pop and jazz.
If her no-nonsense delivery of lyrics exemplifies pop clarity, the steady rhythmic drive that propels her singing is closer to jazz.


CBS INC. (N)
Better days seem to lie ahead at Black Rock.
Yesterday, CBS Inc. reported that earnings in the fourth quarter more than tripled from a year earlier and that it posted a profit for 1992, compared with a big loss for all of 1991.


Pop and Jazz in Review
David Sanborn The Five Spot 4 West 31st Street Manhattan
David Sanborn's opening appearance at a new jazz club, the Five Spot, takes a bit of the shine off what should be a happy occasion.
Given its position at the epicenter of jazz activity, New York City can always use another jazz club, and the Five Spot, with its lavish appointments, has obviously had some money spent on it.
But Mr.
Sanborn, though he's a fine improvising saxophonist, plays instrumental pop music, and much of the club's future booking veers toward instrumental pop.


Egghead Software reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Currents; Atlas Didn't Even Sweat
ATLAS always seems burdened by the load on his shoulders, but the character in Dan Dailey's warrior table, above, is not.
"This guy is happy to be doing his job," said Mr.
Dailey, a New Hampshire artist who attempts both to glorify and to poke fun at machismo.
"I used to draw cartoons, and that hasn't left my work."


Daly's Nets Serve Old Medicine To Pistons
His smile is now perhaps more sharp than his jump shot, but make no mistake, Bernard King still has it.
In his comeback debut with the Nets tonight, he hobbled and he hustled.
At times he looked wobbly, and at times he looked as though he needed a rocker.
But New Jersey's gamble to put King in a Nets uniform and bring him off the bench seems to be paying off.
At least against Detroit it did.
It was easy to see that King, one of the best and most determined players ever to play in the National Basketball Association, will probably regain his timing and his touch.
He is not that far off.
In 21 minutes of play, he scored 8 points, had 7 rebounds and 2 assists.
Not All-Star numbers, but considering that the last time he played in an N.B.A. game was two years ago, this was a gutsy performance.


CLINTON LAYS BASE FOR NEW SACRIFICE TO BOOST ECONOMY
Laying the groundwork for the economic proposals he will offer next week, President Clinton returned last night to the talk-show format he used during the fall campaign and tried to prepare the nation for higher taxes and painful budget cuts.
Mr.
Clinton sought to use the televised "town meeting" broadcast from Southfield in suburban Detroit to persuade Americans that he was not being diverted by the issues that dominated the first two weeks of his Administration: whether to allow homosexuals in the military and the ill-fated search for an Attorney General.
Instead, he emphasized that he was working on almost nothing but the economic plan he will introduce Wednesday.


CHRONICLE
ANNIE LEIBOVITZ is used to photographing celebrities, so taking pictures of President Clinton and 37 of his closest friends and aides did not ruffle her.
"But it did constitute one of the most difficult shoots I have ever done because of the numbers of people," she said yesterday from Los Angeles, describing the logistics for a portfolio, "The New Guard, " in the March issue of Vanity Fair.
"I never photographed so many people at once," she said, explaining that almost all the pictures were taken during the throes of the Inauguration events.


Market Place; Phone companies will churn the next wave of cable acquisitions.
CABLE-TELEVISION stocks and companies with some cable holdings have benefited from the news on Tuesday that the Southwestern Bell Corporation would spend $650 million to buy two cable systems in the Washington area.
The increase was prompted by two facts: First, it was the first cable deal after a long period.
And the sale price was roughly 10.5 times the company's cash flow, down relatively little from the rich deals of the 1980's.
Gordon Crawford, senior vice president at the Capital Research Company, a major institutional shareholder in a host of cable companies, said: "To me this was the opening salvo in a war. These guys have been gentlemanly and staying out of everyone's turf. Now that it has started, everyone will have to do something.


Kate Wilkinson, 76, Stage and TV Actress
Kate Wilkinson, an actress who appeared in the theater and on television, died on Tuesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 76.
The cause was bone cancer, said her son, Jeffrey, of Brookline, Mass.


Where Did You Put the Romance, Honey?; A Place to Feel the Sun
AS Valentine's Day approaches, thoughts turn to creating the proper mood at home.
After all, who has the time or money to go out?
But has the reality of mortgages and children, of renovation and no time for anything but a pizza in front of the television set, overtaken the fantasy of soft pillows and warm colors in a bedroom cooled only by a slow overhead fan?


Gate Crasher Shakes Up Nuclear Debate
A man who drove through the main gate at the Three Mile Island nuclear plant on Sunday, crashed through a fence and into a door, then hid in the building for four hours, caused no significant damage at the plant but has set back a three-year campaign by the nuclear power industry to drop some security rules.
The industry and Nuclear Regulatory Commission say that although they are calling the event on Sunday the most serious intrusion on record in this country, it is not relevant to the industry's campaign to relax the rules.


New York Sues to Halt Kraft's Cereal Deal
Kraft General Foods' $450 million acquisition of Nabisco cereals was challenged on antitrust grounds by New York State yesterday.
The state's lawsuit, filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan, seeks a preliminary injunction to halt the merger and have Kraft and its parent company, the Philip Morris Companies, barred from acquiring any company that makes cold cereals for 10 years.


Where Did You Put the Romance, Honey?; Foyer Fantasy
AS Valentine's Day approaches, thoughts turn to creating the proper mood at home.
After all, who has the time or money to go out?
But has the reality of mortgages and children, of renovation and no time for anything but a pizza in front of the television set, overtaken the fantasy of soft pillows and warm colors in a bedroom cooled only by a slow overhead fan?


What to Do About the Homeless Mentally Ill?
To the Editor:
We are writing on behalf of the Project for Psychiatric Outreach to the Homeless, a six-year-old program of volunteer psychiatrists who provide essential psychiatric treatment -- otherwise unavailable -- to mentally ill homeless people, many of whom are also drug users.
About 70 psychiatrists have volunteered their expertise during these six years, and more than 40 psychiatrists donate time at 19 sites throughout Manhattan, including Project Reachout and two New York City shelters.
Our program has learned what works in the treatment of people who are homeless and mentally ill.


Where Did You Put the Romance, Honey?; A Grotto, a Floating Cockleshell and Thou


Jerusalem Journal; Jews Who Call Jesus Messiah: Get Out, Says Israel
Gary and Shirley Beresford were married in an Orthodox synagogue in South Africa, and consider themselves observant Jews and ardent Zionists.
He wears a skullcap, and she covers her hair.
They keep the Sabbath and follow Jewish dietary laws.
Her two sons from a previous marriage, who had immigrated to Israel before she came from Zimbabwe in 1986, were Israeli Army paratroopers.
Decades ago some of her relatives helped found a kibbutz in Galilee.


Home Video
Support Declines
To independent film makers short of money, the thought of losing a major sponsor is a nightmare.
For the last several years Columbia Tri-Star Home Video (formerly RCA Columbia) has financed the production of dozens of films that won critical acclaim during short theater runs before moving into video stores.
This year the company plans to curtail that support.


A Film Maker's Lot: Frustration, Devotion, Rejection and Some Fun
Richard Brody was busy as usual in a borrowed editing room, twisting the fringes of his bushy auburn beard and talking about film editing.
"It's like sculpture," he said.
"You have to get your body into it and give it your own physical presence."
He was getting his body into it, all right, fingers flying at the controls of the Sony video editor as he tinkered with the ending of "Liability Crisis," his
first full-length feature film after years of working on television commercials and two documentaries that were never completed.


Sound Advice (NMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


What to Do About the Homeless Mentally Ill?; For Involuntary Care
To the Editor:
The tragic incident involving Christopher Battiste, the mentally ill drug abuser who is alleged to have murdered an elderly woman (editorial, Jan. 22), was entirely predictable.


Nuclear Test Illuminates Earth's Interior
A powerful nuclear explosion in China last year has opened a window on the earth's deep interior, revealing intriguing and hitherto unknown geological details.
The underground explosion at the Lop Nor test range in Western China on May 21 was the most powerful nuclear explosion in a decade, the equivalent in destructive energy to 660,000 tons of TNT.
Opponents of nuclear testing deplored it.


Crop Genetics International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Court Case Filed By A.T.&amp; T.
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company went to Federal court today to demand that its chief rivals in the long-distance business disclose their prices in public filings with the Government.
That information would be a potentially powerful weapon in the hotly competitive battle for business customers, who spend $35 billion a year buying complex packages of telephone services.


Holiday Weekend
Lincoln's Birthday will be observed tomorrow and Washington's Birthday will be observed on Monday.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Tomorrow, Federal and state open, city closed.
Monday, Federal, state, and city closed.


Iraq Says It Won't Free 2 Britons Till London Releases Assets
Iraq refused today to free two Britons serving long jail sentences for entering Iraq illegally unless London releases frozen Iraqi assets, the director general of the British Red Cross said.
After a meeting today with Tariq Aziz, the Deputy Prime Minister, the Red Cross official, Michael Whitlam, said: "He wasn't prepared to listen to any discussion from me, certainly not in the immediate future, about releasing of the men, so I think it looks very much as though we will be going back without them."


Services for Ashe
More than 6,500 people attended the funeral service yesterday in Richmond for Arthur Ashe, the former tennis champion who died Saturday at 49 of complications from AIDS.
He was celebrated for his dignity and courage and, in the words of Andrew Young, for being a "good man." An article appears on Page B17.


GM HUGHES ELECTRONICS (N)
C.
Michael Armstrong, chairman and chief executive of GM Hughes Electronics Corporation, said the company's operating results for 1992 reflected improvements in each of the company's four business segments.
The company specifically cited growth in its automotive electronics division, the acquisition of General Dynamics' missile business and in creased sales of commercial satellites.
GM Hughes Electronics is owned by the General Motors Corporation.


New Sponsor of Parade Says It Is Withdrawing
The group selected to run this year's St.
Patrick's Day Parade withdrew last night, leaving the parade in limbo, after a dispute over the participation of a homosexual group.
Who will sponsor the 231-year-old march up Fifth Avenue on March 17, or whether there will even be a parade, was uncertain last night.
Leaders of the Ancient Order of Hibernians, the traditional sponsor of the parade, have maintained the parade permit should be returned to them.
They could not be reached for comment last night.
But Mayor David N. Dinkins has repeatedly said that unless the courts rule otherwise, he will follow a city Human Rights Commission determination that the parade must be "an inclusive event."


Garden Events: Hearts and Flowers
An Early Spring
Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue, off Eastern Parkway, Prospect Heights; (718) 622-4433.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Named Mike Port assistant general manager.
DETROIT TIGERS -- Agreed to terms with Kirk Gibson, outfielder, on a one-year contract.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.81
2.90
3.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.92
2.92
3.73
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.10
3.81
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.04
5.97
6.83
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.25
7.20
7.80
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.30
8.30
8.90
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.20
6.20
6.75
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Starrett (L.S.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Where Did You Put the Romance, Honey?; Meet You in the Kitchen
AS Valentine's Day approaches, thoughts turn to creating the proper mood at home.
After all, who has the time or money to go out?
But has the reality of mortgages and children, of renovation and no time for anything but a pizza in front of the television set, overtaken the fantasy of soft pillows and warm colors in a bedroom cooled only by a slow overhead fan?


With a Cue From Larry, Phil and Franklin D.
Presidents since Andrew Jackson have used whatever means they had to go over the heads of journalists and other intermediaries to speak directly to "the people," especially when beleaguered.
Bill Clinton did so to good effect during his campaign last year, and tonight he demonstrated his skills again in an electronic town meeting that owed much to Ross Perot, Larry King, Phil Donahue and the latest satellite technology.


Results Plus
TENNIS  Edberg Is Upset
Top-seeded Stefan Edberg, struggling with back pains and with an uncertain form, lost a second-round match to unseeded Omar Camporese of Italy last night in the Muratti Time indoor tournament in Milan.
Camporese, last year's winner in Milan but ranked 77 places behind the Swede in the world lists, served well and played powerful returns and passing shots on his way to a 7-6, 2-6, 6-3 victory at Milan's Forum.
Jude International in Memphis.
"I think he played a good match, but I think a lot of the match just had to do with some of the things I wasn't doing," said Washington, ranked 11th. (AP) Navratilova Gains: Martina Navratilova, the defending champion, held off Ros Fairbank-Nideffer, 6-4, 6-4, in the second round of the Virginia Slims of Chicago tournament.
The second-seeded Navratilova beat Fairbank-Nideffer for the ninth straight time. (AP)  CYCLING  LeMond Leaves Race  Greg LeMond, the three-time Tour de France winner, dropped out of his first cycling race of the season yesterday, giving up in the third stage of the Tour of the Mediterranean.
LeMond was far out of contention after the two stages of Tuesday, falling behind in the team time trial and ending up 150th out of 158 competitors in the overall standing, 3 minutes 37 seconds behind.
In yesterday's stage, from Antibes to Le Faron, France, covering 87 miles, LeMond got off his bike before the first climb of Mount Faron.
Charly Mottet of France took the third stage and is the overall leader, 12 seconds ahead of Heinz Imboden of Switzerland. (AP)


Woolworth Fills Top Job
William K. Lavin, the Woolworth Corporation's chief financial officer, was named yesterday to succeed the company's longtime chairman and chief executive, Harold E. Sells, who intends to retire effective July 1.
Mr.
Sells, who is 64, will remain a director.
He has led a transformation of the 113-year-old retailer once known for its drab variety and discount stores.
In recent years, the New York-based company has remade itself by introducing or acquiring new chains of specialty stores, such as its 1,700-store Foot Locker athletic shoe shops.


Clinics Alter Brisk Emergency-Room Style
Faced with increasing competition from walk-in clinics, hospital emergency rooms across the region are sprucing up and introducing special "fast track" systems to treat patients with minor complaints.
The fast tracks often charge far less than regular emergency rooms and require far shorter waits.
And unlike traditional emergency rooms, they don't require a child with an ear infection to sit in a waiting room next to someone with a gunshot wound or a heart problem.


Where Did You Put the Romance, Honey?; The Friendly Bedroom
AS Valentine's Day approaches, thoughts turn to creating the proper mood at home.
After all, who has the time or money to go out?
But has the reality of mortgages and children, of renovation and no time for anything but a pizza in front of the television set, overtaken the fantasy of soft pillows and warm colors in a bedroom cooled only by a slow overhead fan?


Review/Dance; City Ballet, the Sum and the Parts
George Balanchine never called his company the Balanchine Ballet.
Not for him the monikers that identified 20th-century ballet troupes with their founders, from Pavlova to Bejart, from Mordkin to Joffrey.
Even the forerunners of Balanchine's New York City Ballet were named the American Ballet, American Ballet Caravan and Ballet Society. (All four troupes were established with Lincoln Kirstein.)


Stocks Edge Ahead, But Dow Slips by 2.16
The stock market moved slightly higher yesterday, although several of the large blue-chip issues were weak.
As a result, the Dow Jones industrial fell for the third consecutive day.
Most of the weakness came as stocks responded to sharp losses in bonds, following a disappointing 10-year note auction by the Treasury.
The third and last leg of the refunding will take place today with the auction of a new 30-year bond.


Bridge
Enthusiasts from the New York metropolitan area eager for regional action will be in Cromwell, Conn., this weekend competing in the Sidney Cohen Knockout Team Regional Championships at the Radisson Hartford Hotel.
The schedule of major events is: tomorrow, Flighted Knockout Team, 8:30 P.M. and continues; Saturday, Random Draw Knockout Teams 9 A.M. and continues; Stratified Pairs 1:30 P.M. and 7:30 P.M.; Sunday, Flighted Swiss Teams, noon and 7 P.M.; Monday, Flighted Pairs, two sessions, 11 A.M.


Times Are Bad in Slovakia, but Not That Bad
To the Editor:
"In a New Slovakia, Fears Are Both Old and New" (news article, Jan. 23) reports that Slovaks have been "frantically withdrawing their money from local banks." The opposite is true.


Sierra Health Services reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Somalia's Population
To the Editor:
According to the Johns Hopkins Population Report on Environment and Population Growth, Somali families have an average of 6.6 children, among the highest fertility rates in the world, at that rate doubling their population in 24 years.
Somalia's cropland per capita in 1990 was about one-third acre, critically short and among the lowest anywhere.


Where Did You Put the Romance, Honey?; Favorite Squeeze
AS Valentine's Day approaches, thoughts turn to creating the proper mood at home.
After all, who has the time or money to go out?
But has the reality of mortgages and children, of renovation and no time for anything but a pizza in front of the television set, overtaken the fantasy of soft pillows and warm colors in a bedroom cooled only by a slow overhead fan?


Agency's File Forces Inquiry In Allen Case
New York City investigators are looking into whether high-ranking officials in the Human Resources Administration suppressed an investigation into charges that Woody Allen sexually abused his adopted daughter, a spokesman for the Department of Investigation said yesterday.
The investigation was requested on Tuesday by the Human Resources Commissioner, Barbara J. Sabol, after a newspaper article described the contents of the agency's file on Mr.
Allen, said the spokesman, Peter Benjaminson.


A Texas Jail Wing Just for Christians
Inmates call it the God Pod.
They're talking about a Christians-only wing at the county jail that features religious videos, hymn sings, Bible instruction and what one nonbelieving convict complained to his lawyer recently is "a cushier life style" than other inmates lead.


Nuevo Energy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Air Methods (ECM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Treatment for Owner
The Tampa Bay Buccaneers' owner, HUGH CULVERHOUSE, 73, will begin chemotherapy treatment for lung cancer today in Tampa, Fla., a statement issued by the team said. (AP)


Mercury General (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dollar Mixed as Investors Await Trade Talk Resolution
The dollar finished mixed against other leading currencies in light, technically driven trading yesterday as investors awaited the outcome of a standoff in trade talks between the United States and Japan.
Gold prices fell in New York after rising in Europe.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for April delivery, the most actively traded futures contract, lost $2, settling at $383.70 an ounce.


TRW Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Backs Bosnian Peace Plan, Dropping Threats to Use Force
The Clinton Administration today abandoned the tough campaign talk of using force to end the war in the Balkans, and embraced an international peace process that currently envisions allowing the Serbs to keep lands seized from Bosnia and Herzegovina in a campaign of "ethnic cleansing."
Unveiling the Administration's long-awaited Balkan policy today, Secretary of State Warren Christopher offered a six-point initiative that could commit American ground troops as part of an international force to enforce peace in the country should all sides agree to a settlement.  [ Excerpts, page A12. ]


Currents; Fanciful Folk Furniture
JOE LITTLE CREEK enjoys hiking through the hills of northeast Georgia.
Along the way he collects twigs, stumps and other pieces from fallen trees, which he uses to make colorful birdhouses, cupboards, chairs, canes, etageres, tables and rockers.
Brightly painted handcarved fish accent "Wishful Thinking," below, a powder-blue twig rocker with hunter-green dots.
The legs, back and trim are made of rhodendron, the seat of barn boards.
It is $1,850.


Ceremony for Johnson
MAGIC JOHNSON will receive his Olympic championship ring in a special presentation at halftime of the Los Angeles Lakers-Atlanta Hawks game Sunday night at the Forum in Inglewood, Calif.
The ring, which commemorates the United States basketball team's victory at the Barcelona Olympics, will be presented by CRAIG MILLER, director of public relations for USA Basketball, the national governing body for basketball.
The ring is made of 10-karat yellow gold with five diamonds depicting the Olympic rings, and includes Johnson's name, jersey number and the date of the gold-medal game.


Promus Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Saudi Minister Warns Against New Oil Taxes
The Saudi Arabian oil minister, Hisham M. Nazer, made an indirect but strong plea today for the Clinton Administration not to impose taxes aimed at reducing oil consumption and imports.
Mr.
Nazer, speaking at a conference of oil executives sponsored by Cambridge Energy Research Associates, hinted that the Saudis and other large oil exporters might respond in ways that he did not detail.
Oil import fees "defy the logic of geology and economics," he said.
Mr.
Nazer indicated that the Saudis' heavy investments in in new producing fields, as well as in American refining and marketing outlets, would suffer if Washington approved oil-related taxes.


Connecticut's Strategy: Ingenuity and Investment
Connecticut's struggles to heal its economy and stop the loss of jobs caused by military cutbacks have not turned the tide.
Economists say that while the end of the recession may yet lift the state's other industries, like insurance, banking and real estate, military contractors are unlikely ever again to require the number of workers they needed even five years ago.
The implications of that fact resonate through just about every aspect of life in the state.
Along With Aid, More Setbacks
"If you took Connecticut's difficulties and blew them up to the national level, you'd have social revolt in the streets," said Edward J. Deak, a professor of economics at Fairfield University.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  U.S.
ACCEPTS BOSNIA PEACE PLAN  The Clinton Administration abandoned its tough talk of using force to end the Balkans war and embraced an international peace process that would allow Serbs to keep lands seized in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher offered the six-point plan, which could commit United States ground troops as part of an international enforcement group.
A1  A CENTER ROLE FOR MOSCOW  News analysis: For the first time since the collapse of the Soviet Union, Moscow is moving into the center of the diplomatic arena as a result of President Clinton's conclusion that Russia can exert significant influence over the fate of his plan to end the war in Bosnia.
A12  54 DIE IN BOSNIA FIGHTING  Battles between Serbian and Muslim forces in eastern Bosnia have reportedly exacted a heavy toll over the last 24 hours, killing 54.
A13  POPE SEEKS HELP FOR SUDANESE  Comparing the plight of Christians in the Sudan to that of Jesus on the cross, Pope John Paul II urged the country's Islamic leaders to cease what he called religious persecution of Christians and end "the terrible harvest of suffering" caused by civil war in the south.
A3  INSPECTIONS FOR NORTH KOREA?
Intensifying a standoff with North Korea over its suspected nuclear bomb project, the head of the International Atomic Energy Agency has decided to issue an unusual demand that the country immediately open two mysterious buildings to inspection, Western diplomats said.
A6  NO NEW JAPANESE TRADE MOVES  Japan's Foreign Minister, preparing for what could be an uneasy first encounter with the Clinton Administration, said that economic disputes "cannot be allowed to destroy Japan-United States relations" but that he had no major new initiatives to defuse tensions over trade.
A8  3 DIE AT CAMBODIA TOURIST CENTER  Unidentified gunmen wearing military uniforms killed two Cambodians and wounded a Portuguese tourist and nine other people in an attack on a Cambodian tourist center that President Mitterrand of France is scheduled to visit this week.
A10  A Taiwanese was named Premier in shift from the Nationalists.
A11  Jerusalem Journal: Messianic Jews under fire in Israel.
A4  National A16-29, B16  CLINTON'S 'TOWN HALL'  Three weeks into his term, the President traveled to Michigan for give-and-take with a television audience, hoping it would help his Administration recover from early controversies and make the case for economic sacrifice.
A1  A MODERN-DAY FIRESIDE CHAT  News analysis: The President's question-and-answer session skirted a skeptical Washington press corps and marked the start of a politically crucial effort to build a constituency for programs resisted by entrenched interests.
A1  Clinton's arrival in Michigan was carefully choreographed.
A27  Clinton ordered a cut of 100,000 jobs from the Federal work force.
A28  The search for an Attorney General continues to focus on women.
A28  After Baird: A report says the immigration law isn't working.
A28  Washington Talk: The new perspective in the Senate is female.
A28  Powell denied that discord would motivate his early retirement.
A29  THE DEBATE ON SOCIAL SECURITY  Many of the nation's 41 million Social Security recipients, whether retired in comfort or barely surviving, have something to lose as the Administration's deficit-cutters struggle to find a politically palatable way to restrain the program.
A1  G.M.
PUNISHES NBC NEWS  General Motors suspended advertising on all NBC News programs indefinitely.
The network, meanwhile, announced an "urgent and intense" review of why the "Dateline NBC" program had tampered with a G.M. pickup so that it would be certain to catch fire in a filmed collision.
A1  BIG GAIN IN PHONE TECHNOLOGY  In one of the most significant advances for telephone customers since touch-tone dialing, people will soon be able to reach a phone number by simply speaking the name of whomever they are calling.
D1  BREACH AT THREE MILE ISLAND  A driver who crashed through a fence at the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant on Sunday and then hid there for four hours caused no significant damage at the complex but has set back the atomic power industry's three-year-old campaign to drop some security rules.
A16  NEW FINDINGS ON THE EARTH'S CORE  A powerful nuclear explosion in China last year has opened a window on the earth's deep interior, revealing intriguing and hitherto unknown geological details, American scientists reported.
B16  'THE GOD POD'  A Christians-only wing at the county jail in Fort Worth features religious videos, the singing of hymns and Bible instruction.
It is also the subject of a budding civil liberties dispute that may wind up in the Texas courts.
A16  Investigators reported new evidence on the C.I.A. shootings.A19  Space shuttle inspections since the spring may have been faulty.
A22  Metro Digest B1  BOARD OUSTS CHANCELLOR  The New York City Board of Education voted to oust Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez when his contract expires in June, capping a week of political quarreling over the future of the school system and its top official.
The board's 4-to-3 vote ushered in a period of heightened uncertainty for city schools.
A1  ASSESSING IMPACT OF VOTE  While Mr.
Fernandez may have brought his ouster on himself through an abrasive style and political misjudgments, his departure as New York City Schools Chancellor could haunt the Board of Education for years to come.
The ouster could make it difficult to attract top talent, and it raises questions about the future of the board itself.
A1  Business Digest D1  Home Section C1-16  Where'd you put the romance, honey?
C1  Stephen Jay Gould: An evolving celebrity.
C1  The toy stereotypes unravel.
C1  Arts/Entertainment C19-32  A film maker's lot: struggle.
C19  Music: A Rossini romp.
C19  Dance: City Ballet.
C19  Sports B17-23  Basketball: Nets topple Pistons.
B17  Tennis: Ashe eulogized in Richmond.
B17  Obituaries D23  Editorials/Op-Ed A30-31  Editorials  Marching blind into Bosnia.
Fire the Board of Education.
Weicker's budget is the better one.
Letters  William Safire: Justice in contempt.
Leslie H. Gelb: Taking the lead, timidly.
Jon Cowan and Rob Nelson: A cowardly retreat.
Oleh Bilorus: Ukraine needs protection.


A King Performance Daly Can't Forget
There are games people don't forget. For Chuck Daly, one was played on April 27, 1984.
Not that he could remember it by the month, date or even the year.
He can't tell you the final score or which player scored what, and he didn't even recall that it happened to be his first season as head coach in Detroit.
Daly -- and he is far from alone here -- primarily recalls this night as simply: Game 5 at Joe Louis Arena.


Associates Corp. of North America reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Ferdinand Platzer, A Restaurateur, 68, And Innovative Chef
Ferdinand K. Platzer, a chef and restaurateur in New York and New Jersey, died yesterday at his home in Elberon, N.J., at the age of 68.
His family said cancer was the cause.


Boxing; Winner-Take-All Is Talk On Fight, but of What?
What would it take for Riddick Bowe and Lennox Lewis to fight each other?
Representatives for Bowe, who owns two-thirds of boxing's heavyweight championship, and Lewis, who owns one-third of the title, would have you believe that a winner-take-all purse might do the trick.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Jan. 28 about the sale of the First City Bancorporation by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation misstated the circumstances of the dismissal of the bank's chairman, A. Robert Abboud, in 1991.
He was dismissed by the bank's board, not by Government regulators.


Economic Scene; To raise Federal revenue, reduce those sacred tax preferences.
IT'S simply a matter of arithmetic.
To cut the promised $145 billion from the budget deficit without gutting the military or declaring generational war on the Social Security lobby, President Clinton must ask for higher income tax rates on the middle class or float some brand new tax like an energy levy.
Or is it that simple?
The White House has apparently not given much consideration to one very alluring route to raising major bucks, slashing revenue-reducing tax preferences -- what economists call "tax expenditures."


PARENT &amp; CHILD
AT their best, summer jobs provide teen-agers with a chance to learn new skills, increase their confidence and ease their transition to adulthood.
At their worst, they offer little more than a menial wage in exchange for grueling, repetitive, unskilled labor that teaches adolescents nothing about themselves or the world of work.
Many of the best summer jobs are already taken by early spring, so it's a good idea for teen-agers to start looking now.
More and more, researchers are studying the effects of employment on adolescent development.
It's become clear that holding a summer job can be very beneficial to teen-agers.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Jan. 25 about Saudi Arabia's proposal to reduce oil output misattributed a quotation.
It was Saudi Arabia's oil minister, Hisham M. Nazer, not Allirio Parra, the president of OPEC, who said: "We are calling upon OPEC to reduce production from the official ceiling of the organization by one million barrels a day. If it is adhered to in a proportionate way by all members of OPEC, it should have a considerable impact on oil prices, in my opinion, in the second quarter."


Sports Briefings; Louisiana Track Suspends Jockey
Jockey Rick Faul drew a six-month suspension from stewards at the Fair Grounds on Tuesday for allegedly having illegal shocking devices at the track.
The suspension was ordered after a closed hearing, and stewards referred the case to the Louisiana State Racing Commission for further action.
At the same time, Faul filed an appeal that could allow him to ride until the commission hears the case.


All Aboard the Economic Recovery Flier
To the Editor:
The merits of rail transportation, substantial compared with highways, have been overlooked in coverage of President Clinton's strategy of infrastructure investment for economic recovery.
Our dependence on road transport exemplifies the inefficient use of resources in the United States.


Handy &amp; Harman reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Japan Official Plans No Initiatives in U.S. Visit
Japan's Foreign Minister, preparing for what could be an uneasy first encounter with the Clinton Administration, says that economic disputes "cannot be allowed to destroy Japan-United States relations" but that he had no major new initiatives to defuse tensions over trade.
In an interview Tuesday evening, Michio Watanabe, who also serves as Deputy Prime Minister, acknowledged that balooning trade surpluses and American calls for a tougher trade policy were creating a turbulent atmosphere for his meetings this week in Washington with President Clinton and top Administration officials.


Bruce Kelly Memorial
A memorial service for Bruce Kelly, the landscape architect and designer of Strawberry Fields in Central Park, is to be held on Tuesday at 12:15 P.M. at Christ Church, Park Avenue at 60th Street.
Mr.
Kelly died on Jan. 21 at the age of 44.


Southeastern Michigan Gas Enterprises Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Self-Defense Is Claimed for Youth Held in Slaying
Two days before he pulled a gun outside the Amityville High School cafeteria and killed one youth and wounded another, Shem S. McCoy was the victim of a drive-by shooting, his lawyer said in court today.
Saying Mr.
McCoy had been repeatedly warned by friends "to watch his back," his lawyer, Andrew B. Siben, argued that Mr.
McCoy fired in self-defense when he was "aggressively assaulted" by three youths outside the school cafeteria on Feb. 1.


Simpson Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


British Air Investment Means American Jobs
To the Editor:
"The Airline Agreement: No Losers" (editorial, March 14, 1991) described the benefits for United States travelers of an agreement that gave United and American Airlines landing rights at London's Heathrow Airport.
In "No Merger With Open Skies" (editorial, Jan. 28), you enjoin the United States Government to renege on that agreement, by blocking passenger transfer arrangements between British Airways and USAir.


Where Did You Put the Romance, Honey?; Magic Requires a Carpet
AS Valentine's Day approaches, thoughts turn to creating the proper mood at home.
After all, who has the time or money to go out?
But has the reality of mortgages and children, of renovation and no time for anything but a pizza in front of the television set, overtaken the fantasy of soft pillows and warm colors in a bedroom cooled only by a slow overhead fan?


AT THE SCIENCE MUSEUM WITH -- Stephen Jay Gould; An Evolving Celebrity
Stephen Jay Gould is in the cafeteria of the California Academy of Sciences, a snug West Coast rendition of the American Museum of Natural History in New York, and he is about to try what generations of children have delighted in doing whenever they have been in a lunchroom: blow the wrapper from a drinking straw at the ceiling and make it stick.
He dunks one end of a straw and its wrapper into a glass of water, and the paper forms a silly, soggy proboscis at the tip -- the sticky part.
He carefully tears the other side of the wrapper so he can hold and blow at the same time.
Oh, yes, he loves the straw trick, this esteemed 51-year-old Harvard University professor of geology, biology and the history of science, tireless writer of densely elegant science essays that reach a huge popular audience and, it so happens, international authority on a small tropical snail called Cerion.


Job Cuts By I.B.M. May Rise
With its business continuing to weaken, I.B.M. is preparing to cut its work force this year by far more than the 25,000 people it had previously announced, analysts and consultants close to the troubled computer maker say.
An I.B.M. spokesman denied that the company had started considering plans for broader cuts in its work force.
"We're still working off the 25,000 umbrella and that's still the plan of record," said James Ruderman, the spokesman.


Tearing Down the Barricades to the Disabled; New York City Is Seen as the Proving Ground for a Federal Anti-Discrimination Law
Federal law bans discrimination against the 43 million Americans with physical or mental impairments and promotes their employment rights and access to places to work, learn and shop.
But it doesn't address the question of what to do when a motorized wheelchair short-circuits and catches fire while crossing 34th Street.
What it takes to bring down barriers to the disabled in New York City -- from developing emergency repair service for broken wheelchairs, to revamping subway stations -- gives a glimpse of the broad-scale changes it will take to make the goals of the 1990 Americans with Disabilities Act a reality.
New York's Experience
If history is any guide, the rest of the country will be watching what happens with private and public initiatives here.
The Federal law's provisions on access build significantly on New York's experience in the 80's, when the city became a leader in legal action to protect the disabled from discrimination, even using the language of local laws.


Some Super Bowl Fans Can Read and Write
To the Editor:
"A Super Alternative" (editorial, Jan. 31) scoffs at the 120 million Americans who tune in to the Super Bowl, that plebeian "celebration of coordinated group movement and the ability to suppress independent thought." Worse, it's all a capitalist charade, acted out at the behest of greedy barons of business in search of big bucks.
I suppose you're right.
The media hype becomes grating.


G.M. Suspends Ads on NBC News Despite Apology for Truck Report
Despite a long and detailed on-air apology from NBC News, General Motors said yesterday that it had suspended advertising on all NBC News programs indefinitely but would continue buying spots on entertainment and sports programs.
G.M.'s announcement came as NBC executives announced an "urgent and intense" review of how and why their news magazine program "Dateline NBC" decided to tamper with a G.M. pickup truck so that it would be certain to catch fire in a filmed collision.


Where Did You Put the Romance, Honey?; A Tile Is Still a Tile
AS Valentine's Day approaches, thoughts turn to creating the proper mood at home.
After all, who has the time or money to go out?
But has the reality of mortgages and children, of renovation and no time for anything but a pizza in front of the television set, overtaken the fantasy of soft pillows and warm colors in a bedroom cooled only by a slow overhead fan?


Garden Q.&amp; A.
A Windy Scheme
Q.
My house is at the edge of a windy meadow and I desperately need something to temper the winds.
What do you suggest? -- Harold A. Crown Jr., Dedham, Mass.


An Eye on Fashion, Not the Books
When the outside accountants began investigating reports of doctored books at the Leslie Fay Companies last week, they discovered several unopened envelopes from the well-known dress manufacturer's bankers.
Donald F. Kenia, the controller who told company officials that he had altered the company's books, apparently had been so busy juggling phantom numbers that he had neglected to reconcile the statements that monitor financings for hundreds of millions of dollars in goods Leslie Fay buys from abroad.


SEARCH IS WIDENING IN C.I.A. SHOOTINGS
The chief suspect in the shooting deaths last month of two Central Intelligence Agency employees worked for a courier service that made deliveries to C.I.A. headquarters, although he did not have a security clearance to enter the compound himself, law-enforcement officials said today.
They said there were indications that the suspect, Mir Aimal Kansi, 28, had returned to his native Pakistan.


Calendar: Maps and Crafts Classes
Maps and Beyond
Cooper-Hewitt Museum, 2 East 91st Street; (212) 860-6862.


Paddington Merges Accounts
The Paddington Corporation in Fort Lee, N.J., said yesterday that it had consolidated its premium spirits-brands accounts at two New York-based agencies: Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising and Lowe &amp; Partners, effective immediately.
The accounts, with combined billings estimated at $28 million to $30 million, were previously divided among Saatchi and two other New York shops, Grace &amp; Rothschild and Geer, DuBois.


INSIDE
Big Cutbacks for I.B.M.
I.B.M. is said to be preparing to cut its work force this year by at least 40,000, mostly in the marketing and support staff, far more than the 25,000 it had previously announced.
Page D1.
Paying the Penalty of Peace
Connecticut's struggles to stop the loss of jobs from military cuts have not turned the tide, and implications resonate throughout the state.
Last of three articles, page B1.
Pope's Plea for Sudanese
Pope John Paul II called repeatedly for Sudan's Islamic leaders to cease what he called the religious persecution of Christians.
Page A3.
Just Call Out the Name
People will soon be able to dial a telephone number by speaking the name of the person they are calling with a new Nynex service.
Page D1.


AETNA LIFE &amp; CASUALTY CO. (N)
The Aetna Life and Casualty Company yesterday reported a net loss of $192 million, reflecting in part one-time charges for accounting changes, asbestos costs and losses from heavy hurricane and storm damage.
Revenues dipped 1.4 percent, to $4.31 billion.
Analysts noted that the Hartford-based insurer had previously disclosed that it would take these charges.
Ronald W. Frank, an insurance industry analyst for Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company, said that market conditions for Aetna's commercial property-casualty looked ominous, because of soft pricing and reduced volume.
He said that he was not confident the unit would be profitable this year.


T J International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Steven Ross Memorial
A memorial service for Steven J. Ross, the former chairman of Time Warner Inc., who died on Dec. 20, will be held today at 11 A.M. at Carnegie Hall.





Washington Talk; Voices of New Women Resound in the Senate
Debate in the Senate sounds a little different these days.
Senators have always gone beyond the records of hearings and studies when they debated legislation.
They cite lessons they learned as governors or businessmen, and most of all in wartime.
And all of those familiar notes were sounded last week when the Senate debated the family leave bill and argued about homosexuals in the armed forces.


Coaching Isn't for The Faint Nowadays
From Dean Smith to Lou Campanelli, the complexities of college coaching were never so apparent as they were earlier this week.
On Tuesday, Smith moved into a tie for third place on the career victory list, getting his 759th as North Carolina defeated Maryland, 77-63.


Gunmen Kill Two in a Cambodian Tourist Center
Unidentified gunmen wearing military uniforms killed two Cambodians and wounded a Portuguese tourist and nine other people today in an attack on a Cambodian tourist center that President Francois Mitterrand of France is scheduled to visit this week.
Although United Nations peacekeepers said there was insufficient evidence to identify the gunmen or to suggest a motive for the violence, the Cambodian Government attributed the attack to the Khmer Rouge and warned of a possible Government counterstrike against the Maoist guerrillas.


DI Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Executive Changes
AMERICAN GENERAL CORP., Houston, a consumer financial services organization, appointed James S. D'Agostino Jr. executive vice president for administration.
BROWN &amp; WILLIAMSON TOBACCO CORP., Louisville, Ky., a unit of B.A.T.
Industries P.L.C. of Britain, appointed Earl E. Kohnhorst, an executive vice president, to the additional position of chief operating officer.
Also, Michael J. McGraw was named senior vice president for legal and human resources.


Aiming To Reignite A Flame
The National Hockey League's Olympic flame, flickering and nearly extinguished in recent weeks, might burn a little more brightly after the meeting in New York today between Juan Antonio Samaranch and Gary Bettman.
Or it could be doused for at least five years.
Samaranch, president of the International Olympic Committee, revealed plans for the meeting at a breakfast with reporters on Tuesday.
Bettman, the new commissioner of the N.H.L. requested it.
They know each other from Dream Team dealings when Bettman worked for the National Basketball Association.


Clinton's Campaign '93: A Different Trail but a Familiar Format
When President Clinton stepped onto the spare, blue soundstage at station WXYZ-TV here, the carefully screened audience, billed as a group of skeptical questioners, burst into giddy applause.
The President's reception in this Detroit suburb was better than any he had received in the campaign, during which he first grew fond of the question-and-answer "town meeting" format he used tonight on his first trip outside Washington since his inauguration three weeks ago.


Toys Will Be Toys: The Stereotypes Unravel
WILL this be the year the gender barrier falls, or at least shows a few nicks?
Will boys play with trolls?
Will girls go for action figures?
And is America ready for Ken's make-over?


Corrections
A music review on Tuesday about a presentation by the Arcadian Academy at the Metropolitan Museum misidentified the lecturer on music.
She is Ellen T. Harris, not Ellen T. Smith.


Schultz Sav-O Stores (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Powell Says Retirement Decision Is Not Linked to Policy Difference
Gen.
Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said today that he might retire "a month or two" before his term ends, but he denied that any policy differences with the Clinton Administration had motivated his decision.
Appearing on four morning news programs today, General Powell confirmed an account in The New York Times today that he had told Defense Secretary Les Aspin recently, and Defense Secretary Dick Cheney last year, that he would like to leave before his term expired on Sept. 30.


Olympian Improves
The Cuban runner ANA QUIROT, critically burned in a household accident in January, is out of danger, according to Cuba's Prensa Latina news agency.
Quirot, who was 30 weeks pregnant at the time of the Jan. 22 accident, suffered burns to over 28 percent of her body, the agency said Tuesday in a dispatch monitored in Mexico City.
It said she underwent skin grafts over the weekend and began improving rapidly.
Doctors induced labor, but the infant, a girl, died on Feb. 1.
Quirot, 29, won a bronze medal in the 800 meters in the Barcelona Olympics. (AP)


New Orleans Restores a Monument, and Stirs a Furor
The restoration of a monument commemorating the dead of an 1874 rebellion against the Reconstruction government in post-Civil War New Orleans is being attacked by some citizens as a remnant of white supremacy.
Others are unhappy with the addition of a new plaque that honors 11 black police officers killed on the side of the government in the Battle of Liberty Place. (Associated Press)


Standard Commercial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Complexity of a Fiscal Giant: A Primer on Social Security
Some are 65-year-old couples living on golf courses and celebrating their retirement with Caribbean cruises.
Others are 90-year-old widows surviving on cans of soup.
But the nation's 41 million Social Security recipients are getting more from the system than they put in.
And many have something to lose as the Clinton Administration's deficit-cutters struggle this week to find a politically palatable way to restrain the $303 billion program, perhaps the nation's most politically volatile.


VF Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


BOARD REMOVES FERNANDEZ AS NEW YORK SCHOOLS CHIEF AFTER STORMY 3-YEAR TERM
The New York City Board of Education voted yesterday to oust Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez when his contract expires in June, capping a week of furious political quarreling over the future of the city's public school system and its top official.
The board's 4-to-3 vote at the end of a tumultuous six-hour meeting ushered in a period of heightened uncertainty for the city's schools.
Bitterly divided by the showdown over Mr.
Fernandez's future as well as by many of his initiatives, the board must now search for its sixth schools chancellor in a decade.


Currents; Recycling Glass For Art's Sake
WHEN the party's over, Deborah Thomas is there to collect the leftover bottles.
Where some see trash, Miss Thomas envisions iridescent chandeliers, once the bottles are shattered and shaped.
"Everyone fantasizes that I throw them against the wall and have this smashing time, but it can get a bit painstaking," said Miss Thomas, who works in London.


A Maze Crossed by Violent Pathways
ALONG the gritty streets of Maspeth, Queens, where the Elmhurst Gas Tanks loom above rowhouses and wood-frame homes, a hidden passageway winds between two warehouses near an embankment overlooking the Conrail railroad tracks, a grafitti-marred labyrinth littered with spray cans, beer bottles and bullet casings.
In a city with few places for young people to congregate and pass their time away, the passageway, known as "the Maze," has served for years as a hangout for teen-agers in this working-class neighborhood, a hideaway where they acted out, against an urban backdrop, their own versions of the adventures of Huckleberry Finn.


No Headline
"In some sense, Social Security is a victim of its own success. It has dramatically improved the well-being of the elderly. And the question is, Is enough enough?" -- RICHARD BURKHAUSER, an economist at Syracuse University.  [ A29:3. ]


HON Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


In the World of Fragrance, Reputations Rest on the Nose . . .; . . . And Follow    Your    Nose When Buying a Gift
VALENTINE'S DAY sends many friends and lovers to the fragrance counters, but no one scent fits all.
First, don't assume that everyone will appreciate a gift of perfume or cologne.
Some men and women don't like scent and never wear it.


Masco Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Oglebay Norton (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Piggott Rides Again
The British jockey LESTER PIGGOTT failed to win in four rides yesterday as he returned to racing after recovering from injuries suffered in a near-fatal spill in October.
The 57-year-old provided some excitement with two close finishes in his third and fourth races in Dubai, United Arab Emirates.
Piggott rode three horses in the colors of Sheik AHMED BIN RASHID AL-MAKTOUM, a member of Dubai's ruling family.
They included Red Rainbow, who finished second in the featured Jumairah Stakes, a neck behind the winner, Shati.


Tax-Exempt Yields Lower But Taxables Change Little
Yields offered by tax-exempt and taxable money market funds were mixed in the latest week.
The current survey of tax-exempt money market funds by IBC/Donohue's Money Fund Report showed that tax-exempt yields fell sharply for the seven-day period ended Tuesday, largely because of a sharp inflow of funds after a rise in tax-exempt yields the previous week.


Horse Racing: Notebook; Russ, Aboard 30-1 Shot, Gets Comeback Victory
Mary Russ, who took six years off from racing to be with her three children, returned last month at the age of 39 and resumed her riding career.
But she didn't win until today, when she nudged home the 30-1 long shot Boots 'n Buck in the Fast Hilarious Handicap at Gulfstream Park, and did it with style and drama.
They were eighth and last after half a mile, then sixth after three-quarters and third turning for home.
Down the stretch, they were fighting two other horses nose to nose, and they were separated by inches in a tight photo finish: Boots 'n Buck by a head over Czar, who had a nose over Archies Laughter.
The winner ran the mile and an eighth in 1:511/5 and returned a melodramatic $63.80 for every bettor who put $2 on Russ and her horse.


Review/Television; Life Is No Easier, but Tennison Soldiers On
Sequels can be treacherous, particularly when the original was something of an instant classic.
Think of last year's "Prime Suspect," the "Mystery" mini-series, created and written by Lynda La Plante, that put into orbit the career of a gifted English actress named Helen Mirren.
Now, there is "Prime Suspect 2," written by Allan Cubitt ("The Countess Alice") from a story line by Ms.
La Plante.
Relax.
The sequel, directed by John Strickland, is powerful, every bit as good as the original and in some ways even better.
Ms.
Mirren's Detective Chief Inspector Jane Tennison can still, as the show's host, Diana Rigg, puts it, "feel the sting of sexism," but her investigative staff, her "lads," have generally come to respect her drive and intelligence.
There are hints, especially in her softer hair styling, that Tennison is relaxing ever so slightly, all the while realizing that she will have to prove herself over and over to her male superiors.
She doesn't even pretend to be happy with her life.


In the World of Fragrance, Reputations Rest on the Nose . . .
TAKE a look at Sophia Grojsman.
It's hard not to.
Most eyes shift when she walks down the street or into a room, up, up from the nailhead-studded pumps, the white hose and the not-quite-mini skirt to the tousle of reddish hair punctuated with a butter-yellow curl on the forehead and the glistening hazel eyes.
The nose? Mrs. Grojsman is, in fact, defined by it. She's known as
a
nose, and she's a top one.
Over the last two decades, she has been instrumental in the development of more than 20 successful fragrances.


Review/Music; For His Debut Recital, A Pianist Goes Fugal
The debut recital of Awadagin Pratt at Alice Tully Hall on Tuesday night was sold out.
The 26-year-old pianist was presented as a winner of the Naumberg 1992 International Piano Competition and there was much advance word of his abilities.
In addition (though in an ideal world it would be irrelevant), Mr.
Pratt, born in Pittsburgh, is black.
At a time when there are few black American classical musicians either onstage or in the audiences of concert halls, this aspect of his curriculum vitae is very relevant to interest in his career.
Mr.
Pratt seems well trained: he studied at the University of Illinois and at the Peabody Conservatory, where he was the first student in the conservatory's history to receive diplomas in three performance areas (piano, violin and conducting).
But Mr.
Pratt is very much a musician in progress and needs to rethink some of his basic approaches to the piano and its music.


Review/Opera; Rossini Romp of Disguise, Seduction and Illusion
Rossini's abandonment of operatic composition in 1829 is a biographic enigma second only to the 30-year silence of the elderly Sibelius.
Some scholars have argued that opera's evolution toward the age of Verdi and Wagner made Rossini feel increasingly out of date; but there are contrasting indications that the composer's agile intelligence became impatient with operatic conventions old and new.
"Le Comte Ory," Rossini's farewell to comic opera, looks like an old-fashioned buffo romp at first glance, but it has hidden depths and peculiarities.
Philip Gossett, America's foremost Rossini scholar, notes its "sexual and musical shadows, disguises and illusions." The plot revolves around Ory's attempted seduction of a Countess whose husband is away at the Crusades; in the final trio, Ory, dressed as a nun, thinks he has embraced the Countess in the dark, only to find that it is his own manservant Isolier (sung by a mezzo-soprano).
Avoiding the madcap setting that convention might have demanded, Rossini writes off-kilter and slitheringly chromatic music for this scene; order is restored in the martial finale, but an intriguing tone of decadence lingers.
These reflections are prompted by Tuesday night's smoothly idiomatic rendition of "Le Comte Ory" given in concert form by the Opera Francais de New York, at Gould Hall.
Yves Abel, the company's director, gave the buffo episodes brilliance and bite, the lyric stretches a spacious eloquence.
Since Mr.
Abel founded the group in 1988, the Opera Francais has acquired a reputation as a fine independent company; for the most part, this performance did not frustrate expectations.
Jeffrey Francis, a tenor, took the title role's murderously broad range in stride; a nasal edge to his voice enhanced the antiheroic side of Ory's character, although toward the beginning his delivery should have been more seductively fluid.
Lauren Flanigan, a soprano, sometimes seemed too powerful as the timid Countess, but her virtuosity drew shouts of praise from the audience.
Kristine Jepson was an accomplished Isolier, singing with assurance high into her upper range.
The supporting cast had a couple of weaknesses: Joy Hermalyn did not provide enough contrasting delicacy as the Countess's companion, Ragonde, and the enthusiastic Jan Opalach had moments of wavering intonation as the tutor.
But Philip Cokorinos, a bass-baritone, made the most of the opera's comic highlight, Raimbaud's drinking aria.
Nathalie Morais, Paul D. Moore and Pierre Lorieau filled out the cast.
The orchestra played with energy and eloquence; there were some odd sounds from the string section, but the wind playing blended elegantly with the voices.
The chorus propelled the action handsomely.


Time for Commissioner Is:    Now or Later
As major league baseball closes in on the half-year mark of its life without a commissioner, two schools of thought emerge on the future of that office.
And the argument is settling not on who should be given the job, but when it should be filled.
One school states that it believes in a strong commissioner, but does not want one until after the tough decisions on labor, national television contracts and playoff format changes have been made.
The other school holds that a strong commissioner is needed, and needed as soon as possible, rejecting outright the notion of shielding the commissioner from the game or the game from a commissioner.


Dollar Mixed as Investors Await Trade Talk Resolution
The dollar finished mixed against other leading currencies in light, technically driven trading yesterday as investors awaited the outcome of a standoff in trade talks between the United States and Japan.
Gold prices fell in New York after rising in Europe.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for April delivery, the most actively traded futures contract, lost $2, settling at $383.70 an ounce.


Court Blocks Demolishing Band Shell
An appellate court ruled unanimously yesterday that New York City may not demolish the Naumburg Bandshell, a bit of history in the center of Central Park that city officials say has become an obsolete, dilapidated nuisance.
The ruling by a four-judge panel of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in Manhattan upheld a lower-court decision that the city could not destroy the limestone, neoclassical band shell, and raised new obstacles to the demolition.
City officials are weighing whether to appeal.


A Plan for Close-Up Images of Earth From Space
A small California company formed by a scientist who worked on the military's so-called Star Wars program has been licensed by the Government to launch a series of photo satellites that will make it possible for customers to directly dial up high-resolution images of earth and view them on their personal computers.
The new system, even though capable of producing the highest-quality commercially available images from space, will not approach the close-up power of military spy satellites, which is why the Department of Defense agreed to permit the license for the relatively weaker system.
Military satellites can discern objects as small as one foot in diameter, civilian experts say.
The permit is the first granted under a law passed last year by Congress.
Political and Economic Impact
Readily and widely available high-resolution images of the earth could have a significant political and economic impact, according to business experts and Government officials.
Besides making it harder for the world's military powers to launch surprise attacks, the pictures might be used for purposes like corporate espionage or news gathering.


Time to Restore Justice In Death Penalty Cases
To the Editor:
"Deadly Injustice" (editorial, Feb. 1) demonstrates the urgent need for Congress to pass habeas corpus reforms, covering safeguards against illegal detention or imprisonment, especially in death penalty cases.
Habeas corpus is the principal means by which the Federal courts enforce the Bill of Rights in state criminal cases.


Chris Blazakis, 39, A Fashion Executive
Chris Blazakis, a fashion executive who prompted investigations of Nancy Reagan by contending that she improperly kept $2 million in free designer clothes, furs and jewelry, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 39.
His death was a result of AIDS, said David Farneth, his companion for 21 years.


Trooper Kills Youth, 14, After Newark Car Chase
A 14-year-old boy driving a stolen car was shot and killed by a state trooper today at the end of a 10-mile chase that was punctuated by repeated rammings of police vehicles by the fleeing car, law-enforcement officials said.
The shooting occurred on a dead-end street in Bloomfield, just off exit 150 of the Garden State Parkway, where two officers approached the car, thinking it was boxed in, said the Essex County Prosecutor, Clifford J. Minor.
Instead of surrendering, the driver raced the car toward the officers, forcing them to jump out of the way, Mr.
Minor said.


Retail Sales Gained 0.3% Last Month
Consumers kept on spending in January, pushing retail sales up three-tenths of 1 percent, the Commerce Department reported today.
Department stores and automotive dealers recorded the biggest gains.
While the overall increase was a bit shy of expectations -- and was accompanied by a downward revision for December -- analysts said they were not worried that the economic rebound was losing momentum.
Rather they saw the results, based as usual on partial data, as continuing an upward trend that has generated six increases in seven months.


Cummins Engine reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Aequitron Medical (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 13


CHRONICLE
A car that KATHARINE HEPBURN was riding in ran another car off a road in Petersburg, Va., on Wednesday evening, as the actress and a companion were looking for a place to spend the night, the police there said.
No one was injured and no charges were filed, said Lieut.
Melvin Jones, a precinct commander in Petersburg, 18 miles south of Richmond.
The car, a 1992 Buick registered to the 83-year-old Miss Hepburn, was driven by HOWARD FREDERICK, he said.


Revenue 9,742,529 8,574,414


Books of The Times; A Tale of Rape, Murder, Sound, Fury
Recital of the Dog By David Rabe 308 pages. Grove Press. $19.95.
David Rabe's plays -- from "Sticks and Bones" to "Streamers" to "Hurlyburly" -- have been concerned with the confusions of identity experienced by American men and the often violent consequences of their spiritual dislocation.
His first novel is no exception.
Indeed, "Recital of the Dog" begins with a murder and escalates from there to become a phantasmagorical account of one man's rapidly unraveling life, a life marked by paranoia and delusion, and culminating in rape, murder and attempted infanticide.


Amsco International reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3


AES Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sym-Tek Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Atkinson (Guy F.) (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ford and Citibank Issue Card
Moving to counter the General Motors Corporation's entry into the credit-card business, the Ford Motor Company and Citibank introduced a rival program yesterday.
Under terms of the Ford Citibank Visa and Mastercard program, card holders would earn rebates on new Ford, Lincoln or Mercury vehicles equal to 5 percent of their total annual purchases, as much as $700 a year and accumulating for up to five years.
That's a faster rebate program than offered by the G.M. card, which allows $500 in rebates a year for up to seven years.


Uranium Resources Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Re Capital Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Countrywide Mortgage Investments reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ford Motor Credit Co. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Pope's Trip: New Crusade Cross Meets Crescent At Mass in Khartoum
When Pope John Paul II addressed a huge and unruly open-air mass in Khartoum, the predominantly Muslim capital of Sudan, his joust with the Islamic authorities evoked a fundamental shift in the role religion has come to play in the wake of the cold war.
During the decades of the ideological division of the globe, the Pope used the Roman Catholic faith as a rallying point for opposition to the state-decreed atheism of Communism in his native Poland in a way that, the Vatican likes to suggest, began the unravelling of Soviet hegemony throughout Eastern Europe.


Hockey; See Panic Button, Rangers. Push.
The Rangers say they don't want to panic.
They don't want to make changes.
They aren't worried about the playoffs and are convinced that things will turn around.
They are fooling themselves.
The Rangers lost to the Pittsburgh Penguins, 3-0, at Madison Square Garden on Wednesday night.
That doesn't sound terrible, given that the Penguins are the hottest team in the National Hockey League.
But the Rangers haven't been losing just to Pittsburgh.
They can't seem to beat anyone, particularly in the Patrick Division, where they stand shakily in third place, a false step from fifth.


BOXING: Notebook; Barkley and Toney Try the Old Way
And now, a refreshing thought about boxing: Two fighters will actually climb into the ring here Saturday night to resolve their differences.
A novel idea, right?
While the dispute between Riddick Bowe and Lennox Lewis dissolved into a war of faxes today, a title bout of some significance drew near.
Boxing needs it.


Social Programs Give Retarded a Safe Outlet
To the Editor:
As a professional dedicated to improving the social lives of those with mental retardation (and other developmental disabilities) and to supporting efforts by their families to raise them as active participants in our society, I read with great interest "Sex Adds to Fears of Parents of Retarded" (front page, Jan. 26), concerning fears sparked by the Glen Ridge, N.J., trial of four men accused of sexually assaulting a retarded young woman.


Board Splits Are Mirrored In Albany
The dismissal of Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez quickly shifted the issue of Board of Education reform to Albany yesterday, but legislative leaders said that longstanding differences remain over what the schools need and who should run them.
Assembly leaders said Mr.
Fernandez's departure has prompted them to take a fresh look at changing the structure of the board to give the Mayor more control over it.


Phoenix Re (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Food Lion Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


She Was All Man and All Woman
To the Editor:
Barbra Streisand did not deserve Anne Taylor Fleming's censorious, schoolmarmish putdown of her inaugural gala suit in "Peekaboo Power Suits" (Op-Ed, Jan. 28).
Will there never be an end to this genteel middle-class prudery in America?
Barbra Streisand looked spectacular.
Radiating molten sexuality and stunning artistic power, she nearly upstaged President Clinton.
She was all man and all woman.
And I was delirious.
CAMILLE PAGLIA
Professor of Humanities  University of the Arts  Philadelphia, Jan. 29, 1993


Wellington Leisure Products (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Review/Photography; Dismantling Artistic Barriers
THERE is more good news than bad about "Photography in Contemporary German Art: 1960 to the Present," which has just opened at the Guggenheim Museum SoHo.
The good news is that the exhibition of nearly 150 works is by far the most ambitious attempt yet in this country to deal with a big and timely subject involving the multifarious merging of photography with other media.
Photography, the show makes clear, is absolutely central to the achievements of some of the most important postwar German artists, from Gerhard Richter to Sigmar Polke to Anselm Kiefer, all of whom freely mix media or move from one medium to another.
The show proves that photographs alone can demonstrate not only the explosion of creativity in German art during the last three decades, but also the astounding diversity of that art, encompassing as it does Minimalism, emotion-laden Neo-Expressionism and the most cerebral brands of Conceptualism.


MACY SEEKS MORE TIME TO CREATE REORGANIZATION PLAN
Lawyers for R. H. Macy &amp; Company, the bankrupt retailer that operates Macy's, Bullock's and I. Magnin stores, filed a motion yesterday asking the United States Bankruptcy Court to extend the period during which the company alone may submit a plan of reorganization.
Macy's period of exclusivity is scheduled to expire at the end of this month.
Judge Burton R. Lifland is expected to grant the company's request.


METRO DIGEST
CITIES NEW AND OLD VIE FOR DOLLARS
As investment has fled to the suburbs or to more newly developed parts of the country, cities have begun relying less on their own tax receipts and more on tax revenue raised in the suburbs and redirected as state aid.
And though President Clinton may be sympathetic to urban needs, his feelings may collide with Federal budget deficits.
In the tug-of-war over financing, both aging urban communities and the satellite cities emerging among the suburbs suffer.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  $6 MILLION PAYMENT FOR THE POST


Celebrating 2 Presidents
Here is a sampling of events this weekend in the New York metropolitan region that celebrate the birthdays of George Washington and Abraham Lincoln.
Presidents' Day is Monday.
Today
"LINCOLN PORTRAIT," Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center.
The Juilliard Orchestra gives a free performance of Aaron Copland's piece, narrated by Mayor David N. Dinkins, plus other works by Copland, Bartok and Tchaikovsky; Otto-Werner Mueller is the conductor.
Tonight at 8.
All tickets have been distributed, but some seats may still be available one hour before the concert.
Information: (212) 769-7406.
PRESIDENTS' MANUSCRIPTS, Pierpont Morgan Library, 29 East 36th Street, Murray Hill.
An exhibition of famous papers written or autographed by Abraham Lincoln and George Washington, including papers referring to Lincoln's 1858 "House Divided" speech about slavery and letters by Washington that reflect his thoughts during the Revolutionary War.
Through Feb. 28.
Hours: Today and tomorrow, 10:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Admission $5; $3 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 685-0008.
Monday
WASHINGTON'S AND LINCOLN'S NEW YORK, lower Manhattan.
A walking tour of sites associated with George Washington and Abraham Lincoln, including Fraunces Tavern, St.
Paul's Chapel and City Hall.
Monday at 1 P.M.
Sponsored by Big Onion Walking Tours.
Fee: $9; $7 for students and the elderly.
Information and meeting place: (212) 439-1090.


Enserch Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Wisconsin Central Trans.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Art Market
Art, Texas Style
The Dallas Museum of Art has been thinking in true Texan scale, with a $30 million, 140,000-square-foot addition that is to open in September.
The three-story Nancy and Jake Hamon Building was financed in part by a $20 million gift from Mrs.
Hamon, the widow of Jake Hamon, a Dallas oil tycoon who died six years ago.
Mrs.
Hamon stipulated that the money go toward building a new wing rather than increasing the museum's endowment.
The addition was designed by the New York architect Edward Larrabee Barnes, who designed the museum's existing building in 1984.
In addition to office and storage space, the wing provides 14,000 square feet for 7,000 American objects, including the museum's extensive assortment of Pre-Columbian gold.
There will also be a 32,000-square-foot education center for the museum, half of whose visitors participate in some kind of educational program.
But with so many museums struggling just to survive, and the city of Dallas's having reduced its financial contributions to the museum, the new wing is viewed with some skepticism in the art world.
But there are also those who believe the addition could help pull in potential donors.
"It may seem brash from a distance but it's the classic Texas attitude," said Harry S. Parker 3d, a former director of the Dallas Museum who is now the director of the Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco.
"Texas has a long tradition of building real-estate projects on-the-come. And being leveraged is a part of the thinking." Against the Tide
Peter C. Marzio, the director of the Museum of Fine Arts in Houston, said that while most museums were pulling in their horns, Dallas was acting aggressively.
"But sometimes going against the tide works," he said.
"The question is do they have sufficient money to operate?"
Richard Brettell, a former director of the museum who is the consulting director for the Hamon expansion, said he was "very sanguine about the museum's financial future." But he added, "That's not to say it's going to be easy."
When the museum was founded 90 years ago, the city owned all the art as well as the building.
When the museum moved to its new site in 1984 it established itself as a separate legal entity.
The city of Dallas owns the present museum's buildings and what now amounts to about half its collection.
While last year the city cut its funds to the museum by 17 percent, Dr.
Brettell said that two years ago the city had extended for 20 years its contract to pay the museum's operating costs based on a percentage of the city-owned art, and that this new contract included the cost of operating the new addition.
The city has also agreed to make a one-year increase of 50 percent in its financing to help with the opening year of the new addition.
"We're building the addition to the city's specifications," Dr.
Brettell said.
"But the city's collection will remain static and ours is growing, which means that over time the city will be giving less money." He said the museum hoped that income from its endowment would be able to cover the difference.  80% of FundsEighty Percent in Hand
The addition is part of a $55 million expansion.
Meg Hanlon, who heads the museum's press office, said 80 percent of the funds had been raised.
The wing will become the centerpiece of a totally reorganized museum, housing what the institution calls its Museum of the Americas.
In time, the remainder of the collection will be divided among a Museum of Europe, a Museum of African and Asian Art and a Museum of Contemporary Art.
The philosophy behind the thematic reorganization reflects the museum's desire to be sensitive to its location, in a state that borders Mexico, and to put non-Western art on an equal footing with European art.
"When we analyzed the collection we began thinking about making a definition for each building," Dr.
Brettell said, "so that rather than simply being a cultural maze, like most museums, ours will be organized into geographical and historical units."
On April 17, the institution will reopen a portion of the second and third floors of its existing building to house the Museum of Europe.
The Museum of African and Asian Art and the Museum of Contemporary Art are to open in successive years, beginning in 1994.
Dispute Over Picasso Print
A lawsuit is proceeding between two of the world's leading print experts: David P. Tunick, a Manhattan dealer, and Eberhard Kornfeld, the owner of Galerie Kornfeld, a well-respected auction house in Bern, Switzerland.
Last week, Judge David N. Edelstein of Federal District Court in Manhattan denied a request from Mr.
Kornfeld to dismiss the case.
The court had ordered Mr.
Kornfeld to produce by Feb. 1 documents relating to the Picasso print that is at the center of the dispute.
Mr.
Tunick's lawyer, William M. Barron of Walter, Conston, Alexander &amp; Green in Manhattan, said Mr.
Kornfeld had failed to do so.
Now Judge Edelstein has ordered Mr.
Kornfeld to appear in court next week for a deposition.
At the heart of the dispute are issues of authenticity and money.
In June 1990, Mr.
Tunick paid $1.68 million for an impression of Picasso's famous 1935 print "The Minotauromachie" at an auction at Galerie Kornfeld in Bern.
Mr.
Barron says that at the time of the sale both men had agreed that Mr.
Tunick would pay for the print in installments.
The dealer exhibited the print at the annual Art Show in Manhattan in February 1991, where it was the centerpiece of his booth and was priced at $2 million.
The work failed to sell at the show.
Offer of an Exchange
Sixteen months after his purchase, and eight months after the Art Show, Mr.
Tunick said experts who had seen the signature questioned its authenticity.
Mr.
Kornfeld, a Picasso expert himself, insists the work is genuine.
He offered to exchange it for a copy of the same print in his private collection that had once belonged to Nelson Rockefeller and had for years been on loan to the Museum of Modern Art in New York.
Mr.
Tunick refused to make the swap.
"He refused the offer when he heard he would have to pay in 30 days," said Mr.
Kornfeld in a telephone interview earlier this week.
"He said it would not be possible."
Last October, nine days after Mr.
Tunick said he discovered that the print's signature was fake, he filed suit in Federal District Court in Manhattan, citing fraud, misrepresentation, breach of duty, honesty and good faith in fair dealing, and breach of fiduciary duty.
He asked for his money back -- the $426,254 paid in cash as well as artwork he consigned to the Swiss auction house valued at $974,000 -- and punitive damages of $20 million.
At the end of November, Mr.
Kornfeld filed a lawsuit in Switzerland for the money he was still owed.
Two months ago the case was thrown out of the Swiss courts on jurisdictional grounds, a decision Mr.
Kornfeld is appealing.
Change of Venue Denied
Judge Edelstein ruled that the case is to proceed in New York because the disputed print is here, as are the several experts who believe the signature is a forgery.
In a pretrial motion, Mr.
Kornfeld maintained that the dispute should be heard in Switzerland because he is a Swiss citizen and because his auction house had specified that any court proceedings must take place in Bern.
The judge denied the motion to dismiss the case.
Faxes that went back and forth between the two men for 15 months reflect, for the most part, a verbal tug of war concerning the payment.
In one fax, dated July 24, 1991, and submitted to the court, Mr.
Tunick wrote to Mr.
Kornfeld: "While we see some signs of business beginning to turn around, our cash position remains difficult for now, and we simply are not able to continue with any sort of payment schedule at the moment."
Mr.
Barron, Mr.
Tunick's lawyer, said, "This was the beginning of the worst part of the recession and Tunick simply could not divert monies and change his business plans to accommodate Kornfeld." The lawyer added that "as of the time David discovered the forgery he had paid $1.4 million in monies and in kind, so that his ability to pay simply cannot be questioned."
Mr.
Barron said that Mr.
Kornfeld changed the terms of the deal, at first agreeing to accept extended payment but then wanting money immediately.
A Different Estimate
Matthew C. Kesten, a lawyer with Kantor, Davidoff, Wolfe, Rabbino &amp; Kass in Manhattan, who is representing Mr.
Kornfeld, said Mr.
Tunick's payments do not add up to $1.4 million.
So far, Mr.
Tunick has made three cash payments totaling $350,000, according to documents filed with the court.
He has also consigned six prints to Mr.
Kornfeld to auction, two of which, Mr.
Kesten said, have been sold for a total of about $29,000.
Mr.
Kesten estimates this leaves a balance of $1.3 million.
Among the prints Mr.
Tunick sent to Mr.
Kornfeld was Edvard Munch's "Madonna." According to court documents, Mr.
Kornfeld put the print up for sale and his firm's published sales results indicated that it sold for about $500,000.
But after questioning in court, Mr.
Kornfeld admitted that the piece had in fact not been sold at all.
"Mr. Kornfeld published the highest bid, he never said the print had sold," said Mr.
Kesten.
Mr.
Barron said: "Mr. Kornfeld has been struggling to avoid taking the case to trial in New York. He has lost in Bern and here. This case will now proceed with pre-trial discovery and we hope for a prompt trial, where Mr. Tunick will prevail and very likely recover substantial punitive damages."
Mr.
Kesten sees things differently: "If we are ultimately allowed by the judge to get to the merits of the case, I think we will be able to show that the signature is correct. The piece was only questioned 16 months after Tunick bought it and conceded that he could not pay for it."


Tseng Labs (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Nabors Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


GM Canada reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Clinical Data (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Architecture; Crossing Cultural Boundaries
NOT for the first time, Maya Lin walks a calm path through an ideological minefield.
A decade ago, Ms.
Lin's design for the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington invited a divided nation to share tears of reconciliation.
At the Museum for African Art, which opens tomorrow in SoHo, Ms.
Lin traverses even bumpier cultural terrain.
How to create a common ground within a space dedicated to cultural difference?
How to devise a setting for works of art that are non-Western in origin but that are, at the same time, an important part of the black American heritage and therefore integral to the West's own cultural evolution?
Ms.
Lin's response to this challenge is understated: within a flowing sequence of galleries, unfolding on two floors, she uses subtle gradations of color to suggest a passage through time as well as space.
Her design will not settle the controversies that have erupted in recent years over the display of non-Western art in Western settings.
The debate over multi-culturalism continues, and even those who support an ideal of pluralistic culture may find their minds wrenched apart by its disorienting implications.


Sex-Trial Defense Suggests Blaming Woman's Parents
Defense lawyers renewed their criticism of the family of the mildly retarded young woman central to the Glen Ridge sex assault trial today, contending that her sexual appetites stemmed from an unhappy home life.
Alan Zegas, who represents Bryant Grober, one of the four defendants, told the jury in his final summation that the young woman, who has a I.Q. of 64, has "almost an insatiable need to satisfy herself through sex."


Teacher Is Arrested On Heroin Charge
A fifth-grade teacher in the Bronx who the authorities said would leave work on her lunch break to buy heroin was arrested yesterday on a drug charge.
The teacher, Angela Menedez, 32 years old, who works at Public School 26 at 1930 Andrew Avenue in Morris Heights, was arrested at 12:40 P.M. in front of an apartment building at 10 West 174th Street in University Heights, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.
Investigators in the 46th Precinct recovered two packets of heroin and Ms.
Menedez was issued a summons, he said.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Tuesday about a new real estate investment fund misidentified the source of $75 million to $100 million that will be contributed to it.
The amount will be contributed to the Quantum Realty Fund jointly by Paul Reichmann, as a representative of the Reichmann family, and George Soros, a principal in the fund.


Haverty Furniture (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


ITT CORP. (N)
Rand V. Araskog, the chairman of the ITT Corporation, said yesterday that he "cleared the decks" for the company in the fourth quarter by taking one-time charges that produced a loss of $617 million in the quarter and $885 million for the year.
The charges included $612 million to cover losses and a revamping at ITT's finance subsidiary, $115 million for the costs of closing the Grays Harbor Pulp and Paper Complex, $33 million for cutbacks at ITT Components and $34 million for the write-off of losses at ITT Sheraton.


Corrections
A table in Business Day yesterday showing the Ford Motor Company's quarterly earnings provided incomplete data.
The results for the first three quarters of 1992 should have been adjusted for the effects of accounting changes and extraordinary charges announced on Wednesday.


Resource Mortgage Capital reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Toronto Journal; To Battle Bigots, Help From South of the Border
They were back at school the other day, some 200 senior Metropolitan Toronto police officers from division commanders to force deputies, riveted by the discussion about people who commit hate-motivated crimes.
Toronto, which the United Nations calls the world's most multi-cultural city, is becoming a new harbor for white supremacist groups.
A telephone hot line spreads hate against indigenous peoples and other minorities.
Offenses like spray-painting swastikas on synagogues or mugging homosexuals are starting to plague the city.


Mahler Times Two
The Manhattan School of Music Symphony is to present two performances of Mahler's Third Symphony this weekend, with Beth Clayton, a mezzo-soprano, as soloist and Glen Cortese conducting.
Tonight's performance, which is free, is at 8 P.M. at the school, Broadway and 122d Street in Morningside Heights.
The other performance is Sunday afternoon at 4 at Trinity Church, Broadway at Wall Street in lower Manhattan; tickets are $10, $15 and $20.
Information: (212) 749-2802.


Romantic Retreats
Here is a selection of activities and events in New York City this weekend to celebrate Valentine's Day:  Today
"JAPANESE LOVE POEMS," Tenri Cultural Institute, fourth floor, 575 Broadway, at Prince Street, SoHo.
A lecture about what Japanese poets say about love, by Hiroaki Sato, a translator and a co-author of "From the Country of Eight Islands: An Anthology of Japanese Poetry" (University of Washington Press).
Tonight at 8.
Admission: $7.
Reservations: (212) 925-8500.
SAILOR'S VALENTINE: AFTER-SCHOOL FUN, South Street Seaport Museum, Children's Center, 165 John Street, lower Manhattan.
An hour-and-a-half workshop for 6-to-12-year-olds.
A sailor's life at sea will be discussed, and participants will make a traditional sailor's valentine out of seashells, knots and feathers.
Today at 3:30 P.M.; tomorrow at 11 A.M.; Sunday at 2 P.M.
Fee is included in museum admission: $3; $6 for adults.
Information: (212) 669-9424 or 996-9400.
Tomorrow
"VALENTINE EXTRAVAGANZA II," Staten Island Children's Museum, Snug Harbor, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston.
A valentine-making workshop for families.
Tomorrow at 1:30 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $3.
Information: (718) 273-2060.
"MADRIGALS OF LOVE AND WAR," Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue and 112th Street, Morningside Heights.
"Madrigals of Love and War" and other works by Monteverdi will be performed by the Ensemble for Early Music and Grande Bande.
Tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Information: (212) 749-6600.
"LOVE IN BLOOM," Steinhardt Conservatory, Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue, at Prospect Park.
A display of blooming spring flowers, and an exhibition of paintings and sculpture by members of Penumbra, an artists' group.
Tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
On Sunday at 2:30 P.M.
Hannah and Her Brothers will perform romantic ballads.
Admission is free to the garden and all events.
Information: (718) 622-4433.
Sunday
DANCING UNDER THE STARS, Winter Garden, World Financial Center, West Street south of Vesey Street, lower Manhattan.
A dance demonstration by members of the American Ballroom Theater, after which the public is invited to dance to music by the John Randolph Orchestra.
Sunday at 7 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 945-0500.
"JAZZ FOR VALENTINES," Alice Tully Hall.
Love songs and ballads performed by Betty Carter.
With Harold Ashby, Roy Hargrove, Bobby Watson and others.
Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 875-5400 or 721-6500.
SALSA INTERNACIONAL VALENTINE SHOW, Madison Square Garden.
A salsa performance featuring Oscar D'Leon, Luis Enrique, Jerry Rivera, Orquesta de la Luz, Grupo Niche, Pochi and La Coco Band and Polito Vega.
Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25 to $40.
Information: (212) 465-6741.
LOVE SONGS OF MARLENE DIETRICH AND EDITH PIAF, Raoul's Brasserie, 225 Varick Street, SoHo.
Elizabeth Hodes will sing songs made famous by Marlene Dietrich and Edith Piaf.
Sunday at 8:30 and 10:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 929-1630.
BALLROOM DANCING AND DINNER, Book Friends Cafe, 16 West 18th Street.
Sponsored by the Tanjo Project.
Sunday at 7 P.M.
Admission: $35.
Information: (212) 255-7407.
LOVE BUS.
A three-hour mini-bus tour past the former residences of such celebrities as Katharine Hepburn, whose visitors included Spencer Tracy, and Woody Allen and Mia Farrow.
Sponsored by Sidewalks of New York.
Sunday at 1 P.M.
Fee: $25.
Reservations: (212) 388-2286.
WALKING TOUR.
A walk on the streets of Manhattan past sites that figured in the courtships of, among others, Diamond Jim Brady and Lillian Russell, Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton, and Donald Trump and Marla Maples.
Sponsored by Adventure on a Shoestring.
Sunday at 1 P.M.
Fee: $5.
Information and meeting-place: (212) 265-2663.
LOVERS' STROLL THROUGH GREENWICH VILLAGE.
A tour of locations associated with the love lives of celebrities, including President John Tyler, Dorothy Thompson and Sinclair Lewis, Mayor Jimmy Walker, and Cary Grant.
Sunday at 2 P.M.
Sponsored by Sidewalks of New York.
Meets at the Washington Arch, in Washington Square Park.
Admission: $10.
Information: (212) 517-0201.
LOVERS' GUIDE TO CENTRAL PARK, Manhattan.
A walk past some romantic areas in the park, led by the Urban Park Rangers, who will also tell Valentine's Day stories.
Sunday at 2 P.M.
Meets at Central Park West and 72d Street.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
"WHAT'S LOVE GOT TO DO WITH IT?" Prospect Park, Brooklyn.
A workshop, led by the Urban Park Ranger, in the courtship rituals of wildlife.
Sunday at 2 P.M.
Free.
Meets at the boathouse, which is reached from the entrance at Lincoln Road and Ocean Avenue.
Information: (718) 287-34000.
MATES FOR LIFE, Kissena Park, Flushing, Queens.
The courtship and mating rituals of animals will be told by the Urban Park Rangers.
Sunday at 2 P.M.
Free.
Meets at the Kissena Nature Center, Rose Avenue and Parsons Boulevard.
Information: (718) 699-4204.
READINGS AND PERFORMANCE PIECES, St.
Mark's Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village.
More than 50 poets and performers, including Allen Ginsberg, will take part in a presentation on the theme of love.
Sunday at 3 P.M.
Sponsored by the Poetry Project.
Admission by contribution: $8; $5 for members of the Poetry Project.
Information: (212) 674-0910.
READING, Time Cafe, 380 Lafayette Street, Greenwich Village.
A reading from the book "Love is Strange: Stories of Post-Modern Romance," edited by Joel Rose and Catherine Texier, with Mr.
Rose, Ms.
Texier, David Feinberg, A. M. Homes and Lisa Blaushild.
Sunday at 8 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 533-7000.


Celebrity Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Film; Entrails, Monsters, Comedy
The ocean of blood in "Dead Alive," a horror-movie spoof from New Zealand, doesn't merely gush.
It spurts out of necks, mouths and skulls in angry geysers like exploding packets of cherry Kool-Aid.
By the end of the movie, a suburban home has been transformed into one of the slimiest slaughterhouses ever shown in a film.
Severed heads are kicked like footballs over piles of squirming entrails, which resemble lobster legs twitching and wriggling in slippery ankle-deep piles.
Two zombies copulate, producing a grotesque cannibalistic baby, and a monster zombie mother with incestuous cravings devours her son, who moments later bursts out of her decomposing body.


Europe Welcomes U.S. Policy, Especially the Arms
European leaders today applauded the Clinton Administration's initiative on Bosnia and Herzegovina, seeing it as proof that Washington had abandoned a hands-off policy and was ready to lead the search for a solution to end the fighting there.
Publicly, governments issued statements welcoming the new approach; privately, diplomats and policymakers were even more generous.


For Children
With a variety of easily accessible alpine resort areas, New Jersey is an excellent place for children to take their first schuss on downhill skis.
This is an especially good time to consider such an outing, as many schoolchildren start their winter break this weekend and February's crisp temperatures keep the slopes crunchy even when the snow is artificial.
Here are two ski areas -- one large, one small -- that make children feel welcome.
Vernon Valley-Great Gorge Route 94  McAfee Sussex County  Sussex County  (201) 827-2000 or 827-3900
THE RESORT: Great Gorge came first, in 1965; Vernon Valley, next door, opened in 1967.
They merged in 1977 and developed a summer resort called Action Park a year later.
With a vertical drop of 1,040 feet, Great Gorge-Vernon Valley has three mountains with 52 interconnecting trails, rated from beginner to expert; 17 lifts, including three rope tows on two bunny slopes; snow-making machines; night skiing; a spa; two base lodges, lodging and restaurants.
THE BUNNY SLOPES: Among very young children, perhaps 3 to 6 years old, the Chicken Little slope is a perfect inducement for the nervous and wary. (The other bunny hill, Lion's Den, is comparable.) Though not too steep, the slope is steep enough for children to be challenged, and it is wide enough to accommodate a large number of skiers with little or no experience.
There are two rope tows; when group lessons are taught on one side of the slope, one of the two is shuts down. (Children often think the rope tow is the best part of skiing.) On Sunday, many parents were putting their first-time skiers between their legs and going downhill; others enticed them to ski a few feet into the safety of a parent's arms.
Most of the children had no poles, and few were heard whining or crying.
They were thrilled.
LESSONS: On holidays and weekends, the resort offers two children's packages for those 3 to 12 years old that offer a blend of skiing and other activities like craft-making and baking.
The cost is $32 for a half day or $45 for a full day, including lifts, but equipment rental costs $10 extra.
There are also daily group classes whose price ($44 for children 5 years old and up; $51 for adults) includes lift tickets to the beginner slopes and equipment rental.
THE WAIT: We thought we were clever to choose Super Bowl Sunday for an outing, but Vernon Valley was still a popular destination.
Waits for some chairlifts lasted about 15 minutes; others were shorter.
The rope-tow line at Chicken Little moved quickly when there were no stumbling bodies.
SUSTENANCE: Vernon Valley has three restaurants: one upstairs with views of the mountain, serving fare like chili and burgers; one below, specializing in pizza, video games and adolescents, and one upstairs with a bar and a more sophisticated atmosphere.
Smoking is allowed. (There are other restaurants at the Great Gorge area of the resort.)
THE MOOD: This is the Jones Beach of ski resorts; it's not a mecca for the cultural elite and doesn't pretend to be.
The surrounding landscape is eclectic, but from the top of the mountain the view is spectacular.
It is an easy drive along Route 80 from the New York City area, without too much traffic.
The resort attracts a large number of eager beavers, boisterous families and audacious first-timers.
THE COST: Adult lift tickets: $36 for a day (8:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.); $26 for a half-day (1 to 5 P.M.); $32 for twilight (3 to 10 P.M.); $26 for night (6 to 10 P.M.); $51 for a learn-to-ski package with limited lift ticket, rentals and group lesson.
Children's lift tickets (ages 5 to 12; anyone younger enters free): $29 a day; $22 a half-day; $27 for twilight; $22 for night; $44 for a learn-to-ski package.
Rentals: adult skis, boots and poles, $21.50; junior skis, boots and poles, $16.50; snowboards (skateboards without the wheels), $26.50.
HOURS: Mondays through Thursdays, 9 A.M. to 10 P.M.; Fridays, 9 A.M. to 11 P.M.; Saturdays, 8:30 A.M. to 11 P.M.; Sundays, 8:30 to 10 P.M.
Through March 31.
Craigmeur Ski Area Green Pond Road (off Route 23) Newfoundland Morris County (201) 697-4500
THE RESORT: Craigmeur, in rural New Jersey near Stockholm and Lake Telemark, was opened in 1937 by Hugo Muiry, an Austrian immigrant.
Devoted to beginners, Craigmeur, with a 300-foot drop, is not ashamed of its small size and mild-mannered slopes.
It offers four slopes, three for beginners and one intermediate; a chairlift, T-bar and two rope tows; night skiing, cross-country trails (which may be closed if there is a lack of snow), snow-making machines for the slopes and a cafeteria.
Lodging is available nearby.
THE BUNNY SLOPES: On one very wide hill with gentle bumps and relatively stable stretches, lots of parents were towing children downhill by hand, harness or pole.
Some parents were on the slope without skis, coaching their children on skis.
The two rope tows were not running (the management said it operates them when the slopes become crowded), so the real challenge was riding back up on the T-bar or the chairlift.
LESSONS: The Humpty Dumpty class, for 3-to-6-year-olds, lasts about 45 minutes; the children stretch, bend their knees, ski through a row of poles and learn to stop, all without poles.
There was noticeable improvement by the end, and parents had their camcorders running.
Humpty Dumpty classes, including equipment rental, lifts and the lesson, cost $20 on weekdays and $28 on weekends.
The Ski Eagles class, for children 5 to 12 years old, includes lunch and costs $45 for a full day and $25 for a half day.
Rentals are extra: $10 for a full day, $6 for a half-day.
Ski Friend is another program, in which parents may hire a teen-ager to ski with a child for $12 an hour.
THE WAIT: Short, although the large number of beginners means there are many brief shutdowns as novices gather themselves up after falling off the T-bar or recover from descending off the chair lift.
SUSTENANCE: The food is acceptable, but you might prefer to pack a picnic lunch.
The top-of-the-mountain restaurant has picture windows overlooking the Copperas Mountains and offers a close-up view of people getting off the T-bar (which one child called "the hook").
Polyurethaned wooden picnic tables indoors give the restaurant a rustic feeling and make it easy to spend the afternoon reading while others ski.
Smoking is allowed.
THE MOOD: Family, family, family.
Here parents may rediscover why they had children as everyone basks in the low-key atmosphere, surrounded by other beginners.
The resort is not difficult to find driving on Route 80 from the New York City area.
THE COSTS: Full-day lift tickets: $26 for adults; $22 for juniors, children aged 7 to 12; $12 for children 6 and under.
Half-day (8:30 to 1 P.M. or 1:30 to 5 P.M.): $20 for adults; $17 for juniors; $12 for children.
Twilight (3 to 10 P.M.): $26 for adults; $20 for juniors; $12 for children.
Night (5 to 10 P.M.): $20 for adults and juniors; $12 for children.
Rental of skis, boots and poles: adults, $17; children 6 and under, $12.
Snowboards: $18.
HOURS: Mondays through Fridays, 9 A.M. to 10 P.M.; Saturdays, 8:30 A.M. to 10 P.M.; Sundays, 8:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Through March 31.


Award to Lanier
The Hall of Famer BOB LANIER, who went from a Detroit Pistons uniform to national chairmanship of the National Basketball Association's "Stay In School" program, was named winner of the 1993 Schick Achievement Award.
The award is given annually to a former N.B.A. coach or player who has gone on to notable achievements in another career. (AP)


Jetliner Hijacked in Europe Is Flown to New York


Balanced Scoring Boosts UMass
Massachusetts 81, St. Joseph's 69
Harper Williams scored 21 points and Jerome Malloy added 18 as Massachusetts won its 10th straight, defeating St.
Joseph's, 81-69, in an Atlantic 10 game last night in Philadelphia.


In Queens, Cheers for End of Fernandez Era
This was a red-letter day on the Queens ramparts where the battle began against Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez.
After a year of bitter and divisive debate, parents of children at Public School 13 in Elmhurst and leaders of the school board of District 24 were quietly celebrating Wednesday's decision by the Board of Education not to retain the Chancellor.


SSE Telecom reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Dreyfus Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jean Gould Dies at 83; Biographer of Writers
Jean Gould, who wrote biographies of Robert Frost, Edna St.
Vincent Millay and Amy Lowell, as well as of the artist Winslow Homer, died on Monday at a nursing home in Perrysburg, Ohio.
She was 83.
The cause was cancer of the jaw, said her nephew, Dr. James Mann of Perrysburg.


Art in Review
Inspection Medical Hermeneutics The Swiss Institute New York 35 West 67th Street Manhattan Through Feb. 27
If you love the work of the Russian Conceptualist and installation impresario Ilya Kabakov, you may have more than average tolerance for the capricious, not entirely focused work of Inspection Medical Hermenuetics, a collective of three twentysomething Russian artists obsessed with Switzerland.


Art in Review
Minnie Evans Luise Ross Gallery 50 West 57th Street Manhattan Through March 6
Minnie Evans, a self-taught black artist, was born in North Carolina in 1892.
As a child she was plagued by disturbing dreams and waking visions.
Although these diminished after she married, they returned in 1935 when, as she says in the filmed interview playing in the gallery during the run of this show, "an angel spoke to me just as loud as I'm speaking to you." She did her first drawings soon thereafter and continued to draw and paint in a variety of mediums until her death in 1987.


INQUIRY ORDERED IN OWL DECISION
A Federal appeals court has ordered an investigation to determine whether the Bush Administration improperly pressured members of the Endangered Species Committee to permit timber sales in Oregon despite their potential threat to the survival of the northern spotted owl.
Though the decision on Wednesday is seen as a victory for environmental groups fighting to protect the endangered owl, it is also being hailed as a triumph for keeping the Government decision-making process an open one.


Aikman's Early Exit Might Prove Costly
TROY AIKMAN's agent said yesterday that he would appeal a $10,000 fine handed his client for leaving the Pro Bowl before the game was over.
The National Football League announced the fine yesterday, a day after Aikman met with Commissioner PAUL TAGLIABUE to discuss why the Super Bowl most valuable player mysteriously left Aloha Stadium early in the fourth quarter.
Aikman said he left before the game was over because he had an early flight to catch so he could make a Monday morning meeting with his charity.
He publicly apologized at Tuesday's championship parade for the Dallas Cowboys but has been roundly criticized for his early exit and for complaining about the game beforehand.
Aikman was out of town yesterday and unavailable for comment.


ECI Telecom Ltd. (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Itel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Videocart Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Diner's Journal
Seafood in Astoria
Some of the best and most economical seafood buys can be found in the Greek neighborhoods of Astoria, Queens.
It is wise to know where you are going, however, because idle strolling can turn up half a dozen or more places that look indistinguishable from one another: whitewashed walls, a tiny glass-enclosed kitchen up front, maybe some photos of the old country, simply appointed rows of tables and a cooler for wine and beer.


People
*
Peter Stringham, president at McKim Baker Lovick/BBDO, Toronto, was named chief executive, succeeding Jim Anderson, who will remain as chairman on an advisory basis. *
Kenneth E. Caffrey was named to the new position of managing director at Jones-Lundin Associates Inc., New York.
He was most recently executive vice president and worldwide media director at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide, New York.


Tax Report Leaves Queen's Wealth in Dark
The Government announced today what taxes Queen Elizabeth would be paying in two months and in so doing lifted the veil a fraction of an inch on a question that has long intrigued the British: How wealthy is she?
Actual figures were not given in the announcement by Prime Minister John Major in the House of Commons.
But Buckingham Palace tried to counter estimates that the Queen's fortune runs into double-digit billions by saying that even $100 million would be too large.
That figure appears to be based on a narrow definition of personal assets and does not include things like palaces, the royal art collection and the Crown Jewels, which are considered state assets.


Proteon Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sears to Spend $4 Billion To Remake Itself as Retailer
In an unusually thorough, candid and long meeting with stock analysts yesterday, Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company announced that it would spend $4 billion during the next five years to give its 800 stores face lifts and to focus on selling clothing, accessories and makeup.
Just two days after announcing a $3.9 billion loss for last year, the company gave a detailed description of how its plans to spin off its financial services and residential real estate businesses would help it shed almost 60 percent of its debt and add $1 billion to its bottom line over the next five years.


Delays Anger Judge in Clifford Case
An infuriated Federal District Court judge today strongly criticized a New York State trial judge and set a June 1 trial date for Clark M. Clifford, the one-time counselor to several Democratic Presidents, and his law partner, Robert A. Altman, on bank fraud charges.
At a hearing today, Judge Joyce Hens Green criticized the lawyers for Mr.
Clifford and Mr.
Altman, the Federal prosecutors, the Manhattan District Attorney's office and the New York State trial judge, John A. K. Bradley.
She made it clear she felt they had all misled her and were toying with her authority.


Offshore Logistics (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


FileNet Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Year to Jan 3


What Kind of G.O.P. for New York?
In passing legislation guaranteeing the civil rights of homosexuals, New York's Democratic-dominated State Assembly puts the state Republican Party on the spot.
The 35 Republicans who control the State Senate must now decide whether they want theirs to be seen as the tolerant party of Lincoln or the extremist party of Patrick Buchanan and Pat Robertson.
The bill would extend the state's existing civil rights law to bar discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in employment, housing, public accommodations, education and credit.
Those are reasonable provisions, yet the state's Conservative Party attacks the bill with offensive rhetoric that recalls the Republican National Convention.


Doctor Withdraws From Consideration As Aide to Clinton
Dr.
James J. Mongan, who had been chosen to be the Assistant Secretary for Health in the Clinton Administration, has withdrawn for "personal and family reasons," Dr.
Mongan and Administration officials said today.
Dr.
Mongan, who heads the Truman Medical Center in Kansas City, Mo., and is dean of the University of Missouri School of Medicine at Kansas City, withdrew in a letter on Tuesday to Donna E. Shalala, the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Dr.
Mongan made public a copy of his letter, and a spokesman for the Department of Health and Human Services confirmed that he had withdrawn from the appointment, which was expected to be announced this week.


Steven Ross, Time Warner Head, Remembered for Care and Giving
Steven J. Ross, the chairman of Time Warner Inc. who died on Dec. 20, was eulogized yesterday at an event that was part memorial service, part lavish entertainment, filling Carnegie Hall to near capacity with a crowd of film stars, politicians, business colleagues and friends from all walks of his life.
The program, which began at 11 A.M. and lasted until after 1:30 P.M, included spoken tributes from the director Steven Spielberg, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, the soccer star Pele, Mayor David N. Dinkins and former Gov.
Hugh L. Carey, among others, as well as musical selections sung by Natalie Cole and the Harlem Boys Choir.


G.M. Resumes Its Advertising On NBC News
The General Motors Corporation announced yesterday that it was rescinding its ban on advertising on NBC News programs just one day after a company executive said the ban would be indefinite.
William J. O'Neill, the director of public affairs for G.M., issued a statement saying that the company is now satisfied with NBC's apology for a report that was broadcast on its news magazine program "Dateline" in November.
The report, which questioned the safety of G.M. pickups, included footage of an accident that NBC staged to make sure the truck would catch fire.
In response, G.M. had shifted its advertising from NBC News programs to the network's sports and entertainment programs on Monday.


UNC Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Providence Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Clinton Plugs In
President Clinton got out of Washington this week and not a minute too soon.
Sure, he's had moments of triumph, like his swift reversal of the Bush Administration's mean-spirited restrictions on abortion counseling and Congress's approval of the Family Leave Act.
Otherwise the early weeks of the Administration have conveyed all the dignity and order of a mudslide.
By traveling to Detroit for a town hall meeting, Mr.
Clinton gave himself a chance to drink again from the wellsprings of political inspiration.
He also put on display the qualities that led many voters to turn to him as a figure of hope.


Judge Says a Fair Jury Is Possible In Officers' Trial in Beating Case
A number of prospective jurors have expressed fears and prejudices on court questionnaires, but a judge said today that he was confident a fair jury could be impaneled quickly to try four white police officers charged in the beating of a black motorist.
Court arguments today over procedures for eliminating prospective jurors from a pool of 290 offered a glimpse of some of the men and women whom lawyers might remove after questioning begins next Tuesday.


Universal Health Services reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ryan Chooses 1993 For His Farewell Tour
Nolan Ryan, baseball's first $1 million-a-year player, has often said that when he signed that four-year contract with the Houston Astros as a free agent in November 1979, he thought it would be his last one.
More than 13 years later, Ryan says he has finally signed his last contract.
Ageless and inimitable, the Texas Rangers' legendary pitcher announced yesterday that this season, his major league record 27th, will be his last.
Only 5 months and 12 days younger than President Clinton, Ryan will pitch this year at the age of 46.


Reviews/Film; A Blue-Collar Comedy In English, Subtitled
"Riffraff," Ken Loach's tough, honest and sometimes achingly funny comedy about a nonunion construction worker in London, is the kind of English movie that could never be made in this country, not because of the subject matter but because of the social structure: Britain still has a working class.
After World War II, the vast majority of America's blue-collar workers became de facto members of the middle class as wages and standards of living rose.
Even those who haven't benefited tend to identify with those who have.


U.S. Faces a Delicate Task in Intervening in Negotiations on Bosnia
As Clinton Administration officials begin grappling with their newly announced policy on the Balkans, they are struggling to reconcile seemingly contradictory aims.
On the one hand, the Administration has said it will plunge directly into the current negotiating process led by former Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance and former Foreign Secretary Lord Owen of Britain, and that its involvement will make a crucial difference.
On the other hand, Washington is taking care not to bruise egos by overtaking the negotiations at the United Nations and putting them under an American umbrella.


Money Fund Assets Down
The total assets of the nation's 614 retail money market mutual funds decreased $268.8 million, to $383.37 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 380 taxable retail money market funds grew $387.8 million, to $302.30 billion, while the assets of the 234 retail tax-exempt funds decreased $656.6 million, to $81.08 billion.


The Spoken Word
SLIDE SHOW AND WALKING TOURS, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street.
Slide shows and lectures: $3.
Walking tours: $12 ($10 for students and the elderly).
Discussion: $5.
Information: (212) 431-0233.
RADIO DISCUSSION, WNYC-AM (820).
A series of recorded interviews and discussions, sponsored by the New York Public Library and WNYC, continues with "The Constitutional Convention of 1987," a lecture by Lawrence Tribe, a professor at Harvard Law School.
Sunday, 4 P.M.
ART AT THE MODERN, Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street, Manhattan.
"Sculpture as Craft," by Amelia Arenas, today, 1 P.M.; "Theater and Memory: Picasso's Three Musicians," by Sylvia Milgram, today, 3 P.M.; "Futurism," by Lisa Panzera, tomorrow, 1 P.M.; "Art of the 80's and 90's," by Laura Hoptman, tomorrow, 3 P.M.; "Selections from the Permanent Collection," by Gail Stavitsky, Sunday, 1 P.M.; "Picasso and Modernism," by Judy Meighan, Sunday, 3 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $7.50; $4.50 for students and the elderly; under 16, free.
Information: (212) 708-9480.
EXPLORING THE WHITNEY, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"Jean-Michel Basquiat," tomorrow, 2 P.M.; "The Geometric Tradition in American Art, 1930-1990," tomorrow and Sunday, 3:30 P.M.; "Photography: Expanding the Collection," Sunday, 2 P.M.
All four lectures will be given by Margaret Sundell.
Free with museum admission: $6; $4 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3611.
NUMISMATIC LECTURE, American Numismatic Society, Broadway at 155th Street, Washington Heights.
"Collecting Medals for the Met," a lecture and slide show about the collection of European medal art at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, given by Dr.
James D. Draper, curator of sculpture and decorative art at the Met.
Tomorrow at 3 P.M.
Free.
Information (212) 234-3130.
FRENCH AND AMERICAN GRAPHIC DESIGN, the French Embassy, 972 Fifth Avenue, at 79th Street.
Panel discussion in English and slide show featuring French and American graphic designers.
Today, 5:30 P.M.
Sponsored by the French Institute.
Admission: $5; free for French Institute members.
Information: (212) 355-6100.
YEATS SYMPOSIUM, Liederkranz Club, 6 East 87th Street, Manhattan.
A daylong event devoted to the poetry of William Butler Yeats, with lectures, readings and a dramatic production.
Tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sponsored by the W. B. Yeats Society of New York.
Admission: $60 for the entire day; $42 for morning events only; $30 for afternoon events.
Information: (718) 601-8386.


Bigger U.S. Peace Role Leaves Bosnians Split
The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina offered cautious approval today of the Clinton Administration's newly announced steps to negotiate an end to the Balkan war, but the people of this besieged city were disappointed that no military aid was in the offing.
Although many Bosnian civilians expressed disappointment that the American policy did not go further, the mood was more sanguine among Bosnian Government officials, many of whom have long given up hopes for decisive American action against the "ethnic cleansing" campaigns by Serbs.


Alliance Capital Management L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New Nation, Imperiled Economy
In the cold war, this industrial town at the foot of the snow-capped Lower Tatra Mountains was a symbol of how Communist central planners could, by fiat, shower prosperity on an entire region.
Today, it embodies the economic perils and promise that confronts this new Eastern European nation as it tries to weather the transition to a free market economy.


Clinton Orders Hiring Of 160 Meat Inspectors
Prodded by the public outcry over an outbreak of illness from undercooked hamburgers, President Clinton today ordered the hiring of more meat inspectors as part of a broader plan to insure food safety.
The President was asked Wednesday night at the "town hall" meeting to address the problem of tainted meat sold by the Jack in the Box fast-food chain in Washington State.
A 2-year-old boy died and 400 people became ill after eating the hamburgers.


No Headline
I knew I could do it.
I can't say that I'm amazed, because it's something I had set in my heart to accomplish.
DENNIS BYRD, the injured football player, after walking across the room at a news conference.  [ B9:5. ]


When Career Women Need to Stop the Clock; Praise Dartmouth
To the Editor:
Your article on the paucity of tenured female faculty members in the Ivy League (front page, Jan. 24), while admirable, makes a glaring omission.
When evaluating the progress made in promoting female faculty members, one should examine the tenured rank of associate professor, which may best reflect recent efforts to promote faculty members.


Aurora Electronics reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


When Career Women Need to Stop the Clock; On Reading the Data
To the Editor:
"Rare in Ivy League: Women Who Work as Full Professors" (front page, Jan. 24) displays a highly slanted application of data.


Marion Reinhardt, 77, Canon Expert, Is Dead
Msgr.
Marion J. Reinhardt, an expert on Roman Catholic canon law who helped to formulate new standards for marriage annulment, died on Wednesday at the North Shore Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 77 and lived in Hicksville, L.I.
Heart failure was the cause of death, a spokeswoman for the Brooklyn Diocese said.


Casino Owner Offers Lure: $140 Million in New Taxes
Steve Wynn, the Las Vegas casino owner, said today that his company, Mirage Resorts, would guarantee the state at least $140 million a year in tax revenue, about 1.6 percent of the entire 1993 state budget, if casinos were legalized for Hartford and Bridgeport.
The total, which Mr.
Wynn told a legislative committee would be backed by the "full faith and credit" of his company, was far more than the $50 million that Mirage officials had mentioned in past lobbying efforts, and reflects the heights to which Connecticut's debate over gambling have climbed in just the last few weeks.


CLINTON PICKS MIAMI WOMAN, VETERAN STATE PROSECUTOR, TO BE HIS ATTORNEY GENERAL
Pressing forward with his desire to hire a woman as Attorney General, President Clinton today named Janet Reno, a veteran prosecutor from Miami, to the post.
Ms.
Reno came under serious consideration only after Mr.
Clinton had to abandon his first two choices for the job as the nation's chief law enforcement officer.
But the 54-year-old prosecutor has considerably more law-enforcement experience than the other two women, Zoe Baird and Judge Kimba M. Wood, whose selections fell victim to disputes over their hiring of illegal immigrants as nannies.
Unlike the other two, Ms.
Reno is single and has no children.
Praise for Nominee
Clearly upbeat, and no doubt relieved, Mr.
Clinton introduced Ms.
Reno at a news conference in the Rose Garden late this afternoon.
He seemed eager to move beyond the controversy over his first two choices, saying he had long had a high regard for Ms.
Reno.
He said he knew of Ms.
Reno through his brother-in-law, Hugh Rodham, a public defender in Miami.


Holiday Weekend
Lincoln's Birthday will be observed today and Washington's Birthday will be observed on Monday.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Today, Federal and state open, city closed.
Monday, Federal, state, and city closed.
POST OFFICE Today, regular service.
Monday, Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue on Monday.
BANKS Today and Monday, option to close.
PARKING Today and Monday, alternate-side rules suspended.
SANITATION Today and Monday, no pickups, street cleanings, or recycling.
SCHOOLS Today, open. Monday, closed.  FINANCIAL MARKETS Today, open. Monday, closed.
TRANSPORTATION Today, buses, subways, Long Island Rail Road and Metro-North on regular schedules.
Monday, holiday schedules in effect.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Today, Federal open, state closed, local option to close.
Monday, Federal and state closed, local option to close.
POST OFFICES Today, regular service. Monday, Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Today and Monday, option to close.
SCHOOLS Today and Monday, option to close.
TRANSPORTATION Today and Monday, some N.J. Transit lines will be on holiday schedules.
CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Today, Federal open, state closed, local option to close.
Monday, Federal and state closed, local option to close.
POST OFFICES Today, regular service. Monday, Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Today and Monday, closed.
SCHOOLS Today and Monday, closed.
TRANSPORTATION Today, New Haven Line on regular schedule.
Monday, New Haven Line on holiday schedule.


Philip L. Iglehart, 80, Of Polo Hall of Fame
Philip Lawrence Birrell Iglehart, an investor and an accomplished polo player, died on Tuesday at Good Samaritan Hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla.
A resident of nearby Lakewood, he was 80.
His family said he died after a brief illness.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.88
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.90
2.92
3.76
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.06
3.10
3.89
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.99
6.04
6.98
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.15
7.25
7.91
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.30
8.30
8.95
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.18
6.20
6.77
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Duriron Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.  A Rare Scoreless Tie


Art in Review
Kerry Marshall Jack Shainman Gallery 560 Broadway, at Prince Street SoHo Through tomorrow
There is a lot of room for improvement in Kerry Marshall's layered, highly decorative narrative paintings, but the New York City debut of this 37-year-old artist, who was born in Birmingham, Ala., and graduated from the Otis Art Institute in Los Angeles, is nonetheless impressive.
His colorful images, which resemble big drawings and often involve both collage and passages of writing, bring together such recent styles as Pattern Painting, New Image Painting, Conceptual Art and Neo-Expressionism, turning them to complex but never preachy political ends.
They take a thing or two as well from Robert Colescott, early Renaissance painting and manuscript illumination.


Older Cities Relying More on Suburbs' Taxes
Lighted letters still shout this old factory city's historic boast from a bridge over the Delaware River: "Trenton Makes, The World Takes." But these days Trenton, like most of the other big, once-rich cities in the region, is the taker, not the maker, when it comes to paying for its municipal budget.
As investment has fled to the suburbs or to more newly developed parts of the country, cities have begun relying less on their own tax receipts and more on tax revenue raised in the suburbs and redirected as state aid. (New York City, helped by an economic rebound in the 1980's, became an exception to the trend.) At the same time, outside aid is making up an ever smaller part of the budgets of the newer metropolitan areas that have grown up at former suburban crossroads.


Midland Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
President Clinton told executives and lobbyists face to face that he would propose an increase in the top corporate income tax rate and a limit on the breaks companies receive for executives' salaries.  [ Page A1. ]  The effects of a plan to limit tax deductions for seven-figure salaries would probably be more political than economic, some experts on executive compensation said.  [ A24. ]





Real Estate Firm Turns to Next Generation
Acknowledging the younger generation, the family-owned Williams Real Estate Company said yesterday that it had named Michael T. Cohen, 33, president and chief executive.
Andrew Roos, 39, succeeds Mr.
Cohen as executive vice president.
The New York firm, which manages 20 million square feet of office space in Manhattan, was founded in 1926 by their grandfathers, Victor J. Cohen and Sydney W. Roos.
It has been run by their fathers, Jerome M. Cohen, who retains the chairman's post, and Edwin G. Roos, who is vice chairman.


Review/Dance; Acrobatics And a Rite Of Initiation
Elisa Monte and David A. Brown were members of Martha Graham's company when Ms.
Monte achieved early success with her own choreography.
In 1981, Ms.
Monte formed a dance troupe, with Mr.
Brown as associate artistic director.
Breaking with Graham's idiom, Ms.
Monte has generally favored either fluid, gymnastic shapes or hard-driving forceful movements that do not draw from the percussive Graham vocabulary.
Mr.
Brown works in a similar manner, as can be seen in the new pieces they have choreographed for the Elisa Monte Dance Company, whose performances run through Sunday evening at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea).


Parish Faces Charges
Boston Celtics center ROBERT PARISH, at 39 the oldest player in the N.B.A., will be charged today with possession of marijuana after authorities said they found the drug at his home and in a package addressed to him, said KURT SCHWARTZ, an Essex County, Mass., assistant district attorney.


Showboat Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Film Halted On Blacks Freeing Jews
The producers of a documentary film about black G.I.'s who liberated Jews from concentration camps in World War II withdrew it from circulation yesterday after questions were raised about its accuracy.
Harry Chancey Jr., vice president of program services for WNET-TV in New York City, said the film was being temporarily withdrawn with "the absolute intent" of making it available again for viewing after a review and perhaps some editing "to remove any ambiguities, or if there are any factual inaccuracies."


Aston Magna Series
A three-concert series featuring music by Bach, Schubert and Couperin is to be given in March by Aston Magna, a period-instrument group, at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan.
The series opens on March 1 at 8 P.M. with a program featuring two musical tributes by Couperin, "The Apotheosis of Lully" and "The Apotheosis of Corelli (Le Parnasse)." On March 9 the program will be Bach's "Art of the Fugue," orchestrated by the violinist Daniel Stepner.
The final program, on March 24, will be early 19th-century chamber music featuring Schubert's Octet.
Performers for the series include Mr.
Stepner and Stanley Ritchie, a violinist; John Gibbons, a harpsichordist; Laura Jeppeson, a gambist, and Myron Lutzke, a cellist.
Single tickets are $12.50; a subscription to all three concerts is $32.50.
Information: (212) 362-8719.


Howard N. Math, Manufacturer, 72
Howard N. Math, a retired New York City manufacturer, died on Wednesday at Jupiter Hospital in Florida.
He was 72 and was a resident of Jupiter and of Manhasset, L.I. .
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


Communication Intelligence reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


COMPANY BRIEFS
ATLANTIC SOUTHEAST AIRLINES INC., Atlanta, has ordered eight ATR 72-210 turboprop commuter planes and taken an option on 20 more.
GOODYEAR TIRE AND RUBBER CO., Akron, Ohio, has reached an agreement in principle to sell its roofing systems business to Carlisle Companies Inc., Syracuse.
Terms of the transaction were not disclosed.


Shared Medical Sys. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cellular Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Film; Boyfriend Has Heart Of Baboon
"Untamed Heart" is to the mind what freshly discarded chewing gum is to the sole of a shoe: an irritant that slows movement without any real danger of stopping it.
The movie is about the transforming love affair of two innocents, Caroline (Marisa Tomei), a pretty Minneapolis waitress whose boyfriends dump her with alarming regularity, possibly because she talks too much, and Adam (Christian Slater), the busboy at the diner where Caroline works.
He's a good-looking, strapping fellow who talks so seldom that people think he's retarded, though he's only shy.
"Untamed Heart" would have you believe they are made for each other, like Diane and Chico in an upper Midwestern version of "Seventh Heaven."


Monarch Machine Tool reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Katie Beers's Mother Agrees To Continue Evaluation
Katie Beers will remain with a foster family for at least two more weeks while her mother, Marilyn Beers, is interviewed by a court-appointed psychologist under an agreement reached today in Family Court here.
Katie, 10, who is attending school on eastern Long Island, was not in court this morning.
But her interests were represented by a court-appointed lawyer, Anthony DiSanti, who said of Katie's relationship with her foster family, "She's very attached to them."


With Jeers for the West, Iran Cheers 14 Years of Revolution
Hundreds of thousands of Iranians accompanied by battalions of the armed forces converged on Freedom Square in Teheran today in a Government-sponsored rally marking the day the military capitulated to Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, bringing the fall of the monarchy 14 years ago.
While President Hashemi Rafsanjani said in a speech today that the West must reassess its attitude toward Iran, marchers labeled the United States "the mother of all corruption."


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Jan. 18 about corporations' looking outside for top executives omitted the name of an author of "Control Your Destiny or Someone Else Will." Stratford Sherman wrote the book with Noel M. Tichy.


Weston (Roy F.) (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Slocan Forest reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Game Face of Eddie Murray
To the public, Eddie Murray presents a stoic, almost impenetrable presence, a mysterious figure who eschews curtain calls, high fives and anything bordering on undue fanfare.
To the news media, the gaze is often less reticent, and more downright intimidating.
To fellow ball players, Murray is an altogether different fellow, far from diffident, often witty and outright friendly, even to opponents, not necessarily leading with fiery rhetoric but by example.


Jackson Interview High in Ratings
When Michael talks to Oprah, America listens.
On Wednesday night, Oprah Winfrey interviewed Michael Jackson live on ABC, and the result was the highest-rated entertainment show in six years.
An average of 62 million people were tuned in at any given moment of the 90-minute show, the A. C. Nielsen Media Research reported yesterday.


Geraghty &amp; Miller Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


G.M. Lost $23.5 Billion Last Year
General Motors today reported a $23.5 billion loss for 1992, by far the largest ever posted by an American corporation.
But most of the loss was for accounting changes, and results excluding the charges indicated that the company's troubled auto maker's operations might be improving.
Indeed, Wall Street saw beyond the losses.
The General Motors Corporation's shares closed at $40.50 on the New York Stock Exchange, up $1.25.
It was the most active stock, with nearly 11.3 million shares traded.


School's Regrets on Fernandez Ouster
Mildred Dienstag felt a tremor of worry the day after Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez was voted out of his job.
The science teacher at Park West High School in Manhattan passes out condoms to students upon request.
She wondered what would happen now to the Chancellor's experiment that has made condoms available in virtually all of the city's high schools in an effort to curb the spread of AIDS.


Melville Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Art in Review
Paul McCarthy Luhring Augustine 130 Prince Street SoHo Through tomorrow
Paul McCarthy's nearly 25-year career as a performance and video artist has unfolded largely on the West Coast, but his in-your-face and frequently disgusting solo show at Luhring Augustine, his first in New York City, could be said to make up for lost time.


Review/Film; A Homeless Frenchwoman In America Sans Green Card
"Trusting Beatrice," which opens today at the Quad Cinema, is the sort of failed comedy that becomes increasingly difficult to watch as it proceeds.
It has no shame.
It tries so hard to please that it eventually appears to be groveling, making itself June-bug small and defenseless.
The temptation to step on it isn't easily resisted.
The film is the first to be written and directed by Cindy Lou Johnson, a playwright apparently known for her quirky characters and whose latest comedy, "The Years," is now at the Manhattan Theater Club.


BUSINESS LEADERS URGED BY CLINTON TO BACK TAX PLAN
President Clinton told business executives and their lobbyists face to face today that next week he would propose an increase in the top corporate income tax rate and a limit on the tax breaks that companies could take for their executives' salaries.
The proposals themselves were not completely new, but this was the first time since Mr.
Clinton took office -- and probably the first time since he began his campaign -- that he had looked people in the eye and told them in public that they would have to give up something specific for the sake of reducing the Federal budget deficit.
Until now, Mr.
Clinton has only spoken generally about shared sacrifice.


U.S. Panel Urges Setting Export Target Levels
The chairmen of some of the nation's largest corporations said today that Federal trade officials should establish temporary market-share targets for American exports.
In a report, the executives, members of the Government's top advisory panel on trade, said the targets were needed because Japan still imports a smaller percentage of its manufactured goods than any other major industrial nation, despite the removal through negotiations of many regulatory trade barriers in Japan.


Manville Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Halted at the Market's Door: How a $1 Billion Drug Failed
Before it ran into problems last year, the experimental drug Centoxin was expected to save tens of thousands of lives a year and reap billions of dollars for Centocor Inc., the small company that made it.
An advisory panel of the Food and Drug Administration had recommended that the drug be approved to treat sepsis, a reaction to a bacterial toxin in the bloodstream that kills an estimated 100,000 people a year in the United States.
A license seemed only months away.


Amoskeag Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


TRANSACTIONS
Hockey National Hockey League
NEW YORK ISLANDERS -- Recalled Vladimir Malakhov, defenseman, from Capital District of the American Hockey League.


South Africa's Wealth Is Luring Black Talent
When Christopher G. Kibuuka moved to South Africa in 1982, his destination was regarded throughout Africa as a hell invented by whites for blacks.
To Dr.
Kibuuka, a black gynecologist from Uganda, hell was relative.
His own country had been laid waste by eight years under a savage despot named Idi Amin, whose secret police sometimes bashed in the heads of suspected enemies with sledge hammers.
South Africa looked pretty good.


Trying to Develop Immunity to Atlantic City Flu; In a Town of Compulsion, a Zealous Few Offer a Helping Hand to Desperate Gamblers
"The pit boss has been warning me," said the blackjack dealer, his tone miserable as he spoke of the underside of this city's monomania over chance.
The hands of the dealer were fidgety away from the table, and his eyes were sad.
His voice resonated with revival-tent zealotry as he told of his anguish in having to make his living by flipping cards for some of the more self-destructive gamblers who bet hungrily at the movement of his flashing hands.


Woman in the News: CLINTON PICKS MIAMI WOMAN, VETERAN STATE PROSECUTOR, TO BE HIS ATTORNEY GENERAL; Tough 'Front-Line Warrior' Janet Reno


Slain Youth's Body Hidden Under Bed
A 14-year-old Brooklyn boy was shot to death yesterday, apparently accidentally, when a revolver he and three friends were playing went off, striking him in the left eye, the police reported.
Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman, identified the youth as Jimmy Gonzales of 191 Amboy Street.
The incident took place yesterday afternoon in the apartment of one of the friends, at 196 Throop Avenue, in Bedford-Stuyvesant.
The police said that the three hid the body of the dead youth under a bed, and that one called police late last night.
The three, who were not identified, were being questioned early this morning.


Stanley Furniture Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; Semyonova And Meyers Meet Again
HER knees are shot from all those years of lugging her 7-foot-2-inch body up and down the court, but Ulyona Semyonova hopes to make another long haul after the spring thaw.
She would travel from Latvia to Massachusetts, no longer to intimidate rival centers but to be installed in the Basketball Hall of Fame in Springfield on May 10.
Semyonova, of Riga, and Ann Meyers, of California, opponents from the old days of the cold war, will be inducted together.
Meyers has a CBS broadcasting job and a home in Palm Springs; Semyonova lives with her mother in a one-bedroom apartment in Riga, and is not strong enough to work at the moment.


Timberland Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Advertising; A Final Surprise Ends BMW Agency Hunt
Most agency executives would drive to the ends of the earth for a chance to work on even a single automotive account.
Now, a little-known shop is riding off with its second one.
BMW of North America Inc. said yesterday that it had selected Mullen Advertising Inc., based in the Boston suburb of Wenham, Mass., to handle the creative portion of its estimated $80 million to $85 million account.
BMW, one of the world's most coveted automotive accounts, will park next to another prestigious nameplate in Mullen's garage: Rolls-Royce Motor Cars Inc. of Lyndhurst, N.J., the American importer of Rolls-Royces and Bentleys from Britain.


Par Treated Subpar; Strange Leads Assault
Par was savaged again today in golf's equivalent of domed stadiums at the Bob Hope Chrysler Classic.
In perfectly calm 75 degree temperatures over four immaculately conditioned courses, Curtis Strange led the assault, finishing 36 holes at a 13-under-par-131.
He led the quintet of first-round leader Dave Rummells, Steve Elkington, Rick Fehr, Jay Haas and Fred Couples by one stroke.


Review/Film; Bill Murray Battles Pittsburgh Time Warp
In "Groundhog Day," playing a formerly smug weatherman who finds himself condemned to relive one Feb. 2 over and over again in Punxsutawney, Pa., Bill Murray explains his feelings to two bleary-eyed, beer-drinking locals.
"What would you do if you were stuck in one place and everything was exactly the same and nothing that you did mattered?" he asks despairingly.
The two strangers listen very sympathetically.
They didn't have to be trapped by a magic spell to know what he means.
That glimmer of recognition is what makes "Groundhog Day" a particularly witty and resonant comedy, even when its jokes are more apt to prompt gentle giggles than rolling in the aisles.
The story's premise, conceived as a sitcom-style visit to the Twilight Zone, starts out lightweight but becomes strangely affecting.
Phil Connors, Mr.
Murray's amusingly rude Pittsburgh television personality, surely deserves to be punished for his arrogance.
But who in the audience hasn't ever wished time would stand still and offer a second, third or even a 20th chance?


Amid War for Enclave, Armenia Sees Little Hope
There is little cheer these days in the presidential palace in Yerevan, where Armenia's first elected President sits in his chilly office, smoking one cigarette after another from a filtered cigarette holder, contemplating his country's economic ruin and its crippling diplomatic impasse.
At the heart of Armenia's crisis is its undeclared war with Azerbaijan over the mountainous enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh, a conflict that President Levon Ter-Petrosyan helped start in 1988 as a leading member of the Karabakh Committee, one of the first nationalist movements to shake the foundation of the old Soviet Union.


Lincoln Prize Awarded To Kenneth M. Stampp
Kenneth M. Stampp, the historian and author of several books on the Civil War, has been named the Lincoln Prize laureate for a lifetime contribution in Civil War studies.
Mr.
Stampp received $40,000 of the $50,000 award, which has been given annually since 1991 by the Lincoln and Soldiers Institute at Gettysburg College.
He also received a bronze bust of Lincoln.


Sales Signs
One barometer of market sentiment is the Arms' Short-Term Trading Index, which tracks the ratio of advancing to declining issues.
A reading below 1 indicates bullishness; a reading above indicates bearishness.
Yesterday, as the Dow retreated from its highs in the afternoon, the Arms index showed increased selling.


Great Lakes Power reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New Line Cinema reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Post Suitor Has Completed Payment, Lawyer Says
While a judge delayed any decision on whether to freeze the assets of the prospective buyer of The New York Post yesterday, his lawyer said that the buyer, Steven Hoffenberg, had already paid the $6 million necessary to acquire the newspaper.
That transfer of funds effectively completes the steps necessary for Mr.
Hoffenberg to take over The Post.
The deal now requires only the approval of a judge handling the separate personal bankruptcy case of The Post's owner, Peter S. Kalikow.


Ruling on Injury Lawsuits Is Victory for Asbestos Companies
In a victory for asbestos companies facing huge losses from personal-injury lawsuits, the New York State Court of Appeals ruled today that insurers are obligated to pay the companies' often considerable legal fees in defending the cases.
The decision could save tens of millions of dollars for New York companies with outstanding asbestos claims snaking their way through the court system.
But it is a blow to the insurance industry, which has been arguing that it is not obligated to defend companies in asbestos-related personal-injury cases.


Otto R. Salassi, Novelist, 53
Otto R. Salassi, who wrote novels for young readers, died on Wednesday at his home in Fayetteville, Ark.
He was 53.
His wife, Margaret, said the cause was liver disease.


Columbia Gas System reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
dation of the Pulitzer Board.
A report in the Currents column in The Home Section yesterday about a show of contemporary furniture and glass at Leo Kaplan Modern misstated the gallery's telephone number.
It is (212) 535-2407.


CRISIS OVER EXILES LINGERS FOR ISRAEL
Despite an agreement with the United States last week that was supposed to lay the matter to rest, Israel has not been able to end the two-month-old crisis over its deportation of some 400 Palestinians to Lebanon.
Israeli officials have said repeatedly in recent days that their focus is no longer on the banished Palestinians but on reviving the Middle East peace talks, which have been suspended for two months and are unlikely to resume for at least two more months.


Stock Trading Is Heavy As Dow Climbs by 10.27
Stock prices rose in heavy trading yesterday, with blue-chip issues leading the market.
The completion of the Treasury's quarterly refunding also lifted some of the apprehension that has hung over the stock market in the last few trading sessions.
Following an early surge of buying in cyclical stocks, led by General Motors, the market ran into bouts of selling that limited the day's gains, traders said.


Expeditors International of Washington (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Knockout Punch, Just in Time for the Bulls
What was expected to be a test for the Knicks last night became a romp.
The Houston Rockets were picked apart by a team on top of its game in the worst mismatch at Madison Square Garden since the Riddick Bowe-Michael Dokes fight five nights earlier.
There was no referee to stop this one early, though.
So the Knicks kept delivering blows, while the Rockets kept absorbing them until the final buzzer mercifully sounded.
Unbeaten through six games in February, the Knicks (31-15) extended their season-high winning streak to to that level by punishing Houston, 125-95.
New York reached season highs in points and field-goal percentage (58.1) and had its highest-scoring quarter of the season (37 points) in the third period.


Rape and the Accuser: A Debate Still Rages On Citing Sexual Past
The passage of laws by dozens of states largely prohibiting the use of an accuser's sexual history or reputation as evidence in rape cases was an early achievement of the women's movement.
From the mid-1970's to the mid-1980's, one state after another adopted a version of this kind of legislation.
According to the NOW Legal Defense and Education Fund, Utah is the only state today that does not have some kind of rape shield law or a court ruling that protects rape victims.


On My Mind; The President Can Do It
Now that everybody is totally alert to the national danger from alien nannies, perhaps Americans and their new Administration will find a little more time and thought to deal with an even greater threat to our society.
Drugs. You do remember drugs?


When Career Women Need to Stop the Clock
To the Editor:
As the father of a daughter who is a graduate student in psychology, I read Shirley M. Tilghman's articles on women and science (Op-Ed, Jan. 25-26) with interest.
I was disappointed that her main recommendation for increasing women's participation in science is to abolish tenure.
Abolishing tenure is about as realistic as waiting for the millennium.


Billboard Barb or a Burning Question?


Enserch Exploration Partners reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Byrd Defies the Odds to Take His Biggest Steps
Dennis Byrd steadied himself on his crutches at the doorway of the conference room at Mount Sinai Hospital yesterday afternoon.
He stood there for a moment -- flanked by his wife, Angela, and his therapists -- to gather his nerves.
Then, leaning on his crutches, Byrd gingerly put one foot in front of the other and walked the 15 feet to a chair in the front of the room to take his seat next to his wife.
The scene held the wonderment of Neil Armstrong's walking on the moon.
It embodied the joy of a baby's first step.
Because just two and a half months ago, Byrd, a Jets defensive end, fractured his neck during a football game and was left partly paralyzed, with his doctors saying there was little chance of him walking again.


OLYMPICS: One Year to Lillehammer; '94 Olympics Are on Schedule Now That Budget Games Are Over
Back in 1981, when a few dreamy locals first took up the idea of being host to the Winter Olympics here, it was considered the height of pretension for the small lakeside town, known mainly to Norwegians as the birthplace of Thor Bjoerkland, the man who invented the cheese slicer.
Yet, with the 12-month countdown for the 1994 Winter Games getting under way here Friday when Crown Prince Haakon Magnus inaugurates the Haakon Hall indoor stadium, Lillehammer now seems quietly confident that it will be more than ready when its 16 days in the sporting world's spotlight finally arrive.


Authentic Fitness reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3


Mills Mulls Why He's an Ex-Net
Terry Mills is with Detroit, playing great basketball, and the Nets are wondering how he ever slipped through their fingers.
Although his talent is more evident now than last season, when he was a backup forward with the Nets, Mills is Exhibit A of how New Jersey blundered, letting go someone who would have been satisfied backing up Derrick Coleman.
Mills stood in the visiting locker room before the Nets pounded the Pistons on Wednesday night, 109-86, and talked about his previous team with both admiration and confusion.
Admiration because he still talks to a lot of the guys.
Coleman is one of his best buddies.
Chris Morris, Drazen Petrovic, Kenny Anderson, all pals he still speaks to occasionally.
Mills will have another chance to see his friends when the Nets play at Detroit on Friday.
Still Has an Interest
"I like to see what they're doing, there's no doubt about that," said Mills of the Nets.
"Because I thought we had a great team when we were all here. So I like to look and see what Derrick is doing and what Petrovic is doing because that was basically the first team that I got a chance to play for and I'm happy to see they're doing well.


Age-Old Question Divides Coaches
It's time for the latest mind games and war of words between the Knicks and the Chicago Bulls.
And who better to take the lead than the two coaches, Pat Riley and Phil Jackson?
On the eve of tonight's confrontation in Chicago, Riley responded to comments made by Jackson in December.
Jackson fired this salvo in The Chicago Tribune on Dec. 26, the day after the Bulls' Christmas night victory against the Knicks.


Unico American Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bankers First Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Art; For an Opening, Secrets, Africa's Currency of Power
Over the last decade the Center for African Art has quietly produced a series of memorable theme shows.
Its "Wild Spirits, Strong Medicine" in 1989 was a brilliant example.
"Secrecy: African Art That Conceals and Reveals," which opens tomorrow at the museum's new home in SoHo, suggests that the institution is still very much on a winning streak.
Organized by Mary N. Nooter, the show not only marks the center's change of name to the Museum for African Art but also gives a visually gripping account of an aspect of African culture that has important parallels with the West.
The tribal elder from Ghana who is quoted in the show's catalogue as saying, "What I know, that you ought to know but do not know, makes me powerful," gets right to the heart of "Secrecy." All the show's 100 or more 19th- and 20th-century sculptures, reliefs and textiles carry hidden materials or secret information.
The information relates to matters mythical, political, communal or personal, but in every case, the knowers of the secrets -- a king communicating with ancestors, members of a tribal fraternity, women embedding disguised messages in their weaving or a diviner healing the sick -- have the special power to reveal or withhold knowledge from others.


Teleflex Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Astrotech International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Photography; Showing Women in a New Way: Freely
In his first fashion photograph, taken for Harper's Bazaar in 1933, Martin Munkacsi (1896-1963) demonstrated the love of movement and sheer pictorial pizazz that was to make him one of the most successful photographers of his generation.
The picture, which shows a model in a bathing suit and cloak running on the beach, was startling in an age when most fashion photographs were carefully staged confections shot in the studio.
But it also suggested a new way of viewing women, as free and unabashedly physical.
By the time Munkacsi made this invigorating picture he was already well-known as a photojournalist in Berlin, working for the lively illustrated news magazines that thrived in Weimar Germany.
A retrospective of his work, organized by the Aperture Foundation and now at the Fashion Institute of Technology, traces Munkacsi's career from his early work in Hungary to his final fashion shot, taken in 1962, of a model wearing a turban with long cloth ends that droop like a sad rabbit's ears.


Man Sought in Killings at C.I.A. May Have Vanished in Pakistan
The authorities trying to track down the man suspected of killing two Central Intelligence Agency employees said today that they believed he had returned to his home town in Pakistan before fleeing from there several days ago.
In Quetta, a remote provincial capital in southwest Pakistan, relatives of the suspect, Mir Amin Kansi, told reporters that he had returned to the city last month within a few days after the attack outside the C.I.A. headquarters.
But they said he had departed just before he was identified as the prime suspect in the case.


Remaking U.N. for a Changed World Means End to Veto Power; Look to Moscow's Role
To the Editor:
Secretary of State Warren M. Christopher has said that it is "time for some reorganization of the United Nations," including permanent membership for Japan and Germany.
His remarks prompted a curt response from Britain, whose Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, argued, "If it ain't broke, don't fix it."


Continental Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


She Was All Man and All Woman; Self-Transformation
To the Editor:
Re "Peekaboo Power Suits" (Op-Ed, Jan. 28):


A Top Officer At Occidental To Quit Posts
David A. Hentschel, a director and top executive of the Occidental Petroleum Corporation's oil and gas unit, told the company's directors today that he intends to retire and quit the board, effective April 30.
He will be succeeded as chief executive of Occidental Oil and Gas by David R. Martin, 61, who has been president of the subsidiary since 1983 and who is currently heading its international operations.


CompuCom Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


International Research &amp; Development (NMS


Treasury's Auction Sets Off a Rally
The Treasury's auction of 30-year bonds went well yesterday and sparked a rally that turned a so-so three-day quarterly auction into a better one, traders said.
President Clinton also helped, as the yield on the new 30-year bond dropped to 7.15 percent.
The $35.5 billion three-day sale of Treasury notes and bonds was the first quarterly auction under Mr.
Clinton.
Coming after a strong rally since January and ahead of the disclosure of the President's economic plan next week, it could have been a perfect excuse for a big correction.


Sounds Around Town
New From Shimmy-Disc
Kokopop Party, the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, East Village, (212) 219-3055.
For years, the label Shimmy-Disc has been an outlet for the far side of the New York music scene: bands so experimental they border on surreal, projects so avant-garde they're likely to disturb tame ears.
Now, the people at Shimmy-Disc have started a new label, Kokopop, with an esthetic aimed at the more conventional side of the scene.
Kokopop is fun; Kokopop is nutty; Kokopop is a word with only three different letters in it; Kokopop will potentially move more product.
Tonight's party features five bands, including the jittery, grinding guitar band Jive Bible; Aenone and Dandelion Fire, which tend toward fuzz-based, droning guitar pop; Tiny Lights, veering between progressive-rock jams and dreamy ballads, and the slamming distortion of Morning Glories.
Tonight at 9.
Tickets are $8.
Blues With Heart
Jimmy Dawkins Blues Band, Tramps, 51 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
The stereotype of the blues guitarist is a guy standing onstage with a pained expression on his face, his hands zooming up and down the neck as he squeezes out notes in a finger-tripping flurry of notes emphasizing flash and technique.
Jimmy Dawkins, an unjustly obscure figure from Chicago, works the opposite end of the spectrum.
Emotive and economical, he is more likely to turn his back on the crowd and stretch a taut note through several chords, and his solos have a gut-wrenching precision that eschews grandstanding.
He resurrects the heart of the blues: its feelings, urgency and ultimate catharsis.
Tonight and tomorrow at 8:30 and 11:30.
Tickets are $5.
Malone in Overdrive
Michelle Malone, CBGB, 315 Bowery, at Bleecker Street, East Village, (212) 982-4052.
At her best, Michelle Malone is the kind of singer and songwriter who can jolt things into overdrive.
Working a raunchy groove that borrows from the Allman Brothers and the Rolling Stones without keeling over into Black Crowes-style mimickry, she can push her band into a jiving, bluesy frenzy that's no less authentic for being derivative.
On top of that, she has a wail that could stop an express train.
Tomorrow at 8:30 P.M.; admission is $8.


CHRONICLE
Bean counters take note: Could it be that Americans are overtaking the British in theatrical accolades in London?
Certainly they are catching up in some of the biggest honors.
Of the eight London Theater Awards given Wednesday by the Critics Circle, an organization of 40 newspaper and magazine drama critics, four had American links.
The awards were presented in the Theater Museum in Covent Garden.


GTI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Millipore Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Market Place; One bar and a guy named Wilt do not a restaurant empire make.
BASKETBALL prowess long ago proved an almost universal means of winning lots of fans.
But if yesterday is any measure, that public adoration is not always easy to convert into public investment.
Wilt Chamberlain, the former basketball star, took his restaurant company public yesterday in an offering that quickly proved to be an air ball.
The stock of the new company, named Wilt Chamberlain Restaurants Inc., opened at $7.50 a share -- the highest amount the stock fetched all day.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about the appointment of an administrator of the Pulitzer Prizes referred incompletely to the Pulitzer Board's relationship to Columbia University.
The president of the university awards the prizes on the recommen


Citgo Petroleum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Worthington Foods (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that are scheduled to close soon: Closing This Weekend
"JEFFREY," WPA Theater, 519 West 23d Street, Dhelsea.
A comedy by Paul Rudnick about a gay man living in New York who decides to be celibate; with John Michael Higgins; directed by Christopher Ashley.
Closes Sunday.
Performances: tonight and tomorrow at 8; Sunday, 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
All performances are sold out, but returned tickets may become available one hour before the show.
Information: (212) 206-0523.
The show will reopen on March 6 at the Minetta Lane Theater, 18 Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village.
"GEOMETRIC TRADITION IN AMERICAN ART, 1930-1990 and JEAN-MICHEL BASQUIAT (1960-1988)," Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
More than 90 works.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Today through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $6; $4 for students and the elderly; free for children under 12.
Information: (212) 570-3676.
Closing Next Weekend
"HENRY V," Theater for a New Audience at the Playhouse at St.
Clement's Church, 423 West 46th Street, Clinton.
Shakespeare's drama featuring Mark Rylance; directed by Barry Kyle.
Through Feb. 20.
Performances: Tuesday, Thursday and Friday, 8 P.M.; Wednesday and Saturday, 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 279-4200.
NEW YORK CITY BALLET, New York State Theater, Lincoln Center.
Through Feb. 21.
Performances: Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday at 8 P.M.; Saturdays 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday 1 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $11 to $55.
Information: (212) 870-5570.
ANDRES SERRANO, Paula Cooper Gallery, 155 Wooster Street, SoHo.
Photographs by Mr.
Serrano.
Through Feb. 20.
Hours: Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 674-0766
"VISIONES DEL PUEBLO: THE FOLK ART OF LATIN AMERICA," Museum of American Folk Art, 2 Lincoln Square, Columbus Avenue at 65th Street.
Artwork ranging from toys to masks from 17 Latin American countries.
Through Feb. 21.
Hours: Tuesday through Sunday, 11:30 A.M. to 7:30 P.M.
Admission by contribution: $2.
Information: (212) 977-7298.


Review/Film; 'Ballroom': Rivalries And Love
"Strictly Ballroom" was shown as part of last year's New York Film Festival.
Here are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 26, 1992.
The film opens today at the Angelika Film Center, Mercer and Houston Streets, Greenwich Village, and First and 62d Cinemas, 400 East 62d Street, Manhattan.
Inside the bright, brassy confines of an Australian dance palace, a kitschy melodrama unfolds.
It is the story of Scott (Paul Mercurio), a contender for the Pan-Pacific dance trophy who may suddenly have sabotaged his chances by daring to do steps of his own, and Fran (Tara Morice), the homely, spunky girl who dreams of becoming Scott's partner.
It is a tale of scheming for the trophy, of a corrupt contest official (who hawks his own educational video, titled "Dance to Win"), and of Scott's ambitious parents, who hope their son's triumph can make up for their own broken dreams.


INSIDE
Big Loss for General Motors
General Motors posted a $23.5 billion loss for 1992, the largest ever for an American corporation.
But most was for accounting changes, and there were hopeful signs.
Page D1.
G.M.
Lifts Penalty on NBC
Satisfied with the network's apology over a filmed pickup collision, General Motors lifted its suspension of advertising on NBC News.
Page A14.
Bosnia Divided on U.S.
Role
Bosnia's Government supported the U.S. peace effort, but residents of Sarajevo were disappointed that no military aid was arriving.
Page A10.
Albany and the Chancellor
The ouster of New York City's school chief is prompting lawmakers in Albany to take a fresh look at overhauling the Board of Education.
Page B2.


Hillary Clinton Sees Hurdles In Forging Health-Care Plan
Hillary Rodham Clinton said today that she feared that drug companies and others who profit from the current health-care system would obstruct the Administration's efforts to make sweeping changes in that system.
At a conference here on health care, Mrs.
Clinton, the chairwoman of the President's Task Force on National Health Care Reform, and Tipper Gore, wife of Vice President Al Gore, listened more than they lobbied.
And there was plenty to hear: uninsured parents pleading for coverage; businessmen urging caution; academics asserting the President's proposals did not go far enough; labor leaders opposing any tax on health benefits.


Acordia Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Stelco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Diversco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


TVWeekend; The Rise and Fall of a Boxing Champ
The saga of Mike Tyson smacks of an old Warner Brothers movie: a wayward teen-ager, better with his fists than with anything else, finds understanding adults who help him to become a champion, only to self-destruct when his mentors are replaced by exploiters.
"Fallen Champ: The Untold Story of Mike Tyson" is not entirely untold; much of it has been heavily reported.
Still, Barbara Kopple ("Harlan County, U.S.A.") has written, produced and directed tonight's two-hour documentary with her usual skill.
The boxing scenes have punch and so do the interviews, especially those with players in the boxing game.


USA Waste Services reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Noranda Forest reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


EG&amp;G Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3


At the Bar; It's the American way: Immigrant lawyers slash and hook over a hockey player's contract.
Anyone doubting that the melting pot is alive and bubbling should consider the case of VMP International v.
Yushkevich, now grinding along before Judge Louis J. Freeh of Federal District Court in Manhattan.
So should anyone concerned about the perennial problem of lawyers sniping at one another when a judge is not looking.
On one side of the case is Roman Popik (born in the Soviet city of Kishinev in 1956; law degree, Pace University, 1987).
He runs VMP International.
On the other side is Alexander Berkovich (born in Riga, Latvia, in 1957; law degree, Villanova University, 1987) and his partner, Mark Gandler (also born in Kishinev in 1956; law degree, Columbia University, 1991).
They are proprietors of International Sports Advisers.


Black History Month in Words and Deeds
Here is a sampling of events celebrating Black History Month that are to be held in the metropolitan region this weekend: Today
"THE CIRCLE UNBROKEN IS A HARD BOP," Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street, East Village.
A theater piece by Sekou Sundiata, a poet, and Craig S. Harris, a musician, about three black American artists who come of age during the 1960's.
The piece, in the form of letters, features Mr.
Sundiata, Mr.
Harris and the actress Stephanie Alston; the director is Rome Neal.
Tonight and tomorrow at 7:30 P.M. and Sunday at 4 P.M.
On Monday at 7:30 P.M., a benefit is planned for the Audience Development Committee (Audelco), an organization that promotes and recognizes achievements in black theater; tickets: $15.
Admission: $10.
Reservations: (212) 465-3167.
"ALONE IN A CROWD," prints from the 1930's and 40's by black artists, from the collection of Reba and Dave Williams, at the Equitable Gallery, 787 Seventh Avenue, at 51st Street, Manhattan.
More than 90 prints focus on black history and experience in America, part of an exhibition co-sponsored by the Newark Museum.
Through Feb. 27.
Hours: Monday through Friday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Saturday, noon to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 554-4818.
PORTRAITS AND SELF-PORTRAITS, Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street.
Photographs, poems, videos, costumes and other items created by children from East Harlem.
Through March 26.
Hours: Wednesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Admission by contribution: $5; $3 for the elderly, students and children; $8 for families.
Information: (212) 534-1672.
"THE LEGEND OF JOHN BROWN BY JACOB LAWRENCE," Hudson River Museum, 511 Warburton Avenue, Yonkers.
Twenty-two serigraphs depicting the abolitionist, by Jacob Lawrence, a noted black American artist.
Through April 25.
Hours: Wednesday, Thursday and Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Friday, 10 A.M. to 9 P.M. and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
The museum is open this Monday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $3; $1.50 for children under 12 and the elderly; free for members.
Information: (914) 963-4550.
"BILLIE AND MALCOLM: A DEMONSTRATION," Castillo Cultural Center, 500 Greenwich Street, north of Canal Street, South Village.
A new play by Fred Newman, featuring original music and Billie Holiday songs.
Today and tomorrow at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 P.M.
Through Feb. 28.
Tickets: $20; $10 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 941-1234.
PHOTOGRAPHY EXHIBITION, Rockland Center for the Arts, 27 South Greenbush Road, West Nyack, N.Y.
An exhibition of photographs by black American photographers.
Through Feb. 28.
Hours: Monday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, 1 to 4 P.M.
Admission by donation.
Information: (914) 358-0877.
Tomorrow
"CHANGING THE PICTURE: THE EMERGENCE OF AFRICAN-AMERICANS IN TELEVISION," American Museum of the Moving Image, 35th Avenue at 36th Street, Astoria, Queens.
A series of screenings of documentaries, dramatic programs, comedies, movies, sports events, music and talk shows continues through March 28.
Tomorrow's screenings feature films starring Sammy Davis Jr., beginning at 2 P.M.; "Good Night, Sweet Blues," (1961) with Ethel Waters, Coleman Hawkins and Roy Eldridge and "No Hiding Place," (1963), with Ruby Dee and Joseph Campanella, will be shown at 4 P.M.
On Sunday, "Walk in My Shoes," a 1961 television documentary about school integration in Tennessee with Edward R. Murrow, will be screened at 2 P.M., followed at 4 P.M. by television documentaries about the civil rights movement such as "Feedback" (1963), "The Fourth Man" (1963) and "Same Mud, Same Blood" (1967).
Screenings are $2 each and are not included in museum admission, which is $5; $4 for the elderly; $2.50 for children and students.
Also at the museum, through Feb. 28, is "From Harlem to Hollywood: American Race Movies, 1912-1948," an exhibition of posters, photographs and oral histories.
Museum hours are Tuesday through Friday, noon to 4 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, noon to 6 P.M.
Information: (718) 784-4520.
"THE HELIOTROPE BOUQUET BY SCOTT JOPLIN AND LOUIS CHAUVIN," Playwrights Horizons, 416 West 42d Street.
A new play, in previews, based on the lives of the ragtime musicians, by Eric Overmyer; directed by Joe Morton.
Opens Feb. 28.
Performances Tuesday through Friday at 8 P.M.; Saturday at 3 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $26.50.
Information: (212) 279-4200.
EXHIBITION, Transit Museum, Boerum Place and Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn Heights.
"Persistent Struggle: African-Americans in New York Mass Transit from 1930-1963," an exhibition of documents and photographs, through March 14.
Museum admission: $3; $1.50 for students and the elderly.
Museum hours: Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.; closed Monday.
Information: (718) 330-5839 or 330-3060.
Sunday
"AIN'T GONNA BE TREATED THIS WAY," WNYC-AM (820).
An hourlong radio documentary about black American life during the Depression.
Sunday at 10 P.M.


Geer, DuBois Held Likely to Close
Three top executives at Geer, DuBois Inc. in New York, a 58-year-old agency with clients like the BASF Corporation, Meridien Hotels and the Northrop Corporation, said yesterday that they had abandoned plans to acquire the shop after the loss of its third large account in 13 months.
As a result, they said, the agency, with 60 employees and $60 million in billings, was likely to close.
"We had it all lined up," said Stephen G. Bowen Jr., president and chief executive, referring to acquisition plans involving himself; Rodney Underwood, the chairman and creative director, and Martyn Straw, executive vice president and director of strategic services.
Two other executives outside the agency were also believed to be involved in the transaction, which would have included changing the agency's name.


Gorman-Rupp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Restaurants
On this most romantic of weekends it is heartening to rediscover some of the older classic French restaurants around town, places that consider dining a high art, not pop art, and where elegance and understatement reign.
Le Chantilly is such a place, recently rejuvenated by an American talent at the stove, David Ruggerio, who displays maturity far beyond his 30 years.
For much of its recent life, Le Chantilly has been the kindly old aunt of New York's French restaurant family: dependable, cosseting, generous but not exactly a Mardi Gras parade in the excitement department.
Mr.
Ruggerio, a veteran of La Caravelle and Maxim's in Manhattan, seems determined to change all that.


TVWeekend; Historical Tales From the Other Side of Alex Haley's Family
Alex Haley, who died a year ago, chronicled in "Roots" his maternal ancestry, dabbing an Africa-to-America saga that spanned seven generations with touches of fiction.
Now, focusing on the author's paternal grandmother, there is "Alex Haley's 'Queen,' " a three-part mini-series being presented on CBS Sunday, Tuesday and Thursday, at 9 each night.
The scope is considerably more limited, but the sense of unfolding history, familial and national, is still compelling.
Opening in Alabama in 1841, the story finds Easter (Jasmine Guy), a slave, having an affair with James Jackson Jr. (Tim Daly), son of the plantation's Irish-born owners (Ann-Margret and Martin Sheen).
Their union produces a child, the light-skinned Queen, who will spend her life searching for her true self while being considered a mulatto outcast by most whites and many blacks.
From her teens to her mid-60's, Queen is played by Halle Berry ("Boomerang"), who, although a touch weak in some of the more emotional scenes, maintains a steady flow of lovely persuasion.


Owner Lures Gibson
It wasn't the money that drew KIRK GIBSON back to the Detroit Tigers.
It was the man who will pay that money.
Gibson, who grew up in the Detroit suburbs and helped the Tigers win the 1984 World Series, came out of retirment on Wednesday and signed with Detroit for a $500,000 base salary.
The contract also includes a potential $600,000 in performance bonuses for the 35-year-old outfielder, who left the Tigers as a free agent after the 1987 season because of differences with the owner, TOM MONAGHAN.


Marquette Electronics (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


CHRONICLE
HERBERT ZOHN, a retired art dealer, has been a lifelong admirer of Eleanor Roosevelt, and several years ago he was struck with an idea: to put up a sculpture of her in what he described the other day as "a shabby corner of Riverside Park at 72d Street."
Mr.
Zohn wrote to the New York City Parks Department and learned that the work would have to be done by a private organization, so he formed the Eleanor Roosevelt Monument Fund.
He recruited her grandson Dr.
FRANKLIN DELANO ROOSEVELT 3D, a professor of economics at Sarah Lawrence College, to be his co-chairman and organized a sculpture competition.


Remaking U.N. for a Changed World Means End to Veto Power
To the Editor:
When Leslie H. Gelb urges building collective security at the United Nations in "Shaping Change" (column, Jan. 21) and ends by celebrating the new President's and his own devotion to our democratic ideals, he leaves unasked a troubling question:


Purepac Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


They're My Dates! No, They're Mine!
The rivalry over racing dates among south Florida's three tracks intensified yesterday when Hialeah Park announced that it would operate this year from April 1 through June 6, overlapping the final two weeks of the season at Calder.
Calder said that unless the dates were revised, it would open May 1 and compete with Hialeah head-to-head for five weeks.


Oceaneering International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Clinton Wants Fast-Track Rule Extended
Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, announced today that the Clinton Administration would seek a new authorization to negotiate trade agreements and submit them to Congress for quick consideration, with no amendments allowed.
The announcement is the Administration's first public acknowledgment that world trade talks in Geneva cannot be completed before the current authority from Congress expires in two stages, beginning on March 2.


Indian Government Bans a Hindu Demonstration, but Is Challenged
The Indian Government today prohibited a demonstration by the country's main militant Hindu opposition party that leaders of the party said would have brought 1.5 million Hindu campaigners to New Delhi.
They said they would go ahead with the protest anyway.
The demonstration, planned for Feb. 25, is the latest in a series of efforts by Hindu fundamentalists to drive the governing Congress Party from power and create a Hindu state in India.


Advanced-TV Systems Are Called Flawed
A special committee advising the Federal Communications Commission concluded this evening that all five of the systems competing to be picked as the United States' high-definition television standard were flawed.
The competitors told the committee that they had made improvements to repair problems that turned up in tests last year.
So committee members said they would recommend that four of the five systems be retested to gauge those improvements.
That could set back the schedule for the introduction of high-definition television by as much as a year.


Washington Memo; Household Hiring Is Trickier With New Broom in Capital
It hangs low over the city like heavy weather, blighting the bureaucracy, fraying the nerves of Democrats and, in tornado-like fits of arbitrary destruction, wrecking careers.
It's the first collective angst of the Clinton years, the unintended consequence of an unexpected job standard.
It's a mess.
It's Nannygate.
For scores of prospective appointees to the Clinton Administration, suddenly and surprisingly, the ambitions of a lifetime rest on the question, not of education, or experience, or connections, but of practices in hiring household help.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  SOUTH AFRICA DRAWS BLACK ELITE


Sounds Around Town
A Carter Valentine
Betty Carter, Alice Tully Hall, (212) 875-5000.
A special Valentine's Day concert, "Prelude to a Kiss: Jazz for Valentines," featuring Betty Carter and her trio, will concentrate on love songs and ballads.
One of the most original and expressive improvisational singers in jazz, Miss Carter bends her remarkable voice like a lonely trumpet in artfully shaded meditations, which for all their experimentation keep a firm grasp on lyrical content.
The concert will also feature the tenor saxophonists Jimmy Heath and Harold Ashby, the alto saxophonist Bobby Watson and the trumpeter Roy Hargrove.
On the program are standards like "The Nearness of You," "My Funny Valentine" and "Embraceable You." Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets are $30.
From Ghana
Odadaa, Symphony Space, Broadway at 95th Street, (212) 864-5400.
A company of performers from the Ga tribe of Ghana, West Africa, Odadaa combines African polyrhythmic drumming with singing, balafon (wooden xylophone), bamboo flutes, high-energy dances and colorful costumes.
The troupe, led by Yacub Addy, a master drummer, composer and choreographer, will perform sacred and secular songs and dances, as well as recent works by Mr.
Addy.
Saturday at 8 P.M.; tickets are $15.
There will be a shorter, family-oriented program at 6 P.M. on Sunday; tickets are $10 for adults and $3 for children.


WARNACO GROUP INC. (N)
The Warnaco GroupInc. announced yesterday a sharp improvement in earnings for the fourth quarter, recording a profit of $7.33 million, or 36 cents a share, compared with a profit of $429,000 for the period a year earlier.
For the year, the apparel company narrowed its loss, to $17.455 million, from $28.45 million for the year earlier.
Warnaco shares fell $2.875 yesterday, to close at $33.75, after advancing $1.875 on Wednesday.


Armored Car Owners Charged in $13.5 Million Theft
The owners of an armored car company who authorities say stole at least $13.5 million from two banks surrendered this afternoon and were arraigned before a Federal magistrate in Brooklyn this evening.
Federal prosecutors said the owners of the Revere Armored Car Company of Bohemia, L.I., Robert J. and Susanna M. Scaretta, had lost millions of dollars gambling in Atlantic City.
Mr.
Scaretta alone lost $2.1 million, they said.


Unicef Director Recommends It Stay Where It Is
The executive director of Unicef has recommended that the relief agency keep its headquarters in Manhattan rather than moving to Westchester County or elsewhere.
Under a proposal by the Dinkins administration and a city-state agency, the rent that Unicef pays for its current headquarters at 3 United Nations Plaza would be cut, and Unicef would be given ownership of the building in 2026.


Sterilization -- and Unfit Mothers
Last month a Tennessee woman and her husband were convicted of molesting the woman's two sons.
Judge Lynn Brown gave them a choice.
They could each serve 10 years in prison.
Or the woman could agree to sterilization by tubal ligation, in which case the judge would put both her and her husband on probation.
Guess which course the woman chose.
So the woman won't be able to have any more children.
But what does making it impossible for her to get pregnant have to do with making it impossible for her ever to molest another child?
Not much.
And what does it have to do with her husband's complicity in the same crime?
Not much, again.


Co-Steel reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


S.E.C. Chief Planning To Leave by April 15
Richard C. Breeden, the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, said today that he would leave the agency to join the private sector by April 15, two months before his term expires.
Mr.
Breeden, a Republican who has headed the commission since 1989, said he might leave the post sooner if a new chairman is in place before April.


Art in Review
Coenties Slip Pace Gallery 142 Greene Street SoHo Through tomorrow
"Coenties Slip" is just the show to do if a gallery wants to compete with the Gagosian Gallery's string of historical shows while endearing itself to important artists -- Ellsworth Kelly or James Rosenquist, for example -- who are represented by other dealers.
But never mind, such speculation barely detracts from this beautiful museum-quality exhibition, which offers an illuminating if somewhat truncated glimpse of the past.


Conspiracy's Labyrinth: An Ex-Pilot's Grim Quest
IN 1983, a Soviet warplane shot down Korean Air Lines Flight 007 over the nighttime Sea of Japan, but that is becoming old news now.
When new fragments of information come out, the papers run them short and inside.
The bad Soviets have been replaced by the good Russians, so politicians no longer make self-regarding statements of outrage.
Senator Bill Bradley may receive a delegation of seventh graders from New Jersey animated about the issue, but that could have more to do with the electoral value of being nice to kids than with the death in dark waters of 269 innocent people.
It was James Brazell who got the seventh graders interested in Flight 007.
His speech to them was the third one on the subject he has given in the last year.
As the horror and outrage over Flight 007 fades, the American attachment to the guest speaker, especially free ones like Mr.
Brazell, keeps the 58-year-old professor of English plugging away at his lonely cause, which is the appalling conviction that the C.I.A. intentionally guided the Korean passenger airliner off course and over Soviet territory to test the enemy's air-defense reactions.


On Stage, and Off
Gay Scene Revised in 'Goodbye Girl'
The saga of "The Goodbye Girl," already the season's best offstage soap opera, has another chapter.
Last weekend, after the producers received four letters of protest from people who had seen the show in its pre-Broadway tryout in Chicago, the playwright Neil Simon rewrote a key scene, eliminating all references to homosexuals.
The show begins previews at the Marquis Theater tomorrow.


Tennant Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hilb, Rogal &amp; Hamilton reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Conpak Seafoods reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


American Power Conversion (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


She Was All Man and All Woman; Practical Gear
To the Editor:
Evidently Ms.
Fleming has forgotten how difficult it is to walk up stairs without a hand railing and sit on a bar stool in a floor-length straight skirt without a slit.
MARCIA RICKER  New York, Jan. 29, 1993


Chief of Brokerage Firm Defends Record
The chief executive of Raymond James Financial Inc., the Florida brokerage firm linked to questionable trading practices, defended his company today, telling the annual stockholders meeting that it had not violated Federal regulations.
"I'm proud of our compliance efforts," said Tom James, chief executive of Raymond James, parent of Raymond James &amp; Associates, a regional firm based here.


So Full of Promise, and Then She Never Came Home
Shilie Turner ran every place.
She ran to the grocery store for her mother, Vivian King, and came back with two paper bags, filled, in 10 minutes flat.
She jogged to the laundromat with clothing bundles.
She bounded past the track trophies and medals piled on the coffee table in the living room, up the stairs in her northwest Philadelphia home, two steps at a time.


Experts See Tax Curbs on Executives' Pay as More Political Than Fiscal
The effects of President Clinton's plan to limit corporate tax deductions for paying seven-figure salaries would probably be more political than economic, some experts on executive compensation said yesterday.
The plan could hit hard at high-salary industries like Wall Street, Hollywood and big time sports, which might make it easier for middle-class people to swallow a tax increase, these experts said.


A Tempest in Tampa Over an Ex-Slave Ship
This city already has a football team called the Buccaneers and a raucous annual festival named for a Spanish privateer.
So when it was proposed that a replica of the only pirate ship ever salvaged in the United States be built here as the centerpiece of a $70 million pirate museum on a chunk of prime downtown waterfront, the idea seemed a perfect fit.
But before pirates hijacked the Whydah, which sank in 1717, it had been a slave ship, and when leaders of Tampa's black community learned of the vessel's full history late last year, they were outraged.
The controversy has engulfed Tampa since then, not only threatening the project but reopening old wounds in a city with a long history of racial disputes.


Fiscal Prudence in Trenton
Gov.
Jim Florio has yet to announce he's running for re-election in November, but his budget love-in with the Republicans who control New Jersey's Legislature says he is looking to minimize confrontations that might upset his plans or rattle voters.
His cautious stance may be smart politics, but it is also smart governance after years of fiscal stress.
The Republican leadership greeted the Democratic Governor's budget message this week with approval.
The two Republican contenders for Mr.
Florio's job denounced it.
And the Senate Democratic leader complained that Mr.
Florio should be fighting to restore homeowner tax rebates that the Republicans cut last year.


Transco Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Prince Sihanouk Talks of Uniting Cambodia by Reassuming Throne
Prince Norodom Sihanouk suggested today that the best job for him might not be as the elected president of Cambodia -- it might be, once again, as King.
Prince Sihanouk, who abdicated as Cambodia's monarch in 1955 but went on to serve as its head of Government until he was deposed in a coup in 1970, raised the possibility of his return to the throne as he welcomed President Francois Mitterrand to Cambodia.
The French leader arrived here today for a two-day visit intended to bolster sagging efforts toward a settlement in Cambodia.


Spinnaker Software Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Starrett (L.S.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Jet Diverted To Kennedy By Hijacker
A gunman who demanded to be taken "to the West" commandeered a Lufthansa jetliner carrying 104 people to Africa from Europe yesterday.
After a trans-Atlantic flight to New York, the aircraft landed at Kennedy International Airport and the hijacker surrendered what turned out to be a harmless starter's pistol and gave up without a struggle.
Amid conflicting reports and much confusion, the hijacker was identified by Federal prosecutors last night as Nebiu Zewolde Demeke, a 20-year-old Ethiopian who was being deported from Europe to a homeland that has been wracked for years by strife, poverty and hunger.


Review/Opera; Old Movies? No, but Just As Psycho
The modern horror film owes a lot to the mannerisms of turn-of-the-century Expressionism, to images of severed limbs and invocations of disordered minds, to sickly dread and syrupy moans.
The most appropriate movie scores for such films are still written in a style that imitates the music of the period, in which the long, tonal musical lines once associated with Romantic desire twist upon themselves, splintering into fragments or drifting into disturbed disarray.
So it should not have been too surprising that when the Canadian director Robert Lepage brought his Canadian Opera Company productions of Bartok's "Bluebeard's Castle" and Schoenberg's "Erwartung" to the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Wednesday night, there was no escaping the sense of cinematic cliche.
In Mr.
Lepage's staging of Schoenberg's monodrama -- a troubled, disoriented monologue by an unnamed woman -- there are languorous slow-motion sequences: an attack with a scythe, a naked body rolling into a stream of water, blood streaming from a corpse, a hand emerging out of a brick wall and grabbing its victim.
There is even a white-suited psychiatrist with a pad, making notes as the woman's obsessions take shape.
In Bartok's one-act opera, Mr.
Lepage has given us a long dungeon corridor, huge doors with keyholes the size of severed heads, shimmering shadows cast by red light and a slow march of women through streams of blood.


About New York; Bakers Find Anger Is the Mother of Invention
As a starting point, hatred can be positive.
Take the case of the 400 workers who lost their jobs when Stroehmann's shut down its Taystee Bread bakery in Queens seven months ago.
When they started to hold their weekly meetings, it was mostly to vent their anger at bosses who had fled the city and abandoned them.
They cursed their old employers.
They dreamed of vengeful boycotts.
They are still meeting, only now, what they talk about is setting up their own big bakery in two years time.
"O.K., listen up," said Lynn Bell, addressing 35 of the unemployed workers who turned up at the Ebenezer Baptist Church in Flushing.
The 40-year-old former machinery cleaner and union representative was both giving news and shoring up hopes.


For Funerals, A Female Touch; More Women Undertakers
When people call Gruerio's Funeral Home here and get Toni Gruerio on the phone, they sometimes ask for the funeral director.
"I
am
the funeral director," says Ms. Gruerio.
"Then can I speak to the owner," the caller persists.
"I
am
the owner," she answers.


RHI Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Noranda Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Scotsman Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3


Emcon (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY REPORTS PINPOINT POLICE TRAINING LAPSE
The New York City Police Department's transformation to community policing has been hampered by a lack of continuing training to help officers grow in their ability to address chronic crime problems, rather than simply respond to emergencies, a high-ranking police official said.
The critique was offered in a series of memos and reports to the Police Commissioner over the last month by the official, Assistant Chief Aaron H. Rosenthal, the former commander of Manhattan detectives appointed to assess the department's efforts to change over to community policing.
Page 1.


Lights Out Early for Columbia as Penn Wins Duel of Ivy's Best
The lights went out in the Palestra tonight, and for Columbia that was a sure sign the game was over, even though there were 9 minutes 28 seconds to play.
By the time one of the 6,898 fans in attendance for this showdown between the Ivy League's top two teams accidentally hit a switch, causing a row of lights to black out and force a five-minute delay in the game, the University of Pennsylvania was leading Columbia, 63-35, on the way to an 84-63 victory.
"We were in trouble from the tip," said Buck Jenkins, who led the Lions with 19 points.
"We didn't come out of the starting blocks and they did. Then they finished us the way they were supposed to."


Goldwyn (Samuel) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-5  U.N. PLANS PULLOUT OF U.S. TROOPS
The U.N.
Secretary General plans to bring most American troops home from Somalia by April and replace them with a multinational corps of 15,000 to 20,000 soldiers under the command of a Turkish general.
The plan would leave 3,000 to 5,000 American troops under the command of a foreign officer, a departure from long-standing U.S. policy.  1  BOSNIA TO BAR U.N.
AID
The Bosnian Government announced that it would refuse to accept any further deliveries of U.N. food and medical aid to Sarajevo until United Nations relief convoys begin regular deliveries to besieged Muslims in eastern Bosnia.
The move appeared to have been prompted by the Clinton Administration's policy statement on the war in Bosnia.  1  U.N.
DECISION BACKS ISRAEL
The U.N.
Security Council, closing the book on the dispute over Israel's deportation of 400 Palestinians more than six weeks ago, again urged Israel to take back the deportees and called on the Palestinian delegation to return to the stalled Middle East peace talks.  3  WHAT'S IN STORE FOR ITALY?
After the resignation of Bettino Craxi as leader of the Socialist Party in Italy, one of the country's more perplexing questions is this: Where will the new leaders be found in a political system that is seen by many Italians as utterly discredited?  4  ARGENTINA AND U.S.
IN PACT
Broadly opening its technology to a Latin American country for the first time, the U.S. signed an accord with Argentina that will permit it to buy some of the most advanced computers, nuclear technology and aeronautical guidance systems.  4  UZBEKISTAN TESTS THE FUTURE
In the heart of Central Asia, Uzbekistan challenges the fond hopes and assumptions that a collection of newly independent countries would cast off the immense burden of the past and emerge as democracies from the wreckage of the Soviet Union.  5  ANGKOR-ERA STATUES ARE STOLEN
Thieves have raided the conservation office outside the fabled ruins of the ancient Cambodian capital, Angkor, and made off with 11 statues that together are valued at hundreds of thousands of dollars, the U.N. said.  5  U.N. weapons inspectors received a frosty reception in Iraq.  3  Strasbourg Journal: The provinces are gaining new cachet.  4  National 6-9  CLINTON ASSAILS DRUG COMPANIES
In an echo of an attack leveled by his wife the day before, the President said the pharmaceutical industry was pursuing "profits at the expense of our children." 1
Drug companies said price data were leading Clinton astray.  8
Aides denied Clinton would slash the space-station program.  7
Perot joined Leno, and it was hard to tell who was the star.  9
Congressional Brief: G.O.P. newcomers are feeling their oats.  9  HOME REFINANCING SURGES
American homeowners, who last year pared billions of dollars in interest payments off balance sheets by refinancing their mortgages, are at it again, spurred by a bond-market rally that has pushed long-term mortgage interest rates to 20-year lows.  1  THE CAUTION IN JANET RENO
For at least a decade as State Attorney for Dade County, Fla., the woman who is now the Attorney General-designate has largely avoided prosecuting cases of police brutality or corruption, preferring instead to direct such cases to Federal prosecutors or seek a judicial inquest.  8
Washington Memo: A month in which the lawyers stumbled.  8  POWELL ON 'REDUNDANCIES'
The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff submitted his report for reducing duplication of the services' roles, but it is well short of what the President has endorsed.  9  SEATTLE AND ITS PARTNER
Seattle coasted above the last major recession in large part because it had an economy based on world trade.
Now the Boeing Company's recent announcement of extensive layoffs has demonstrated to many business leaders there that no city, no matter how forward-looking and global its economic base, should be so dependent on a single company.  6  HOPI ACCORD TURNS SHAKY
An uproar in Arizona over a Government proposal to grant 400,000 acres of Federal land to the Hopi Indians has dimmed the chances of settling a century-old dispute between the Navajo and Hopi tribes.  6  MICHAEL JACKSON'S AILMENT
Michael Jackson, who said in a television interview this week that his light skin was due to a disorder, not intentional bleaching, is suffering from vitiligo, a rare, discoloring disease.  7  Religion Notes: Free weddings on Valentine's eve.  7  A judge ruled in a custody fight that has pitted two states.  6  Metro Digest 23  PROBLEMS IN COMMUNITY POLICING
The New York City Police Department's transformation to community policing has been hampered by a lack of follow-up training that would help officers grow in their jobs and teach them to address chronic crime problems, rather than simply respond to emergencies, a high-ranking police official said.  1  FROM ANGER TO A NEW HOPE
About New York: The 400 workers who lost their jobs when Stroehmann's shut down its Taystee Bread bakery in Queens started weekly meetings to vent their anger at bosses who they felt had abandoned them.
Dr. Howard A. Paul; developed robotic surgical arm.
George B. Allen, a retired executive at a hospital group.
Editorials/Op-Ed 20-21  Editorials  A promising choice for Justice.
Probation's bold experiment.
Mary Cantwell: St.
Patrick's.
Letters  David Corn: The Senate's hearing problem.
Angelo Codevilla: The C.I.A., losing its smarts.
Bette Ann Moskowitz: A valentine nobody could love.
Flora Lewis: It isn't "Yankee, go home" anymore.


General Motors Acceptance Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Tyler Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The powerful drug industry was criticized by President Clinton for pursuing "profits at the expense of our children." He directed the Secretary of Health and Human Services to begin negotiations with drug companies on the price of childhood vaccines.  [ Page 1. ]
Merck, Connaught, Lederle and SmithKline Beecham will send representatives to the White House to discuss vaccine prices.
They said the President was misled about their profits.  [ 8. ]


Peoples Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Religion Notes
A Valentine Bargain
Tomorrow is both Valentine's Day and the first day of Brotherhood/Sisterhood Week.
To celebrate the confluence of events, the Interfaith Temple in Manhattan is offering to perform marriage and other commitment ceremonies free of charge tonight.
Rabbi Joseph H. Gelberman, the president of the temple, said lovers often face roadblocks when they try to marry in nontraditional ways.
Some ministers balk at performing interfaith marriages, and even more refuse to perform commitment ceremonies for gay men and lesbians.
Once a willing minister can be found, the costs are often considerable.


Doctor Says Michael Jackson Has a Skin Disease
Michael Jackson, who said in a television interview with Oprah Winfrey on Wednesday that his light skin was the result of a disorder, not intentional bleaching, is suffering from vitiligo, a rare disease that discolors the face and body, his dermatologist said yesterday.
Although Mr.
Jackson did not disclose the name of the disorder in the interview, his dermatologist in Beverly Hills, Calif., confirmed that the pop singer suffered from the little understood disease that affects 1 to 2 percent of the world's population.


For an Un-Valentine: Dead Black Roses
Tomorrow is Valentine's Day, and while roses are a common currency of sentiment, they may not mean what you think.
Especially if Todd M. Cohan has anything to do with them.
Last year, the 25-year-old entrepreneur from East Brunswick, N.J., was searching for an appropriate way for former friends or lovers to convey the anger, resentment or pain caused by a relationship gone bad.


Medtronic Product Approved
Investors rushed to buy shares of Medtronic Inc. yesterday after Federal regulators approved the company's device for reducing the chance of fatal heart attacks in certain types of patients.
The device, which is implanted in the body, contains a computer chip that senses irregular heartbeats and directs electrical impulses to restore the heart's normal rhythm.
If a low-level shock does not work, it may deliver two levels of stronger jolts.
Medtronic, based in Minneapolis, projected worldwide sales for the device of $1 billion by the end of the decade.


Clinton to Look At Bonuses Sent To Bush Aides
President Clinton today directed Federal officials to investigate the actions of departing Cabinet officials in the Bush Administration who awarded a total of $300,000 in last-minute bonuses to senior political and career aides.
In a letter sent to Patricia W. Lattimore, the acting director of the Office of Personnel Management, Mr.
Clinton requested the 45-day review to gauge the extent to which Secretaries at the Departments of Labor, Interior, Agriculture and Justice disbursed the bonuses in George Bush's final days as President.


Calgon Carbon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


COMPANY BRIEFS
SUN CHEMICAL CORP., Fort Lee, N.J., a printing inks manufacturer, acquired Usher-Walker P.L.C. for $19.9 million.


CAPX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Angelo Fosco, Union Leader, 71
Angelo Fosco, the general president of the Laborers' International Union of North America, died Thursday at Memorial Hospital in Hollywood, Fla., where he had a winter home.
He was 71 and lived in Chicago.
The union said he died after a brief illness.


Civil Rights Complaints Sought at Princeton
Walking home from the library late one night, a Princeton University student was stopped by a university security guard looking for a homeless man who had been loitering on campus.
"I was stopped because I was black," said the student, who requested anonymity so that he would not be singled out on campus.
"I know who they were looking for, and I can tell you I look nothing like the guy."


Women Must Unite Against Smoking
To the Editor:
With mounting evidence of smoking's hazards, it is time that women, who have most to lose from its effects, take a more active role against this most destructive addiction.
It is women who, if they smoke during pregnancy, jeopardize their unborn child.
It is women who, if they take the pill and smoke, increase the risk of phlebitis, heart attack and stroke.
It is women, concerned with a child's daily routine from infancy, who must realize the sensitivity of young, growing membranes to the irritants in cigarette smoke that cause ear, nose infections, bronchitis, acute asthma and lung scarring.


3 New Offerings: Bond, Stock and Mixed
Tax-conscious investors with a conservative bent might consider the new T. Rowe Price Tax-Free Insured Intermediate Bond Fund from T. Rowe Price Associates of Baltimore.
Owning bonds that mature in 5 to 10 years reduces the volatility of the fund's share price by about a third, which is a plus should interest rates begin to rise.


Albertville Learning To Turn Gold, Silver And Bronze Into Green
For any American television viewer who overdosed on luge last February, Ray Leblanc and 16 days of snow-capped, tape-delayed Winter Olympic scenery from the French Alps, a return to the Savoy region one year later reveals an area indelibly marked by the Olympic experience.
The enormous Olympic rings are still painted on the highway in the workaday outskirts of Albertville.
Windows full of Magique-the-mascot dolls and "Albertville '92" duffel bags at 40 percent off still fill the stores on the city's main street.


Phillips Cables reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about the American Telephone and Telegraph Company's agreement to develop a communications network based on Telescript software by General Magic, included an erroneous description from A.T.&amp; T. about the extent of the agreement.
A.T.&amp; T. says it should not have described its rights to operate the network as exclusive.


Editorial Notebook; St. Patrick's Gallimaufry
On March 17, 1762, a group of Irish-born militiamen, both Catholics and Protestants, marched -- without their superiors' permission -- to a St.
Patrick's Day breakfast at Hull's Tavern on lower Broadway.
There's been a St.
Patrick's Day Parade in New York ever since.
But this year's, which so far has produced a dramatic photograph of John Cardinal O'Connor posed against St.
Patrick's Cathedral, two lawsuits and enough heat to power a steam engine, is very much in doubt.
When the parade's traditional sponsor, the Ancient Order of Hibernians, refused to let gay groups march, Mayor David Dinkins denied it a parade permit.
Calling for "an inclusive event," he awarded the permit instead to a new group, The St.
Patrick's Day Parade Committee.
Now, with the Hibernians renewing their claim, the committee has returned its permit.
"Partition has temporarily destroyed Ireland," the committee explained.
"We're not going to allow it to destroy this parade."


Espey Manufacturing &amp; Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


No Headline
"In both instances, you had a tremendous number of lawyers who fooled around and missed the main point. Isn't that a symbol of what happens when you've got all these lawyers running things?" -- CHARLES PETERS, describing the first two false starts in the search for an Attorney General.  [ 8:1. ]


VSI Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pulitzer Publishing Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Heart Technology Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Abbott Gets Ruffled After Arbitration Loss
When Jim Abbott learned two months ago that he had been traded to the Yankees, he was not happy.
He subsequently expressed a different view, but now the team has given him reason to be unhappy again.
It's not just that Abbott learned yesterday that he had lost his salary arbitration case to the Yankees; it's also that some of the things he heard at the hearing the day before were apparently not to his liking.


Verdix Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Grammar Rules Weren't Made in Heaven
To the Editor:
Regardless of how speakers of English choose to use the words "shall" and "will" today (letters, Jan. 1 and 23), they should understand the historical basis for the controversy.
This is set forth in the book "American English Grammar" by the great American linguistic scholar and teacher Charles C. Fries.
Mr.
Fries's dissertation treats the 17th- and 18th-century origins of the rules for using shall and will and the development of these rules in 18th-, 19th- and 20th-century grammars.
He shows that the rules for shall and will were invented by William Ward for his "Grammar of the English Language" (1765).
In "American English Grammar" Charles Fries summarizes: "The conventional rules for shall and will did not arise from any attempt to describe the practice of the language as it actually was either before the 18th century or at the time the grammar was written in which these rules first appeared." Ward, he states, "definitely repudiated usage, even that of 'our most approved authors,' as the basis of correctness in language."


ECC International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


ARGENTINA SIGNS TECHNOLOGY PACT
Broadly opening its technology to a Latin American country for the first time, the United States signed an agreement with Argentina today that will permit this country to buy some of the most advanced computer equipment, nuclear technology and aeronautical guidance systems.
In a memorandum of understanding signed in the ornate San Martin Palace in downtown Buenos Aires, Argentina agreed to a broad range of controls over technology it develops and any technology it receives from the United States.


Late Call: Jordan Suspended and Fined
The National Basketball Association suspended Michael Jordan today for one game and fined him $10,000.
The action took the league's most valuable player and leading scorer out of tonight's nationally televised game between the Bulls and the Knicks.
Jordan was suspended for punching Reggie Miller of the Indiana Pacers during Wednesday night's game in Indianapolis.
Miller was fined $6,000 but he was not suspended.


Hartford Schools Molded by Racial Isolation
Hartford Public High School's principal, Amado Cruz, reflected on the different worlds of his 2,200 students.
Some arrive doing well.
Most come from homes where English is not spoken.
Some come directly from Puerto Rico.
And some come from jail.
"I have a kid who's been in Somers," he said, referring to Connecticut's maximum-security prison.
"How the hell am I going to educate him? That's what he brings to school."


The Military Has a Real Flair for Integration; What Plato Says
To the Editor:
Plato had an opinion on gays in the military. In the "Symposium," Phaedrus is speaking:


One Final Damaged Pillar of Italy's Sinking Politics Resigns
Ever since elections last year registered Italians' disenchantment with the clutch of leaders who finessed or finagled their way to power on the coattails of the cold war, this land has been filled with the sense that an old order is dying, hounded by history and a record of misdoing.
On Thursday night, with a 25-minute speech of resignation from his party by the former Socialist leader Bettino Craxi, it seemed the malady had become irreversible.


Eagle Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Classical Music in Review
Vienna Chamber Orchestra  Carnegie Hall
Expanding chamber pieces into orchestral works, a practice more popular in the early decades of the century than it is now, always required great caution.
And when the authenticity movement made musicians feel guilty about tinkering with composers' original proportions and instrumentation, transformations of this kind virtually died out.
Philippe Entremont and the musicians of the Vienna Chamber Orchestra have reconsidered the unspoken ban on these arrangements, and they presented two of them, along with a Mozart concerto, on Monday evening at Carnegie Hall.
The results were mixed, particularly for listeners who believe that such expansions make sense only if they illuminate qualities in the music that are obscured in the chamber versions.


Curtiss-Wright reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Latest Offer From Nets Is Rejected by Petrovic
Guard Drazen Petrovic has turned down the latest contract offer from the Nets -- believed to be a five-year deal worth between $3 million and $4 million -- and has told the club he will wait until the end of the season before deciding whether to stay in the National Basketball Association or return to playing in Europe.
"Maybe we should go three or four years instead of five," Petrovic said tonight.
"I have to speak to my family, and this is going to take time, but it was a good offer."


Mark Controls (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Caretenders Health reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dr. Howard A. Paul Dies at 59; Developed Robotic Surgical Arm
Dr.
Howard A. Paul, developer of a robotic surgical device tested on human patients in California, died on Wednesday at Stanford University Hospital.
He was 59 and lived in Loomis, Calif.
The cause of death was leukemia, said Integrated Surgical Systems of Sacramento, Calif.
Dr.
Paul was Integrated's co-founder, chairman and chief executive.


Penn Virginia (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Palmer Tube Mills reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Demonstrators Protest Confederate Emblem on Georgia Flag


Brite Voice (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Children Greet Byrd For His Return Home
The Jets' DENNIS BYRD went home to Tulsa, Okla., yesterday and was greeted by dozens of children from the church youth group he works with in the off season.
Byrd, partly paralyzed during a game on Nov. 29, held his hand outside the limousine's dark-tinted window, and in sign language formed, "I love you."


Congressional Brief; Outnumbered, Sure, But Not Overwhelmed
With Democrats all over town singing the praises of having the White House, Senate and House of Representatives in the hands of one party -- theirs -- the 47 Republican freshmen in the House might seem destined to spend the next two years as potted palms.
But if they have not quite set the place on fire yet, they are nevertheless lighting matches.


Police Viewed As Ill Trained For New Roles
The New York City Police Department's transformation to community policing has been hampered by a lack of follow-up training that would help teach officers to solve persistent neighborhood crime problems, rather than simply respond to emergencies, a high-ranking police official said yesterday.
Most officers are receiving only sporadic instruction, jammed in haphazardly during their daily roll-call sessions, the official said.


Gascard Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.97
3.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.92
2.90
3.79
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.08
3.06
3.89
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.96
5.99
6.98
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.12
7.15
7.96
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.30
8.30
8.95
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.18
6.18
6.78
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


President Is Expected to Request Full Financing for Space Station
President Clinton has decided to ask for full financing for the proposed international space station but is concerned about possible cost overruns in the program, White House officials and Congressional aides said today.
After two days of rumors that the President would call for drastic cuts for the orbiting observatory, Administration officials said Mr.
Clinton would propose spending $2.25 billion on the project in the next fiscal year, as requested by the space agency.


Bronfmans Pulling Out Of Labatt
Canada's troubled Bronfman empire announced today that it would sell its 37.3 percent stake in John Labatt Ltd., Canada's second-largest brewery, for about $785 million in United States currency.
The sale, for $993 million Canadian, was the second this week for Edper, the Bronfman family's sprawling conglomerate of 500 private companies employing more than 100,000 Canadians.
On Tuesday, Edper's Brascan Ltd. unit sold its 49 percent stake in MacMillan Bloedel Ltd., a leading forest products company.
That transaction yielded $971 million Canadian, or $768 million American, for Noranda Inc., the resource arm of Brascan.


Union Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Scott Meredith, Innovative Agent For Literary Figures, Dies at 69
Scott Meredith, the literary agent who represented Norman Mailer and who introduced the concept of the book auction to publishing, died on Thursday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 69 and lived in Kings Point, L.I.
The cause of death was cancer, his wife, Helen, said.


PRESIDENT ASSAILS 'SHOCKING' PRICES OF DRUG INDUSTRY
President Clinton criticized the powerful drug industry today for pursuing "profits at the expense of our children" as he sought to assign blame for soaring health care costs and to enlist public support for his own health program.
Mr.
Clinton's blunt words came as he announced a proposal to spend $300 million next year to increase the number of American infants and children who get vaccines.
White House officials said the effort would lead to the immunization of one million more infants and children beginning this summer.


Dow Ends at 3,392.43; Off for Day and Week
Stocks fell yesterday amid concern about President Clinton's State of the Union Message next week, especially over the possibility that tax increases will be part of a deficit-cutting package.
The week ended very much the way it started, with the broad market retreating across its full breadth.
Analysts also cited some programmed selling, early weakness in bond prices and the three-day holiday weekend as factors in the decline.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 30.26 points, to 3,392.43.
For the week, the Dow lost 49.71 points from its all-time record closing high of 3,442.14 at the end of last week.
Trading Tails Off
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday was the lightest of the week, at 216.8 million shares, down from 257.2 million on Thursday.
The equity markets will be closed on Monday for the Washington's Birthday holiday.


Classical Music in Review
Currents  Kathryn Bache Miller Theater
Currents, a contemporary music ensemble from the University of Richmond, presented six recent works on Tuesday evening.
Most of the works were atonal and rigorously structured, but a few of them showed that the style, for all its intensity, does not preclude humor.
Gunther Schuller's "Bouquet for Collage" (1988), which closed the concert, made the best case for the place of levity within the context of concentrated, post-tonal writing.
The movements flirt with past styles -- waltzes, ragtime and even a kind of dark, ominous Romanticism -- in an amusing way.
But this is a showpiece as well.
Scored for flute, clarinet, violin, cello, percussion and piano, it gives each player a moment in the spotlight and demands precision and energy in the connective sections.


New Brunswick Tel reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Rangers Finally Manage a Victory, but Not Without a Scare
From the beginning of the season, these two teams looked at this weekend as a challenge.
The Rangers and the Islanders, most bitter of Patrick Division rivals, were scheduled for a home-and-home series that was certain to be a battle, if not to spill blood.
Last week's tie at Nassau Coliseum only made these two meetings all the more tense.
The Rangers, though, never expected last night's game at Madison Square Garden to arrive with so much meaning attached.
Picked to be the best in the division, they were without a victory in their last six games and were clinging to a 1-point lead over the boys from the Island and the hated Devils of New Jersey.


Graco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Most U.S. Troops Will Leave Somalia by April in U.N. Plan
The United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, is finishing a plan to bring most American troops home from Somalia by early April and replace them with a multinational corps of 15,000 to 20,000 soldiers under the command of a Turkish general, diplomats and Pentagon officials said today.
The plan would leave 3,000 to 5,000 American troops under the command of a foreign officer, a departure from long-standing United States policy.
The selection of a commander from Turkey addresses concerns by Washington about placing American soldiers under foreign command and by Somalia and other Arab nations about having a Muslim oversee the relief effort.
Turkey, an Islamic nation, is a NATO ally of the United States.


Another Surge of Refinancings Sweeps Over Mortgage Lenders
American homeowners, who last year pared billions of dollars in interest payments off personal balance sheets by refinancing their mortgages, are at it again.
Fueled by a rally in the bond market that has pushed long-term mortgage interest rates to 20-year lows, the latest surge in refinancing activity began right around Christmas, mortgage bankers said, and has intensified in the last few weeks.


Moore Medical Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Resurgens Communications Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Classical Music in Review
Ysaye String Quartet  Kathryn Bache Miller Theater
Diligence, a number of awards and a handsome London recording of Debussy and Ravel have brought the Ysaye String Quartet to international attention.
The four Frenchmen came to New York on Wednesday night playing Beethoven, Mendelssohn and Dutilleux.
These performances somewhat belied the advance notice conveyed via compact disk.
Indeed, the satisfying fullness and reassuring sense of order of the Ysaye's recorded sound was replaced here by a tighter, dryer tone.
This kind of timbre was perhaps appropriate, or at least inevitable, in Beethoven's F-minor Quartet (Op. 95), an aggressive, often explosive piece.
But one expected from Dutilleux's "Ainsi la Nuit," with its mysterious pizzicatos, tremolos and col legno bowings, more sheen, less surgical correctness.


Curative Technologies (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Steel of West Virginia reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


International Research &amp; Development (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


SunGard Data Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


From Intel, the Thinking Machine's Chip
The Intel Corporation has begun shipping samples of a computer chip that imitates the circuitry of the human brain.
The chip is the largest and fastest neural network processor yet built, and computer designers and scientists say the new technology is the most promising approach toward building intelligent machines that mimic hearing, seeing and thinking -- functions today's computers do poorly.


The Military Has a Real Flair for Integration; A Club in Arkansas
To the Editor:
About 36 years ago, I trained as an artilleryman in Fort Chaffee in President Clinton's home state, Arkansas.
Most of our cadre were veterans of World War II and Korea.
They were regular army and very gung-ho.


Q &amp; A
Household Help
Can someone who belatedly paid Social Security taxes for household help now amend his or her income tax return to claim the child-care credit?
EVELYN MILLER, MANHATTAN
Yes you can, but any interest or late-filing penalties are nondeductible, said Julian Block, a Larchmont, N.Y., tax lawyer.
"To amend your return, file Form 1040X, accompanied by Form 2441, for each year in which you claim the credit," he said.
The maximum child-care credit each year is $480 for the care of one child and $960 for the care of two or more children.


Hornbeck Offshore Services (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/City Ballet; In a Pose From Matisse
"Images," which Miriam Mahdaviani choreographed last spring for the New York City Ballet's Diamond Project series of new works, proved visually pleasing yet curiously wispy when the company presented it on Tuesday night at the New York State Theater.
In its first episode, five women gather in a ring and link arms, their poses recalling those of the women in Henri Matisse's painting "La Danse." They are soon joined by five men.
Although Ms.
Mahdaviani has devised graceful phrases and pretty poses for everyone, these felicitous moments are separated by passages that amount to little more than choreographic padding.
Three pieces by Debussy serve as accompaniment.
"Images" might have been stronger if Ms.
Mahdaviani had chosen only two.


We Can Save Haitians Yet Not Take Them In
To the Editor:
On the subject of Haitian boat people, there is a middle ground between David Carliner's proposal to invite Haitians to come to the United States and Michael S. Teitelbaum's proposal to contain them in Haiti (dialogue, Op-Ed, Feb. 2).
The United States is obliged under the 1967 United Nations protocol relating to the status of refugees, to which it is a party, not to return refugees where they may be persecuted.
The precise contours of this legal obligation may be clarified in a challenge pending before the Supreme Court.
But the United States is not obliged to resettle the boat people in its territories under the treaty, however wise that policy may seem.


11 Valuable Historic Statues Fall to Thieves in Cambodia
Thieves have raided the conservation office outside the fabled ruins of the ancient Cambodian capital, Angkor, and made off with 11 statues that together are valued at hundreds of thousands of dollars, United Nations peacekeepers said today.
The statues were stolen early Wednesday morning in the midst of an attack by unidentified gunmen on the tourist center of Siem Reap, the city that borders Angkor, about 140 miles northwest of Phnom Penh.
The attack killed three Cambodians and wounded several other people, including a Portuguese tourist.


About New York; Bakers Find Anger Is the Mother of Invention
As a starting point, hatred can be positive.
Take the case of the 400 workers who lost their jobs when Stroehmann's shut down its Taystee Bread bakery in Queens seven months ago.
When they started to hold their weekly meetings, it was mostly to vent their anger at bosses who had fled the city and abandoned them.
They cursed their old employers.
They dreamed of vengeful boycotts.
They are still meeting, only now, what they talk about is setting up their own big bakery in two years time.
"O.K., listen up," said Lynn Bell, addressing 35 of the unemployed workers who turned up at the Ebenezer Baptist Church in Flushing.
The 40-year-old former machinery cleaner and union representative was both giving news and shoring up hopes.


Executive Changes
CODA ENVIRONMENTAL AND RESTORATION INC., Dallas, an oilfield-surface- restoration unit of Coda Energy Inc., named Howard Garrett president and chief executive.
COMMUNITY FIRST BANKSHARES INC., Fargo, N.D., named Ronald K. Strand to the new position of executive vice president of the banking group.


Review/Film; The Perfect Secretary, But Just Temporarily
New from hell: Kris Bolin (Lara Flynn Boyle), a temporary secretary who's the latest in a line of too-good-to-be-true female characters in recent horror movies.
In "The Temp," Kris has the foresight to get herself hired by Peter Derns (Timothy Hutton), a guileless, newly separated executive who is much too likely to give Kris the benefit of the doubt.
Quickly convincing Peter that she lives to make his corporate life easier, Kris eagerly begins taking over his affairs.
She helps him prepare an important report and makes sure it promptly reaches Charlene Towne, the high-strung boss (Faye Dunaway, reprising her "Network" role).
She does a nice job of reorganizing Peter's personal finances, even if she manages to antagonize his estranged wife in the process.
And she becomes so attached to Peter that she becomes flustered when his permanent secretary, who happens to be a man, comes back from paternity leave.
Not long afterward, this man has an unfortunate mishap involving a paper shredder.


First USA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wackenhut Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Jan 3


H.M.O. Ills
The recent success of the California Public Employees Retirement System in negotiating a rise in premiums of only 1.5 percent from 19 health maintenance organizations may have negative implications for the H.M.O. industry, analysts say.
Stock in U.S.
Healthcare, an H.M.O. whose shares have performed well, has slipped recently.


Probation's Bold Experiment
Tucked into Mayor David Dinkins's latest New York City budget plan is a a proposed experiment that, in time, could have a substantial effect on both municipal budgets and public safety.
The experiment bears watching locally and across America.
The idea is for the city's Probation Department to apply modern technology and better management to the task, now poorly carried out, of supervising thousands of criminals not sent to prison but released under court supervision.


CHRONICLE
Prime Minister JOHN MAJOR of Britain accepted a public apology and an undisclosed financial settlement yesterday in the first round of court settlements reached in the libel actions he filed over allegations that he had had an affair with a caterer.
The caterer, CLARE LATIMER, was also awarded undisclosed damages and an apology from the companies that produce and sell The New Statesman and Society, a weekly magazine, according to The Associated Press.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Acquired Felix Jose, outfielder, and Craig Wilson, infielder, from the St.
Louis Cardinals for Gregg Jefferies, third baseman, and Ed Gerald, outfielder.
Designated Rico Rossy, infielder, for assignment.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Agreed to terms with Jay Buhner, outfielder, and Norm Charlton, pitcher, on one-year contracts.
National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Agreed to terms with Hal Morris, first baseman, on a one-year contract.
NEW YORK METS -- Agreed to terms with Eric Hillman, pitcher; Jeff Kent, infielder; and Darren Reed, outfielder, on one-year contracts.
Basketball National Basketball Association  NBA -- Suspended Michael Jordan, Chicago Bulls guard, for one game without pay and fined him $10,000 for throwing a punch in a game on Feb. 10.
Fined Reggie Miller, Indiana Pacers guard, $6,000, for fighting in a game on Feb. 10.
LOS ANGELES CLIPPERS -- Signed Alex Stivrins, forward, to a 10-day contract.
Hockey National Hockey League  HARTFORD WHALERS -- Named Steve Weeks goaltending coach.
TAMPA BAY LIGHTNING -- Acquired Herb Raglan, right wing, from the Quebec Nordiques for Martin Simard, Michel Mongeau and Steve Tuttle, forwards.
College  MOREHEAD STATE -- Named Richard May defensive line coach.


Holiday on Monday
Washington's Birthday will be observed on Monday. Here are holiday schedules. NEW YORK
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal, state, and city closed.


Appliance Recycling Centers of America Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


When Business and Schools Enter Partnership
To the Editor:
You report that Syracuse University is sponsoring a new kind of high school in New York City, the High School for Leadership and Public Service (news article, Jan. 25).
I would like to acquaint readers with another school partnership that is national in scope and has a college link as part of its mandated curriculum: the Academy of Public Service, which in New York City is housed in three high schools, Cardozo, Forest Hills and Washington Irving.
The program, begun in September 1991, has 140 students, and the first class will be graduated next June.
The school is linked with C. W. Post of Long Island University and New York University.
Academy seniors have just finished a college course in criminal justice offered by C. W. Post and will be eligible for special scholarships at both institutions.


How to Make Friends and Pick Stocks
Armed with specialized reports and chatting enthusiastically about the performance of Amgen, a pharmaceutical company, and Gtech, makers of computerized gaming systems, 14 women gathered around a table at the Westport Women's Club one recent noontime for a session of their Venture Investment Club.
Gtech had been enthusiastically endorsed by the majority for purchase -- "think of all those casinos being opened on the Indian reservations," said one member -- but another reminded the group that Gtech was a gambling stock and thus not quite suitable for a gathering of grandmothers.


Superior Surgical Mfg.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Masco Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Military Has a Real Flair for Integration
To the Editor:
Discussions about gays and lesbians in the military evoke intense feelings of deja vu for me.
In 1951 I was part of an operations research team under contract to the Army to advise on how best to assign black soldiers to implement President Truman's 1948 executive order mandating thoroughgoing integration of the services.
Our investigation included observations, opinion surveys and interviews with Army personnel at all levels at United States bases and hospitals and in the field in Korea, where the exigencies of battle had already resulted in large-scale de facto racial integration.
Some of the negative opinions were identical to those now raised in opposition to homosexuals.


Dotronix reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Alexander &amp; Alexander Services Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dixon Ticonderoga reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Vishay Intertechnology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Southern Indiana Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Edward F. Conley, Correspondent, 60
Edward F. Conley, a longtime correspondent and bureau chief for the Voice of America, died on Thursday in George Washington University Hospital in Washington.
He was 60 and lived in Tokyo.
The cause was a brain tumor, his family said.


Philippine Volcano Explodes; Scientists Warn of More Eruptions


Driver, 51, Dies After Crash
Joe Booher, a 51-year-old driver from Montmorenci, Ind., was killed today in an accident on the second lap of the Florida 200 at Daytona International Speedway.
The rear of Booher's Chevrolet touched the front of Carl Horton's Pontiac as the two drivers entered Turn 1 of two-and-a-half-mile oval.
Booher's car then turned sideways and hit the wall.
As Booher's car slid back down the banked track, Rodney White's car hit it in the right front.
Horton, of Ayden, N.C., was able to keep going.


Reviews/Dance; Athletic, Understated and Religious
Demetrius Klein dealt with deft physicality and complex emotions in a program of six new and recent solos and duets on Sunday night at the Merce Cunningham Studio.
"Bone on Bone," a premiere danced to music by Steve Keller and Force 3, was primarily a showcase for Mr.
Klein's athletic, understated way with movement, often a matter of corkscrew turns, small jumps and rooted plunges.
"Duet," a premiere performed to one of Bach's "Goldberg" Variations played by Tim Gilligan, etched a portrait of a friendship in large, hefting lifts and gentle physical rapprochements, colored by a curious sadness.
"Duet" was danced by Mr.
Klein and Kathleen Johnson-Klein, his wife, an expansive yet purposeful mover with a quiet radiance.


Tenera L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


High Schools in Hartford Do What Is Necessary to Carry On


U.S. Details Careful Plan Of Hijacker
The Ethiopian who commandeered a German jetliner to New York carefully planned the hijacking for some time because he had been refused entry to the United States and had "personal and family problems" that required his presence here, Federal authorities said yesterday.
The nature of the problems was not disclosed, but the suspect, Nebiu Demeke, who had lived in Germany since last August and is the son of an Ethiopian father who is an economist and a Moroccan mother, said he had brothers in Minnesota and Indiana and a sister, Selamawit Demeke, at Gettysburg College in Pennsylvania.
Bail Hearing in Court
Mr.
Demeke also told the authorities how he had deftly smuggled a harmless starter's pistol aboard the Africa-bound jet over Austria on Wednesday, hiding the gun under an Indiana Jones-style hat and then using it repeatedly to threaten pilots and flight attendants.
As his arrest loomed, he swapped it for the pilot's sunglasses.


The Issue's Dead: No N.H.L. Skaters at Lillehammer
USA Hockey is going ahead with plans to recruit its Olympic team for 1994 without players from the National Hockey League.
Baaron Pittenger, executive director of USA Hockey, said today that a meeting this week between Gary Bettman, the new commissioner of the National Hockey League, and Juan Antonio Samaranch, the president of the International Olympic Committee, had all but assured that N.H.L. players would be unavailable until the 1998 Games.


Endotronics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


George B. Allen, 60, A Retired Executive At a Hospital Group
George B. Allen, the retired head of the association representing nonprofit hospitals and nursing homes in New York State, died on Thursday at his home in Clifton Park, N.Y.
He was 60.
His death followed a long respiratory illness, said a spokeswoman for the Hospital Association of New York State, where he had worked.


Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Service for Ashe
Thousands attended a memorial service for Arthur Ashe yesterday at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine.
Ashe, who died last Saturday at 49, was remembered by Mayor David N. Dinkins as "the most decent man I've ever known." Sports of The Times, Page 29.


It Isn't 'Yankee, Go Home' Anymore
The message to Washington from the mammoth gathering of leaders at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, was loud and clear.
Reversing the hostile graffiti of a generation ago when America was seen as determined to dominate, it was, "Ami, don't go home."
From East and West, North and South, the plea was for the U.S. to stay actively engaged in the world's economic and security affairs.
Raymond Barre, France's former and possibly future Prime Minister, put it flatly, saying the U.S. bears "first responsibility" for restoring economic confidence and pulling everyone back into a new period of growth.
Others need to do better on their monetary, fiscal and wages policy mix, he said, but the key is to make sure there is no U.S.
"economic decoupling" and a convincing U.S. start on deficit reduction.


Forschner Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


ARX Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pulaski Furniture Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 24


Transferring Accounts Is Often a Slow Process
AS any brokerage industry executive can tell you, the switching of funds from one firm to another is an effortless process.
A simple one-page form is completed, signatures are checked, and your new brokerage firm communicates electronically with the old one to whisk your funds right to the spot where they belong.
The simple process, according to New York Stock Exchange guidelines, breezes through Wall Street's computers in 10 days.


Corrections
A brief report in Business Day on Thursday about the Morrison Knudsen Corporation misstated the amount that the company is considering paying for the 51 percent of McConnell Dowell, an Australian construction company, that it does not already own.
A Morrison Knudsen spokesman said the amount under discussion was about $5 million.


20 Families Are Left Homeless by Union City Fire


Brandon Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Receiver Is Arrested
The Phoenix police arrested Cardinals wide receiver ERNIE JONES on Thursday after discovering small amounts of crack cocaine and marijuana in his car, Sgt.
KEVIN ROBINSON, a police spokesman, said yesterday.
Robinson said Jones was booked on suspicion of possession of a narcotic drug, possession of marijuana, possession of drug paraphernalia and driving under a suspended registration.


Carlisle Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.N. Missile Team Gets a Cool Reception in Iraq
United Nations weapons inspectors received a frosty reception today when they arrived here to determine if Iraq still has any ballistic missile installations.
"I was a little bit surprised," said Patrice Palanque, a Frenchman who heads the 13-member team of ballistic missile experts.
"This is the first time where there was in fact nobody there to wait for us."


Jabs and Plenty of Pitches In Perot Visit to 'Tonight'
Ross Perot traded jokes and jabs with a master of the form, Jay Leno, on Thursday night as he expanded his political fund-raising drive to the "Tonight" show's huge television audience.
If the lusty response of the crowd was any indication, the sometime Presidential candidate was a hit.


Parlex Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Commerce Clearing House (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cash Is Scattered in Piles At Armored Car Terminal
An armored car company whose owners have been charged with stealing millions of dollars from its clients has left its storage space in such disarray that it may be impossible to determine who are the rightful owners of piles of money found throughout its vaults, a Federal trustee said tonight.
The assessment came the day after the two owners of Revere Armored Inc. of Bohemia, L.I., Robert J. and Susanna M. Scaretta, were arraigned in Federal District Court in Brooklyn on charges of theft from a financial institution.
A criminal complaint filed by the prosecutors said that at least $13.5 million was missing from the deposits of two banks.


From Justice Nominee, Caution in Brutality Cases
It was the biggest police brutality case in Miami history, and State Attorney Janet Reno's prosecutors had failed to obtain the conviction of the four white police officers accused of beating a black insurance man to death.
In the aftermath, Ms.
Reno was forced to watch from her downtown office for several days in May 1980 as her beloved city burned and 18 people died in racial violence.
To this day, the McDuffie case, named for the unarmed and handcuffed victim whose head, a coroner's report said, was "cracked like an egg," remains the most disputed in the 15-year tenure here of Ms.
Reno, whom President Clinton nominated on Thursday to be the next Attorney General.


Seattle, City of Future, Finds It's a Company Town
Over the last seven years, during one of the worst economic periods in modern times, few cities in America added jobs as quickly as Seattle did.
This Pacific Rim port has been held up as the city of the future: an economy free of smokestack industries, producing things the world wants to buy, from airplanes and computer software to biotechnology and exotic coffee.
On Jan. 26, a day some here are calling "Black Tuesday," the city of the future was told it might lose 50,000 jobs in the next 18 months -- nearly 5 percent of the area's work force.
The Boeing Company, this city's old partner in civic destiny, said hard times in the world airline industry were forcing it to cut production by 35 percent.


Rabbi and Wife Arrested in Disappearance of Boy
A Hasidic rabbi and his wife were arrested early yesterday on charges of kidnapping Shai Fhima, the teen-ager who disappeared last year amid a struggle for control of his care and religious training, law-enforcement officials said.
Rabbi Schlomo Helbrans and his wife, Malka, were taken into custody at 8 A.M. at their upstate residence in Monsey, N.Y., by a task force of New York City detectives, New York State troopers and agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the officials said.
The couple were held in Brooklyn last night, awaiting arraignment on Tuesday.
The boy's whereabouts had not been determined.


Devils' McKay Is Back
The Devils will need all the physical help they can get for the home-and-home series with the Flyers today and tomorrow, and it appears to be on the way in the form of RANDY McKAY.


At Grand Central, Wishes for a Safe Valentine's Day


Palace Isn't What it Used to Be for Daly
This was Chuck Daly's first appearance at the Palace of Auburn Hills for a regular-season game since he left the Pistons and became coach of the Nets.
So the Pistons, who won successive titles under Daly, threw him a party.
That was Thursday night, when Daly said it was good to see old faces.
But tonight some of those old faces, like Isiah Thomas, and a few not so familiar ones, like Melvin Newbern, brought the festivities to a serious halt with a convincing 106-97 victory over their old coach.


Review/Music; Klezmer Meets Arabic Tradition
The concert on Thursday night at Merkin Concert Hall promised one story: a glimpse of common ground between the Jewish tradition of klezmer, represented by the Klezmatics, and the Arabic music played by the Simon Shaheen Ensemble, a quartet featuring Mr.
Shaheen on oud and violin.
That kinship was clear in the Middle Eastern inflections of melodies played by both groups and shared in a group jointly led by Mr.
Shaheen and by Frank London, the Klezmatics' trumpeter and leader.
But the concert also offered another story: the contrast between the music of a diaspora, always assimilating, and music that has stayed in one area for many centuries.


U.N. Council Calls on Palestinians to Resume Talks
The United Nations Security Council, closing the book on the dispute over Israel's deportation of 400 Palestinians more than six weeks ago, again urged Israel today to take back the deportees and called on the Palestinian delegation to return to the stalled Middle East peace talks.
Under a complicated agreement worked out over the last few weeks, the Council told Israel that it welcomed its decision to readmit 101 of the Palestinians deported to a barren strip of land in Lebanon separating the Israeli and Lebanese frontiers.
But the Council said it expected Israel to comply fully with its order to take all of them back.


In Nervous Uzbekistan, It's a New Day but With the Same Old Hard Line
Here in the heart of Central Asia, Uzbekistan challenges the fond hopes and assumptions that a collection of newly independent countries would cast off the immense burden of the past and emerge as democracies from the wreckage of the Soviet Union.
Stunned by ethnic strife and the rise of the religious right next door, Uzbekistan is engaged in a sweeping political crackdown on dissent, banning demonstrations and arresting opposition leaders on charges ranging from treason to slandering President Islam Karimov.


Review/City Ballet; On Wings of Mendelssohn and Shakespeare
George Balanchine covered all bases in his two act-version of "A Midsummer Night's Dream," which the New York City Ballet presented on Thursday night with wit and splendid style.
There was, as expected, true fidelity to Shakespeare's play, but also an equal loyalty to the Mendelssohn music that was obviously the choreographer's chief inspiration in 1962.
Squads of children, flapping their arms onstage at the New York State Theater as bugs and fireflies, were again on hand to charm adults and tykes in the audience.
But there is never any doubt that the dazzle here always comes from neo-classical choreography performed by first-rate mature dancers.


Another Surge of Refinancings Sweeps Over Mortgage Lenders
American homeowners, who last year pared billions of dollars in interest payments off personal balance sheets by refinancing their mortgages, are at it again.
Fueled by a rally in the bond market that has pushed long-term mortgage interest rates to 20-year lows, the latest surge in refinancing activity began right around Christmas, mortgage bankers said, and has intensified in the last few weeks.


After Fernandez, School Board Wants to Oust Process That Chose Him
Three days after ousting Joseph A. Fernandez as New York City's 19th Schools Chancellor, the Board of Education gingerly took its first steps yesterday toward finding a successor, with many members clamoring for what one called a less elitist approach in the selection.
The proposals for change included hiring professional recruiters, holding candidate forums with the contenders, giving parents a greater role in the selection, and barring any participants in the search from working for the chancellor once he is selected.


Ramsay Health Care (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Vari-Care Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Oak Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Scott Paper Ltd. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Bosnians Tell U.N. They'll Refuse Relief Aid Shipments to Sarajevo
The Bosnian Government announced today that it would refuse to accept any further deliveries of United Nations food and medical aid to Sarajevo until United Nations relief convoys begin regular deliveries to besieged Muslims in eastern Bosnia.
The move appeared to have been prompted by the Clinton Administration's policy statement this week on the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The announcement, blocking virtually the only food and medicine reaching this besieged city, was made less than 36 hours after Secretary of State Warren Christopher outlined a new, tougher United States policy on Bosnia.
Among other things, Mr.
Christopher said the Administration had not ruled out "quite determined steps" to insure the delivery of United Nations relief supplies in this former Yugoslav republic.


Shell Unit Names Chief
John Jennings, 55, has been named chairman of the Shell Transport and Trading Company, a unit of the Royal Dutch/Shell Group, effective July 1.
He is to succeed Sir Peter Holmes, 60, who will retire.
Sir Peter will continue to serve on the board.
Mr.
Jennings, who has been on the board since 1987, will continue as a group management director of Royal Dutch/Shell.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Wednesday about the growth of the UNUM Corporation misstated the rise in the company's earnings since 1986.
They have risen to $248.8 million from $112 million.


Audubon Drawings Should Finally Get a Better Resting Place
To the Editor:
There should be much hue and cry about the possible demise of the New-York Historical Society.
I would add my voice in the cause of its priceless Audubon collection.
I am the author of several volumes on the art and life of John James Audubon.
Audubon was from 1838 until his death in 1851 a New Yorker.


Foxmoor Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
ELOISE GREENFIELD is known as a writer children love to read.
This weekend, the author gets the nod from adults when she is presented with the lifetime achievement award at the Ninth Annual Celebration of Black Writing.
"She started writing children's books for black kids way before it was popular," said Larry Robin, director of Moonstone Inc., a nonprofit educational organization in Philadelphia that focuses on the arts.


Bridge
It is generally considered that head-to-head team competition is the ideal form of duplicate play, with luck virtually eliminated over the long haul.
It is used for world championships, some major national championships and some events at the local level.
One of these is the Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout Teams in New York City, in which each team continues until it has lost twice.
The Flight B competition, for players with fewer than 1,500 master points, ended a month ago.
The winners were Dr.
Alfred Lewis, Robert Christman, Judith Boies and David Robinson, all of Manhattan and Charles Greeley of Larchmont, N.Y., who won the final match by 14 imps against a group led by Paul Rosenbaum of the Bronx.


Storm Offers Delight, Dismay and Danger


Badger Meter Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Promising Choice for Justice
When asked about Janet Reno, friends and critics alike in the Miami legal community respond first with the word "integrity." For a nominee to high office, that's a good beginning.
It may also mark the beginning of the end of President Clinton's snakebitten search for his attorney general.
This is the welcome first impression of Ms.
Reno, State Attorney for Dade County, Florida, who heads the vast law office that fights street crime in sprawling, diverse Miami.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Tax Deferral Is a Plus, But Charges Are High
VARIABLE annuities are popular investments these days, largely because they defer taxes.
But they may be more costly than some alternative investments after accounting for all the charges.
An annuity is a financial contract sold by an insurance company providing for a series of payments to be made at regular intervals.
There are two basic kinds: fixed, or guaranteed, and variable, or self-directed.


Review/Music; From Russia, in a Different Voice
Of all the reclamation projects undertaken by Soviet culture, Scriabin was among the most radical.
Early revolutionists condemned this strange, sensual music as unhealthy: the product of severe neurosis, tainted mysticism, delusions of grandeur and overactive glandular response.
The evidence was fairly good, especially in piano pieces like "Vers la Flamme," a shuddering little exercise in erotic helplessness in which the circling moth is drawn fatally toward heat and light.
Scriabin, thought the Politburo, was hardly music to inspire tool-and-die workers toward new production goals.
Things changed, both in the idea of Scriabin's music and the way it was played.
Refiltered through proper channels, pieces like the "Poem of Ecstasy" -- which Valery Gergiyev and the New York Philharmonic brought to Avery Fisher Hall on Thursday night -- became more like a "Poem of Youthful Aspiration." The tugging, nagging melodic lines, the sensation of ooze, the ecstatic trumpet proclamations suddenly assumed broad shoulders and a squarer cut in performance.
Scriabin in his madness thought that if only he skipped and gamboled at a slightly accelerated pace, he would fly through the air.
The Soviets, correspondingly, made him a symbol of their heroic cosmonauts.


With 2 Rounds Left, Kite and Elkington Lead Birdie Parade
Amid an otherwise tightly bunched field, Tom Kite and Steve Elkington thrust themselves to a joint two-stroke lead today after the third round of the Bob Hope Chrysler Classic.
Making birdies at the rate of one every three holes, Kite and Elkington tied at 18-under-par 198 after 54 holes of this 90-hole event.
Their closest pursuers were seven golfers at 16-under 200, including Fred Couples and Payne Stewart.
Event or Track Meet?
Kite blistered Indian Wells, the easiest of the four courses used in the five-day tournament, for a 64, while Elkington cruised through Bermuda Dunes in 66.
With two rounds to go, they are on the precise pace to break the tournament record of 29 under par.


Meridian Tech. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Home Products reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Helix Technology (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Vicon Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Classical Music in Review
Jupiter SymphonyChrist and St. Stephen's Church Manhattan
After temporarily succumbing to financial crisis last spring, the Jupiter Symphony has moved a few blocks north of Alice Tully Hall, which was its home for many years.
This chamber orchestra, whose repertory derives largely from the Classical era, has revived itself on the basis of individual donations, including some from members of the New York Philharmonic.
Monday night's concert began with Handel's Concerto Grosso No. 1 in B flat and then Haydn's Symphony No. 18 in G. While the ensemble was not always completely tidy, it had an attractive, well-rounded sound; Jens Nygaard conducted gracefully and with a lyrical bias.
Robert Ingliss was an able oboe soloist in the Handel.


Diana Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Sports of The Times; A Cold Day To Say a Last Farewell
WHEN they buried Arthur Ashe next to his mother Wednesday, a warm sun shone on the countryside around Richmond.
But yesterday, when more than 5,000 friends, well-wishers and acquaintances gathered for a memorial service in Morningside Heights, in the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, a storm was swirling through the streets and snow and ice were blowing in the blustery winds.
Inside the church, with the somber tones of a cello, two choirs and a soloist echoing, the ceremony had the solemnity of a funeral.
And Mayor David N. Dinkins, perhaps sensing the heavy mood, said, "This is a memorial tribute, not a wake, so feel free to come alive."


A Troubled Rodman Visited by a Favored Ex-Coach
One of the first things Nets Coach Chuck Daly did when he arrived in the Detroit area was visit a friend and player he used to coach, the troubled Dennis Rodman.
Rodman, the league's best rebounder, has been on injured reserve for the Pistons with a torn calf muscle.
A powerful and smart player on the court, his problems off the court have become equally visible.


Limited Dredging Allowed in Newark Bay
The Environmental Protection Agency cleared the way today for port officials to dredge some container-ship berths in Newark Bay, a task judged vital to the survival of waterfront commerce in New York Harbor.
But the agency reserved decision on the full amount of dredging requested by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey until further testing determines if concentrations of dioxin in dredged sediment are low enough to permit it to be dumped in the ocean.


Jones Ducks King's Delivery and Lands His Punches
This was no fight.
It was a meeting between a promoter and a boxer.
It was Don King, the man who has sometimes ruled the sport with a viselike grip, and Roy Jones Jr., the young middlweight from Pensacola, Fla.
They met late last year, when King flew from his home in Cleveland to offer Jones a title fight with Julian Jackson, the World Boxing Council champion.


Shulman, Representing Queens, Settled Fernandez Issue for All
Joseph A. Fernandez was ousted this week as New York City's Schools Chancellor because his allies were unable to overcome an insurmountable obstacle: Claire Shulman, the Queens Borough President.
Ms.
Shulman's rebuff of entreaties to give the Chancellor a second chance reflected the deep passions aroused by what critics complained was Mr.
Fernandez's usurpation of parental prerogatives.


Ameriwood Industries International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


DVI Health Services reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Air Force Award Snag
The Air Force's third attempt to award a lucrative Government computer contract was halted today when two of the losing bidders filed the latest in a series of protests.
The Electronic Data Systems Corporation of Herndon, Va., and the Compuadd Corporation of Austin sought to halt the award, which calls for the delivery of as many as 300,000 personal computers to the Defense Department and other agencies over the next three years.


Streaking Knicks Make Sure Bulls Miss Jordan
Do not expect the Knicks to apologize for tonight's victory just because Michael Jordan was serving a one-game suspension.
The Knicks have played superbly this month, and to them, tonight's game was just the lastest triumph for a confident team.
Extending their winning streak to a season-high seven games, the Knicks defeated the Chicago Bulls, 104-98, at the Chicago Stadium.
Not only did the victory snap a 13-game regular-season losing streak for the Knicks in Chicago, but it gave New York (32-15) the best record in the Eastern Conference, percentage points ahead of the Bulls (33-16).


Trading Houses for European Vacations


INSIDE
Hard Times Arrive in Seattle
Boeing's layoffs have demonstrated to many in Seattle that no city, however global its economic base, can be dependent on one company.
Page 6.
Uzbekistan Tests the Future
Uzbekistan is challenging the assumptions that a collection of newly independent nations would cast off the burdens of the past.
Page 5.
Details Emerge in Hijacking
An Ethiopian said he hijacked a jetliner to New York after being refused entry to the United States, where he has relatives, officials said.
Page 23.
The Caution in Janet Reno
The Miami prosecutor who is now Attorney General-designate has been criticized as not vigorously pursuing cases involving police abuse.
Page 8.
U.N.
Compromise on Mideast
The Security Council accepted Israel's decision to readmit some Palestinian deportees but said it still wanted all 400 taken back.
Page 3.


Monk-Austin Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Quebecor Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Jefferies, After Trade, Returns to the N.L. East
From 1989 to 1991, the Mets played Gregg Jefferies at second base and third base.
They found him wanting and traded him to Kansas City.
Last season, the Royals used him exclusively at third base.
Yesterday, they traded him to St.
Louis and the Cardinals plan to try him at first base.
First base?


Glatfelter (P.H.) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


USA Truck reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pacific Telecom Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


RESULTS PLUS
AUTO RACING Elliott Wins Opener of 4-Race Series  Bill Elliott, with some drafting help from Davy Jones, took the lead on the 35th of 40 laps yesterday and won the opening round of the International Race of Champions in Daytona Beach, Fla.
The four-race series features drivers from stock cars, Indy cars and sports cars competing in identically prepared Dodge Daytonas.
Elliott's average speed for the 100-mile race was 181.726 miles an hour, and he won by a car length.
Elliott was third, behind Ricky Rudd and Al Unser Jr., entering Turn 3 on Lap 35 around the two-and-a-half-mile Daytona International Speedway oval.
Jones, a sports car racer, got behind Elliott, and the aerodynamic help allowed Elliott to take the lead.
Jones looked ready to try to pass Elliott on the final lap, but he lost control exiting Turn 2.
Jones came so close to the wall he scraped off his name, painted on the right-side door.
He held on for fourth, behind the runner-up, Davey Allison, and Unser.
TENNIS Courier Escapes Again, but Agassi Loses  Todd Martin upset third-seeded Andre Agassi last night, while top-ranked Jim Courier saved a match point for the second straight night before advancing at the Kroger-St.
Jude International.
Martin beat Agassi, 6-1, 7-6 (7-4), and Courier rallied past Jonathan Stark, 6-7 (5-7), 6-3, 7-5, in the quarterfinals.
Michael Chang, seeded second, easily beat No. 9 Andrei Chesnokov, 6-4, 6-0.
Martin won the last three points in the tie breaker against Agassi.
In his near upset, Stark led by 5-4, 40-30 in the final set before losing his serve.
Courier then won the last two games. (AP) It's Becker Over Stich: Second-seeded Boris Becker, using explosive serves and powerful returns, trounced eighth-seeded Michael Stich, 6-2, 6-2, in an all-German quarterfinal yesterday in the Muratti Time indoor tournament in Milan, Italy.
Petr Korda, the third-seeded Czech, beat Magnus Larsson of Sweden, 7-5, 6-4, and Sergi Bruguera of Spain eliminated the Italian Omar Camporese, the defending champion, 6-2, 1-6, 6-2. (AP)
Navratilova Routs Garrison-Jackson: Martina Navratilova maintained her mastery over Zina Garrison-Jackson with a 6-2, 6-1 victory in the quarterfinals of the Chicago Slims tournament.
It was Navratilova's 32d victory over Garrison-Jackson in 33 matches.
Second-seed Navratilova, seeking her 13th Chicago Slims title, will face Katerina Maleeva in a semifinal today.
Maleeva defeated Pam Shriver, 4-6, 6-4, 6-3.
In the other semifinal, top-ranked Monica Seles meets third-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez, who rallied to beat 15-year-old Iva Majoli, 4-6, 6-1, 6-2. (AP) COLLEGE BASKETBALL Mooney Leads Princeton Over Cornell  Princeton forward Chris Mooney scored 18 points and nailed two 3-pointers last night to spur the Tigers to a 62-50 victory over Cornell in Princeton, N.J.
The Tigers (11-8) improved to a 4-2 record in the Ivy League, jumping ahead of Cornell, now 4-3.
Cornell is 12-6 over all. (AP)
Harvard 54, Yale 51: Tyler Rullman scored 14 points to help lead Harvard to a come-from-behind victory over Yale in Boston.
The victory snapped a six-game losing streak for Harvard (4-14) and gave the Crimson its first Ivy League victory of the season after opening up with six consecutive defeats.
Yale (5-13, 2-5) lost its fifth straight. (AP)


Texas Pacific Land Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Strasbourg Journal; On Fast Track to (Gasp!) Provinces
It is one of the more extraordinary sights in France: the future elite of the country, the exquisitely articulate men and women who will rule ministries and state industries, gathered in a small classroom in a mouse-infested, semiderelict former prison hundreds of miles from the corridors of power in Paris.
Earnestly, they take notes from labyrinthine diagrams in red, blue, black and green ink illustrating an aspect of the state budget.
As students of the exclusive Ecole Nationale d'Administration, the school that is a passport to the inner sanctum of French power, they know the importance to the civil servant of discreet obedience.
Their sang-froid seems intact despite provincial exile.
But their dignity is being severely tested.


Washington Memo; A Lawyerly Search for a Good Lawyer
Maybe Shakespeare, Dickens and Dan Quayle were right.
Recent events in Washington have only reinforced the arguments of those who would "kill all the lawyers," or at least curb them, or at the very least not let a lot of them get into a room and make important decisions affecting the country.


In Snow and Slush, a Dreary, Dangerous Day
A mixture of wet snow, sleet and freezing rain made highways treacherous yesterday and caused delays and flight cancellations at La Guardia and Newark airports as the season's third major storm struck at the start of a long holiday weekend.
While the snow turned to slush throughout most of New York City and its nearby suburbs, outlying communities to the west and north reported up to five inches of snow.


Pro League Is Formed
ROY BOE, the former New York Islanders president, has organized a professional hockey league.
The Major League Hockey is projected to begin play in the fall with six to eight teams.
While the league does not intend to raid the National Hockey League, Boe said, "we'll have major league players."


Coors (Adolph) (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 27


A Jolt for the Student Loan Stocks
Wall Street received a quick education on the student loan business yesterday, and it did not like what it learned.
The once-hot stocks of the Student Loan Marketing Corporation, known as Sallie Mae, and the Student Loan Corporation fell sharply as some analysts issued warnings to investors about possible changes in the student loan program.


Key Senator Opposes Plan To Settle Dispute by Tribes
An uproar in Arizona over a Government proposal to grant a 400,000-acre tract of Federal land to the Hopi Indians has dimmed the chances of settling a century-old dispute between the Navajo and Hopi tribes.
People who own land in pockets within the disputed tract as well as others in Arizona have been indignant over the proposed transfer of the rolling expanse of pinon, juniper and aspen, about half the size of Rhode Island in the northern Arizona high country.


CFI Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Director Agrees Not to Film Inside Auschwitz Memorial
Steven Spielberg and the World Jewish Congress reached an agreement yesterday that will enable the filmmaker to build a replica of the Auschwitz death camp outside its main gates and film his next movie there, representatives of both parties said.
Calling Auschwitz "the largest Jewish graveyard in the world," Elan Steinberg, executive director of the congress, said its members were "very concerned about any act, no matter how well-intentioned, that could desecrate its solemn dignity."


Drug Makers Defend Prices For Vaccines
Several drug companies contended yesterday that President Clinton had been led astray by misleading statistics in asserting that vaccine makers were profiteering at the expense of American children and calling for lower prices.
Four companies -- Merck &amp; Company, Connaught Laboratories, the Lederle Laboratories division of American Cyanamid, and SmithKline Beecham -- said they would send representatives to a White House meeting early next week to discuss vaccine prices with Mr.
Clinton.


Bow Valley Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


St. Patrick's Standoff: Gay Issue Still Unresolved
A month before St.
Patrick's Day, the city's largest annual parade is in complete disarray, mired in a convoluted legal and political standoff over whether a gay Irish group should be allowed to march.
The group that won this year's parade permit, which promised to let the gay organization march, no longer wants to run the event.
The traditional sponsor, the Ancient Order of Hibernians, wants the permit but cannot get it.
And the Dinkins administration, which supports the gay group, began desperately casting about for other sponsors this week.


Airline in Complaint on Reservation System
American Airlines said yesterday that it had filed an unfair competition complaint against Air France and Iberia Air Lines of Spain, saying the carriers were restricting its opportunities to sell Sabre computer reservations system in France and Spain.
The complaints, filed on Thursday with the Transportation Department, also named the French and Spanish Governments, which own the two airlines.
American said the countries had allowed a virtual monopoly in their home markets for Amadeus, the reservation system owned by an assortment of carriers, including Air France and Iberia.


Richmond Is Sidelined
MITCH RICHMOND, who is averaging 21.9 points a game for the Sacramento Kings, will be sidelined three to four weeks because of a broken right thumb he suffered Thursday's victory over Atlanta, team officials said yesterday.


Honors to a Foe Of Hate and Poverty
Gloria Brown Wise closes her eyes as she pulls memories from a life spent fighting prejudice and helping young people.
It was 1960 in downtown Greensboro, N.C., and despite warnings of violence, the petite Ms.
Wise, then a 21-year-old student from the Bronx, slid quietly onto a seat at the whites-only lunch counter at F. W. Woolworth's.
There she became one of the first women to take part in the Greensboro sit-ins, a milestone in the civil rights movement.


A Tabloid Touch In the Nightly News
EVER since the Presidential campaign, the television news business seems to have been suffering from an identity crisis.
Appearing on MTV and "Larry King Live," the candidates proved that network news divisions could no longer place their upstart competitors in a different league.
Now a few tiny rockets have made such condescension even harder.
Last week, in an extraordinary public confession, NBC apologized for errors it had made in a report on General Motors trucks that aired on its news magazine show "Dateline NBC" in November.
As part of the report, "Dateline NBC" broadcast a crash demonstration purporting to show one of the trucks bursting into flame as a result of a collision.
In fact, the demonstration had been rigged: the truck had been outfitted with rocket-like "sparking devices" to insure that it would explode if the gas tank leaked.


The Case of The Missing Masterpieces
A remarkable aspect of the new installation of the permanent photography collection at the Museum of Modern Art, which opened the first week of February, is that none of the more than 200 pictures in it was included in the last showing of the museum's holdings, mounted nearly three years ago.
In fact, up to a third of the photographs in the new show have never been exhibited at the museum before.
Missing from the exhibit are some of the most famous pictures in the history of the medium, among them Julia Margaret Cam eron's portrait of the craggy face of Sir John Herschel, of 1867; Jacob Riis's "Bandit's Roost," circa 1888, recording a back alley in a slum district, and Edward Steichen's moody "Moonrise, Mamaroneck, N.Y.," of 1904.
All were present in previous displays of the permanent collection, but Peter Galassi, the director of the museum's department of photography and the organizer of this show, left them out this time.


Education in the Arts Is an Education for Life; Role for Museums
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 3-4 series on the decline in arts education suggests anew the crucial role that museums play in supplementing the education of our young people.
At the Metropolitan Museum of Art, tens of thousands of students from all five of New York City's boroughs and the surrounding region encounter the greatest artistic achievements of all peoples, from all times and all places.


A New Generation Of Color Film
WITH every new film that is created photography changes, and last week in New York, Eastman Kodak unveiled 12 new color films, which will be officially introduced at the Photo Marketing Association Show in Atlanta from Thursday through Sunday.
Kodak has developed a technology that makes the new Ektachromes the sharpest and purest-color versions ever produced.
The use of this T-Grain technology in all layers of color reversal film, like transparencies and slides, makes this possible.


25-Under-Par Score Puts Kite Only One Shot Ahead
Tom Kite continued to set a sizzling pace at the Bob Hope Chrysler Classic today, coming impressively close to making a rout out of the tournament that perenially produces the closest finishes in golf.
On another day of windless, 75-degree weather in the arid Coachella Valley, Kite shot a seven-under-par 65 at the Arnold Palmer Course at PGA West for a four-round total of 25-under-par 263.


Where Strong Men Fear to Tread
SHOPPING for a Valentine's Day present at Victoria's Secret, the lingerie and sleepwear emporium, raises a provocative question: Just whose fantasy is it?
With its ersatz English decor and large selection of striped cotton pajamas ($38) and practical bras ($22 to $36), the 6,000-square-foot Victoria's Secret store in the Riverside Square Mall in Hackensack, N.J., one of the largest in the 544-store chain, is far from Frederick's of Hollywood.


POSTINGS: Hunter Playhouse Renovation; To Sylvia and Danny, With Love
She was Sylvia Fine, he was David Daniel Kaminski.
They grew up in Brooklyn; he dropped out of Thomas Jefferson High School, she attended Hunter College and graduated from Brooklyn College.
After they married, she wrote the music and lyrics for many of his films, among them "Up in Arms," "Wonder Man," "The Kid From Brooklyn," "The Secret Life of Walter Mitty," "The Inspector General" and "The Court Jester."
He died in 1987 at age 74, she in 1991 at age 78.
Now, Hunter College is completing a $4.8 million renovation of its old Hunter College Playhouse, which has been renamed the Sylvia and Danny Kaye Playhouse.
The 662-seat theater will open its doors April 15 for a student dance concert and will be formally inaugurated in November with a gala week of performances, including a concert by the soprano Martina Arroyo, a Hunter alumna.


Results Plus
HOCKEY First-Period Barrage Is Enough for Penguins The Pittsburgh Penguins scored three times in the first period and got strong goaltending from Tom Barrasso in a 4-1 victory over the Chicago Blackhawks yesterday in Pittsburgh.
Not even a brawl that left three Penguins and one Blackhawk ejected and halted the first period with 51 seconds remaining could stop Pittsburgh from beating Chicago at home for the first time since Dec. 6, 1988.
The Penguins' record shutout streak ended at 187 minutes 30 seconds when Brian Noonan scored on the power play at 6 minutes 31 seconds of the third period with a shot between Barrasso's pads. (AP) SKIING Giant Slalom to German Katja Seizinger of Germany won the women's super giant slalom today in Shizukuishi, Japan, the final day of competition in the World Alpine Ski Championships.
Seizinger, the World Cup downhill champion, covered the 1.35-mile Mount Kotakakura course in 1 minute 33.52 seconds to deflate the hopes of Austrian veteran Sylvia Eder.
Eder, whose sister, Elfi, won a bronze medal in the women's slalom, got the super-G silver in 1:33.68.
Astrid Loedemel got the bronze in 1:34.07, giving Norway its seventh medal of these ski games, one behind Austria.
Norway still led with three golds to two for Germany, which got the first of this competition when Miriam Vogt won the women's combined.
The women's super-G was perhaps the most critical event of the championships.
The start was pushed back 90 minutes by wind and blowing snow, and further delays would have imperiled the men's super-G, to be run on the same mountain three hours later.
On Saturday, Kjetil Andre Aamodt of Norway won the slalom for his third medal of the competition.
He has won two golds and one silver in three races, making him the runaway big winner in the world championships.
If the weather would cooperate, Aamodt had a shot at another medal today in the super giant slalom, the event in which he is Olympic champion. (AP) BOBSLED RACING Swiss Lead 4-Man Gustav Weder drove Switzerland's No. 2 sled into the lead halfway through the four-man bobsled World Championships in Igls, Austria, by posting the fastest times in both runs yesterday.
Weder, who finished second in last weekend's two-man bobsled race, had a combined time of 1 minute 43.84 seconds.
Austria's No. 1 sled, driven by Hubert Schoesser, finished the day in second place with a 1:44.06 clocking.
The United States' No. 1 sled, driven by Brian Shimer of Naples, Fla., and the No. 2 German sled, with Harald Czudaj at the helm, tied for third place in 1:44.15.
The final two-runs in the two-day event are scheduled for today on the Igls course, just outside of Innsbruck. (AP) TENNIS Seles-Navratilova Final  Monica Seles lived up to her No. 1 world ranking yesterday with a 6-3, 6-0 victory over Mary Joe Fernandez in the semifinals of the Chicago Slims tournament.
Today, Seles will face Martina Navratilova for the $75,000 first prize in the $350,000 tourney.
Navratilova defeated Katerina Maleeva of Bulgaria, 6-0, 4-6, 6-1, in the other semifinal.
"Against Seles, you have to earn every point," Fernandez said.
"Since she's been No. 1, she been just about unbeatable. I'm just going to have to get better." (AP) Becker Beats Masur: Second-seeded Boris Becker served 15 aces and beat the Australian Wally Masur, 6-4, 7-6 (7-2), in the semifinals of the Muratti Time Indoor tournament in Milan, Italy.
Sergi Bruguera of Spain rallied from a second-set rout and a 3-0 deficit in the third to upset third-seeded Petr Korda, 6-4, 0-6, 7-5, in the first semifinal. (AP) GOLF Hill Leads Seniors by 6  Mike Hill shot a sevenn-under-par 65 to take a six-shot lead yesterday after two rounds of the Challenge, a Senior PGA tournament in Naples, Fla.
Hill holed a 75-foot putt on the 490-yard par-5 10th hole for an eagle.
His hot round also included six birdies and a bogey.
He birdied the 18th by hitting a 5-iron within 15 feet of the pin.
Dave Stockton, the first-round co-leader, fell off the pace with a 71 to put him in the pack at six under with Gibby Gilbert, Jim Dent, Larry Gilbert and Mike Joyce. (AP) SOCCER Wegerle Goal Wins It Forward Roy Wegerle of the United States scored a spectacular goal with a minute left yesterday to give Blackburn a 1-0 victory over Newcastle United and move Blackburn into the quarterfinals of English soccer's F.A.
Cup.
The Blackburn-Newcastle match was one of six F.A.
Cup games played yesterday with no upsets, while Aston Villa moved into the Premier League lead by winning, 1-0, at Chelsea.
In cup play, Arsenal downed Nottingham Forest, 2-0, with two goals from Ian Wright, and Ipswich whipped Grimsby, 4-0, with the Bulgarian Bontcho Guentchev scoring three times.
Manchester City and Sheffield Wednesday both gained 2-0 victories over Division 1 teams.
City defeated Barnsley and Wednesday beat Southend.
Division 1 team Derby beat Division 2 Bolton, 3-1. (AP)


Clinton's Hope: Hostility; Oddly Enough, if Everybody Finds a Fault In the Deficit Plan, the Better Its Chances
When President Clinton drops his economic plan on Congress and the American public next week, the first sounds you hear will be the potshots.
The hostile fire will come from every which way -- industries that would have their taxes increased, people who would lose Government benefits, communities where military bases would be jeopardized, conservatives who want lower taxes and less Government spending, and liberals who want higher taxes so spending can be increased.
Cutting the budget deficit is so difficult that almost everyone will have a beef.


Corrections
A schedule of films by Michael Powell on page 14 of the Arts and Leisure section today misstates the telephone number for the Walter Reade Theater in some copies.
It is (212) 875-5600.


Wall Street; And General Motors Marches On
IN the battle of the Generals last week, Electric was routed by Motors.
As it happens, the same thing has been going on in the stock market since the end of last year.
The battle in question was over the news report by General Electric's NBC television network regarding General Motors's old pickup trucks, which are said by some to be unsafe because the gasoline tank is outside the frame of the truck, making it more vulnerable to fire in side collisions.
It turns out NBC used remote-controlled miniature rockets to make sure any gasoline that was released would burst into flames.
To get out of a libel suit, the brass at G.E. decided to issue an abject apology.


Special Tools Help Drywall Installation
GYPSUM wallboard is a nearly ubiquitous building material.
But because it comes only in large heavy panels, amateurs new to remodeling often find it intimidating to order and install on their own.
Here is a basic guide to the steps, including tips that can benefit even experienced amateurs.
Finishing wallboard, which consists of covering seams and fasteners with tape and filler, is not discussed.


Who's Who and What's What (A Murder Mystery)
JOAN and Thomas Devereaux and their neighbors, Carolyn and Jeffrey Symons, make their home in Green Meadows, a cozy suburban enclave designed by Thomas, where the bywords are "to live, to work, to shop." To Carolyn and Jeffrey, who have two children, it's a stake in a rising community.
To Joan and Thomas, who are alone together, it's a "lovers' hideaway."
"This is it -- the life most men dream about, but none achieve," says Thomas, who likes to warn his neighbors about break-ins in Green Meadows and who insists, forcibly, on telling Joan about the time he took a young man for a long ride to a deserted place where Thomas had him dig a hole deep enough to climb into.


Not So Sunny on Those Railroads
To the Editor:
The suggestion that the Government should provide a telecommunications infrastructure does bring to mind the 19th-century Pacific Railway Bill, which provided Government financing of a transcontinental railroad.
To briefly summarize, the bill gave rise to the Union and Central Pacific Railroads, which in just seven years met in Promontory Point, Utah.
The rest is high school history.


Don't Stereotype Dominicans
To the Sports Editor:
As a Dominican-American with strong family ties to Dominican baseball, I am offended and baffled by Joe Sexton's piece on Pascual Perez ("Pascual Perez Was Hard to Hit, but Now He's Just Hard to Find," The Times, Jan. 25).


Risks in Rio
To the Editor: "Rediscovering Rio" by James Brooke (Jan. 3) made the point that "though there are risks, the city offers ample rewards." As a periodic visitor to Rio over the past 15 years, I'd suggest that though there are rewards, there are ample risks.
The threat is pervasive, and a constant topic of conversation.
During my most recent business trip about a year ago, we were repeatedly advised by the staff of our hotel not to walk even a block -- in daylight -- without an escort.
Not only did a private car take us everywhere, we were also cautioned to be sure that it was our designated driver, and not an impostor.


Elizabeth Hoffman, Richard Baker
Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert H. Hoffman of Manhasset Hills, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Hoffman to Richard Andrew Baker, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Baker of Oceanside, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hoffman, 28, graduated from George Washington University and received a master's degree in counseling psychology from Columbia University.
She is a psychotherapist at the Postgraduate Center for Mental Health, a nonprofit organization, and a partner in Women Supporting Women, a New York group that runs support and therapy groups.


Proud of Bills
To the Sports Editor:
The Buffalo Bills made it to the Super Bowl the toughest way possible -- as a wild card, on the road, entry.
They beat every team that they had to beat and could beat, engineering the greatest comeback in N.F.L. history along the way.


Mary Palmer, Fitzhugh Taylor
Mr. and Mrs.
Valfrid E. Palmer of Ponte Verda Beach, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter Mary Evelyn Palmer to Frank Fitzhugh Taylor 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Taylor Jr. of Memphis.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Palmer, 28, graduated from Duke University and received an M.B.A. from the University of California at Berkley.
Her father, now retired, was the president and chief executive of Alco-Gravure Inc., a gravure printing company in Rochelle Park, N.J.


Where the Action in the Aisles Can Be Livelier Than on the Shelves
SATURDAY night, Date Night U.S.A., and Jason Nadler of Mount Sinai and his fiancee, Laura Grisafi of Rocky Point, are out on the town, or more accurately behind a bookshelf.
On most weekend nights the couple head for their favorite dating spot, the Basset Book Shop in Sayville.
First, a stop at the coffee bar, perhaps to listen to live music, then to the children's section.
"We come back here, because there is always a place to sit," Miss Grisafi said as she and Mr.
Nadler lounged on the carpeted reading nook hidden behind volumes of Dr.
Seuss.


Debut of a New Museum
Museum of African Art, SoHo, Feb. 11.


Topics of The Times; A Crime to Remember
Black citizens of Tampa, Fla., are angered by a city proposal to build a replica of a pirate ship in a new $70 million pirate museum.
It appears that the Whydah, which sank in 1717 in New England waters, was used as a slave ship before pirates seized it.
Tampa's blacks are right to protest lack of consultation.
Their other grievance -- that a slave ship should not be a tourist attraction -- has less merit.
The exhibit will expose Americans to a shameful chapter in their past.
No human rights outrage has been less adequately documented than the commerce in human flesh.
Millions of human beings were stowed in wretched vessels heading to American and West Indian plantations.
But slavers kept few records or journals.
Much of the rare documentation was gathered by abolitionists, including chilling pictures showing how slaves were tied on decks inches apart.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-23  U.N. SUSPENDS BOSNIA AIRLIFT


SHOULD DOCTORS TELL THE TRUTH?
In "Should Doctors Tell the Truth?" (Jan. 24), Martha Weinman Lear highlights the complexity of "truth" in the context of terminal disease.
I would like to add one more perspective from my experience as a medical oncologist.
Telling the truth, no matter how hard, does not have to destroy hope.
Even when all hope for cure is gone, doctors can help terminal patients to redefine and find new hope, whether it be hope for a trip to the shore or simply hope for pain-free days at home with their families.
Our ability to cure is bound by the limits of scientific knowledge, but our ability to
care
for our patients is limited only by our own perspective, and offers some of the greatest rewards the career of medicine has to offer.
MARY B. DALY, M.D.
Cheltenham, Pa.


BEST SELLERS: February 14, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
27
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
2
4
DRAGON TEARS, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $22.95.) Two police detectives try to cope with a demonic serial killer in southern California.
3
3
3
DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Knopf, $23.) The case of a woman journalist charged with killing an eminent novelist: was it self-defense or murder?
4
4
3
CLOSE COMBAT, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Putnam, $22.95.) In the sixth volume of the series "The Corps," there are new challenges for the Marines all over the Pacific in World War II.
5
5
3
DEVIL'S WALTZ, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware investigates the strange series of illnesses that befalls a small child. (LP)
6
9
2
ALONG CAME A SPIDER, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) Detective Alex Cross on the trail of a psychopathic serial killer in Washington.
7
7
49
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
8
10
32
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
9
6
11
DOLORES CLAIBORNE, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) After being accused of murdering her employer, a woman tells of killing her husband almost 30 years earlier and of her life ever since.
10
12
18
SABINE'S NOTEBOOK, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Continuing the epistolary romance begun in "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
11
13
24
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
12 *
14
12
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) The adventures of a 16-year-old vaquero from Texas in the Mexico of 1950.
13
15
13
THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $21.95.) The investigation of the murder of an officer, a general's daughter.
14
11
13
MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.50.) Three couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.
15 *
8
5
TERMINAL, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $21.95.) A medical researcher's pursuit of a treatment for cancer and a nurse's pursuit of him have extraordinary consequences.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
22
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
2
2
27
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
3
3
13
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The authors predict the collapse of America under Government debt and suggest ways to cope with it.
4
4
35
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
5
5
19
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Linda Grey/ Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the general who commanded the allied forces in the gulf war.
6
8
4
LIBERATION MANAGEMENT, by Tom Peters. (Knopf, $27.50.) How American industry is reorganizing to deal with the problems wrought by changing times.
7
6
21
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of A. A. Milne's character Piglet.
8
9
4
NOBODY NOWHERE, by Donna Williams. (Times Books/Random House, $21.) The autobiography of an autistic woman.
9
7
9
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $20.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
10 *
11
35
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
11
15
10
JFK: Reckless Youth, by Nigel Hamilton. (Random House, $30.) The first 29 years of the 35th President.
12
12
24
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
13
14
2
THE WIVES OF HENRY VIII, by Antonia Fraser. (Knopf, $25.) The lives of the six spouses of the 16th-century English monarch.
14
10
15
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Pantheon, $27.50.) The life and achievements of Richard Feynman, the Nobel Prize-winning physicist.
15
13
2
MAKING THE MUMMIES DANCE, by Thomas Hoving. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The reminiscences of the former director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
4
EXCESS BAGGAGE, by Judith Sills. (Viking, $21.) A psychologist's counsel about conquering character traits that make one's life harder.
2
2
49
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
3
4
31
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf, by a legendary teacher.
4
49
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual advice for married couples.
5
5
2
TOUCHPOINTS, by T. Berry Brazelton. (Lawrence/Addison-Wesley, $22.95.) A pediatrician's counsel to parents about their children's emotional and behavioral development.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
MARLENE DIETRICH, by Maria Riva. (Knopf, $27.50.) Dietrich's only child tells all in a book that startles by its sharpness of remembrance while confirming and completing much that was already known about the disciplined, hard-working movie star.
MY FATHER'S GURU: A Journey Through Spirituality and Disillusion, by Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson. (Addison-Wesley, $20.) Before he grew up and overthrew Freud, Mr.
Masson lived a childhood of total immersion in his family's infatuation with a spiritual guide his father brought home from India.
THE END OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY AND THE END OF THE MODERN AGE, by John Lukacs. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $21.95.) For one thing, Mr.
Lukacs says, it was a short century, beginning in 1914 and ending with the fall of Communism.
Now, he argues provocatively, the world will be ruled by intransigent nationalism.
BONE, by Fae Myenne Ng. (Hyperion, $19.95.) A sophisticated first novel about youth in San Francisco's Chinatown, about leaving it and about the unbearable disloyalty of "assimilation."
LET THE DOG DRIVE, by David Bowman. (New York University, $19.95.) Fresh, fun and smart, this novel is told in the voice of an 18-year-old intellectual with an obsessive knowledge of many things who is always on the lookout for new obsessions.
CHARLES SANDERS PEIRCE: A Life, by Joseph Brent. (Indiana University, $35.) A biography of a great American thinker that not only renders the thought but explains the disastrous life.
THE EMPTY LOT, by Mary Gray Hughes. (Another Chicago Press, cloth, $22.50; paper, $10.95.) This absorbing novel concerns a ruthlessly ambitious divorcing couple who struggle over the house that stands in for the ordered values they seem to have forgotten.


Corrections
The Architecture View column on Jan. 24, about the New York headquarters of Capital Cities/ABC, omitted mention of an architect.
Arthur May, a former member of the firm of Kohn Pedersen Fox, designed the easternmost ABC building along West 66th Street; William Pedersen designed the rest.


At a Bank, Automatic Frustration Machines
At the start of the holiday weekend yesterday, one of the few things that New Yorkers thought they could depend on was on the blink for more than four miserable hours.
Every automatic teller machine at Citibank locations throughout the New York metropolitan area refused to dispense cash or perform other transactions from about 10 A.M. to 2 P.M.
The breakdown resulted from a software programming glitch, said Susan Weeks, a spokeswoman for Citibank.


No Headline
We are a dying breed.
I got a 7-year-old brothuh who has no accent whatsoevuh.
The kid's great, there's nothing wrong with him, but it's like he talks more laid-back, like his mouth is easier on the words.
CHRISTOPHER LOCKNER, at a deli counter in Queens.  [ 1:1. ]


The Ones That Got Away
PICTURE yourself in a sleek, high-powered vessel slicing the waves in pursuit of the oceanic equivalent of big game.
That is precisely what many people do when they set off for the Caribbean to try their hand at a sport that, at least since Hemingway, has exercised a pull on the popular imagination.
Handling the screaming reel or mastering techniques for fighting the good fight with a fish as determined to escape your heavy hook as you are to catch it, however, are not the first lessons of deep sea fishing.
Instead, this novice was reminded of the more prosaic summertime fishing he did as a child on the nearby lake or stream, and the most important attribute needed for it: patience.


THE REFORMATION OF A STREET PREACHER
It is preposterous that you have mistaken whatever political veneer Al Sharpton's distant third-place primary finish has afforded him for a "rebirth."


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Eugene C. Gavin; Politics From the New Side of the Aisle
WHEN State Representative Eugene C. Gavin, a Republican of Westport, was sworn in recently, he became a member of the largest class of freshmen in the General Assembly in recent memory.
One-third of the state legislators in Hartford this year are freshmen and, like most of the newcomers, Mr.
Gavin won the seat of a longtime legislator who chose not to run for another term in 1992, Elinor F. Wilber, Republican of Fairfield.
Mr.
Gavin, who is 39 years old and a native of West Haven, earned a master's degree in business administration and law degree at Rutgers University, and an advanced degree in taxation from New York University School of Law.
He returned to Connecticut after college and, after having held accounting jobs with several large companies, became director of state and local taxes for the Coopers and Lybrand accounting firm.
Mr.
Gavin discussed issues faced by freshmen legislators in a recent interview in his office in the Legislative Office Building in Hartford.
Here are some excerpts from the conversation.


Officials and Builders Don't Protect Water
"Ground-Water Plan Touches Off Dispute"  [ Jan. 17 ]  gave me the impression that government officials and consultants to builders seem to be in control of a matter that is essential to all, our ground water.
One consultant argues that our water is "protected and not susceptible to harmful contamination" and building could commence in the pine barrens because we do not need that water, as long as "reasonable steps are taken to protect other areas." And that is exactly the concern of those of us who are outside the loop of government and the building community.
Will reasonable steps be taken to protect our ground water?


The Executive Life; When Country Life Gets on Their Nerves
THESE days, when successful executives grow tired of the corporate rat race and dream of retiring into a life of rustic simplicity, one of the places they eye most longingly is the Northwest, especially Oregon.
Land's cheap.
Traffic's almost non-existent.
And the casual life style looks like an appealing break from the pin-striped boardroom world they know.
But for many of these newly minted country squires, retirement soon looks a lot like the work they left behind.


Andrea Golaine, Douglas C. Case
Andrea Beth Golaine, a daughter of Rosalyn Golaine of Demarest, N.J., and Joseph Golaine of Houston, was married yesterday to Douglas Charles Case, the son of Marilyn and Leon Case of Portland, Conn.
Joseph Chuman, the leader of the Ethical Cultural Society of Teaneck, N.J., officiated at the Woodcliff Lake (N.J.) Hilton.
Mrs.
Case, 25, is the editor of Priorities, the health magazine published by the American Council on Science and Health in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Connecticut College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in environmental health management from Harvard University.
She is a stepdaughter of Dorothy Golaine of Houston.


Real Incest and Real Survivors: Readers Respond
To the Editor:
Carol Tavris condemns our book "The Courage to Heal" and the incest-survivor movement in general.
We'd like to respond to her accusations.
Ms.
Tavris makes a potpourri of criticisms -- that repressed memories of child sexual abuse are unreliable, that substantial numbers of perpetrators are falsely accused, that many of those who say they are incest survivors have been brainwashed by therapists or book publishers who are out to create victims for profit and, lastly, that incest survivors are so busy seeking personal solutions they aren't contributing to social change.


THE COMPANY HE KEEPS
In telling us repeatedly that the honeymoon is over, your correspondents seem like the divisive mothers-in-law of this new Presidency.


The Mornings Are No Less Beautiful
To the Editor:
I read with pleasure Stephen Holden's article on Rodgers and Hammerstein  [ "Their Songs Were America's Happy Talk," Jan. 24 ] .
Still, I resist Mr.
Holden's urge to file away the musical plays created by these men with the antique mementos of a fairy-tale past.


Confusion on Research On Magnetic Therapy
As a nurse and a person with arthritis, I read with interest about biomagnetic therapy.
The information presented sounded good, but I feel that people who have arthritis and are interested in purchasing any new treatment should contact the Arthritis Foundation and speak with their doctor before trying a new treatment.
You did not mention in the article if the Arthritis Foundation approves of this treatment or if it is approved by the F.D.A.
It is very easy for a person in a lot of pain to want and try alternate treatments.
That is fine, as long as they have all the facts.
Before agreeing to any treatment you should find out what all the costs are and if they will be covered by your insurer.
If the treatment is investigational, your insurer may not pay for it.
If after checking out all these things you decide you want to try a new treatment -- fine.
At least you are making an informed decision about your care.
SUSAN STERN, R.N.
Plainview


Some Unfinished Business on St.-Germain
At a lecture in New York last fall, the Dutch architect Rem Koolhaas began by wondering aloud why his generation has taken so long to make its mark upon the city.
Koolhaas, 47, is part of the postwar European generation that came of age with the "events of May," the student upheavals that rocked Paris and other cities in 1968.
For Koolhaas, '68 remains a touchstone, not for sentimental reasons, or not mainly, but because the protests revealed attitudes that, for better or worse, remain in force.
To paraphrase his musings: if architects of this generation feel "marginalized," that is because they chose to occupy the margins, because they staked their identity to a stance of opposition they have yet to outgrow.
No one is stopping them from crossing over their self-imposed barricades, nor is the city still the stern father's stone face.


Corrections
A map on Feb. 4 illustrating the United Nations-European Community peace plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina mislabeled a proposed autonomous province.
Under the plan, the province, which includes the town of Tuzla and is designated No. 5 on the map, would be dominated by Muslims, not Serbs.
A corrected map appears today on page 5 of The Week in Review.


Old-Fashioned Diner, New Style Dishes
BISTRO 55 in Fairfield, a new project of the owners of Cafe de la Plage in Westport, is a landmark diner now attached to a large frame building.
The diner retains its old-fashioned white tile floor, long counter and window booths in front.
The main dining area (seating 24) is a carpeted, rather dimly lighted interior room with three booths, a few wood tables, black lacquered chairs, a pressed-tin ceiling and lemon and rust painted walls hung with paintings, prints and old photographs of Fairfield.
Upstairs, an old-fashioned bar, with a huge stuffed marlin on one wall, has additional tables for dining.
The menu contains standbys like clams casino and scampi as well as certain new American concepts, some of which work, others not always with consistency.
For instance, a starter of smoked ham and corn fritters in a mango vinaigrette sounded intriguing, but the reality lacked ham and the pool of sauce the fritters rested in tasted more like undiluted orange juice than mango.
Despite the absence of smoked ham, the fritters were crisp, golden and tasty -- certainly among the best of the appetizers sampled.
The plate also yielded a sharp, fresh-tasting chopped tomato-fennel sauce laced with raspberry vinaigrette.
The sauce later surfaced as a garnish for chicken paillard.


Virtuosi in Two Chamber Series
CHAMBER music by Philharmonia Virtuosi brackets the week in Westchester, starting at 2 o'clock this afternoon when Richard Kapp, the music director, introduces Amy Lin, the prize-winning young pianist, who will join members of the ensemble in Janacek's "Concertino" and the Schumann Piano Quintet.
Also on the program is Brahms's Clarinet Quintet.
Because this is one of the Philharmonia Virtuosi's Coffee Concerts in Theater C at the State University of New York at Purchase, ticketholders are invited to come by an hour early for free coffee and pastry.
The entire program (without the coffee and pastry) will be presented next Saturday at 8 P.M. at the Paramount Center for the Arts in Peekskill.


They Knew Their Audience
To the Editor:
Limited by his generational correctness, Stephen Holden dismisses the shows of Rodgers and Hammerstein as "slightly right of center." Thus, he sees and hears the soliloquy in "Carousel" as a polarized and patriarchal view of sex roles because he lacks empathy for World War II veterans who longed for families of their own with, yes, feminine daughters and masculine sons.


Technology; Ivories That Tickle Themselves
TWENTY years ago, when Wayne Stahnke set out to make the perfect reproducing piano, musicians sneered and engineers said it couldn't be done.
Today, two leading piano manufacturers produce instruments incorporating Mr.
Stahnke's technology.
Like the player piano of the 1920's, a reproducing piano plays a musician's previously recorded performance, but there the similarities end.
The wooden, honky-tonk sound of the old player piano came from its inability to distinguish dynamics -- the difference between loud and soft -- and the inaccuracy of its timing.
In contrast, Mr.
Stahnke's piano so closely matches a performance that even the pianist cannot hear the difference.


Corrections
The picture caption on the cover of the Television section today, about "Black and Blue" on "Great Performances," includes an outdated air time.
Channel 13 will show the program on Wednesday at 10 P.M., after President Clinton's address to Congress.


Lisa M. Harte, James E. Taylor
Lisa M. Harte, the president and director of Parle Portraits, an oil portrait gallery in New York, was married last evening to James E. Taylor, an architect at Procter &amp; Wang Architects in New York.
Cantor Raymond Smolover officiated at the Fountainhead in New Rochelle, N.Y.


Real Incest and Real Survivors: Readers Respond
To the Editor:
Frequently incest survivors, like war veterans and torture victims, suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder.
One of the symptoms of this syndrome is the obliteration of the memory of the trauma.
This repression is actually a coping mechanism that allows children to survive the terror of their past.
Dennis Charney, a neuroscientist, found that trauma actually alters the chemistry of the brain.
Studies report that the average age of remembering childhood incest is between 29 and 49.
It is for this reason that the statute of limitations for reporting abuse was extended in Washington State.
"Is such legislation warranted?" Carol Tavris asks.
Many critics of our legal system believe we do more to protect the accused than the victims.
According to an article written by Heidi Vanderbilt for Lear's magazine, eight of our states have no incest statutes.
Twenty-seven states deem vaginal penetration necessary for incest to have occurred.
Thus a father who sodomizes his child or forces him or her to perform fellatio would not meet the legal definition of incest.


Business Diary/February 7-12


In Williamsburg, Prince Completes a Royal Circle
For a Valentine's Day prelude, the spectacle was bittersweet.
Prince Charles arrived alone here today to help the College of William and Mary celebrate its 300th birthday, finding himself, like the college's royal patrons, a victim of the vagaries of love.
A lifelong student of the monarchy, the Prince of Wales certainly recognized the odd twist.
On a first visit in 1981 to the college, the nation's second oldest, he confided to students that the marriage of the future monarchs William and Mary in 1677 had been a "bad and depressing affair."


Kitchen Drama


Parents Who Subsidize 'Twentysomethings'
" 'Twentysomething,' and Home Again on L.I."  [ Jan. 31 ] , on the adjustment involved when a college graduate returns to live in his or her childhood home, focuses on one trend affecting the "twentysomething" generation.
But you ignore another equally as important trend, parent subsidization of children's postcollege life style.
Growing numbers of college graduates are becoming part of a new "subsidized generation," in which financially able parents cheerfully underwrite apartments in the city so that both their children and they themselves may continue to enjoy their independence.
The trend is furthered by the possibility, in some cases, of declaring a portion of the apartment a city "office" and of realizing tax advantages.
GEORGE HABER Jericho


A Sensible Sort Of Flattery
It's still va-va-va-voom, but with a sensible bra.
Victoria's Secret took one of its best-selling bras and extended it into a lace teddy.
The molded, slightly padded cups lift and enhance the bust.
The stretch contouring fabric and spandex back insure comfort.
Pushups were never so much fun.
In black, white, red or taupe; $40.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
TEMPLES OF CHANCE How America Inc.
Bought Out Murder Inc. to Win Control of the Casino Business.
By David Johnston.
Doubleday, $22.50.


Joan Sullivan, Francis Feeley
Joan O'Shea Sullivan, a teacher at the Long River Middle School in Prospect, Conn., was married Friday night to Francis Bernard Feeley, a founding partner of the law firm of Feeley &amp; Elliot in Waterbury, Conn.
Judge Mary Kay Flaherty of the Southbury district probate court officiated at the bride's home in South Britain, Conn.
The bride, 59, plans to keep her name.
She graduated from St.
Joseph College in West Hartford, Conn., and received a master's degree in education from Western Connecticut State University.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


Dr. Gershman, Edward M. Kennedy Jr.
Elizabeth G. Gershman and James D. Gershman, both of Stamford, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Katherine Anne Gershman, to Edward Moore Kennedy Jr., a son of Joan Bennett Kennedy of Boston and Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Hyannisport, Mass..
A fall wedding is planned.
Dr.
Gershman is an instructor, soon to become an assistant professor, in psychiatry at the Yale University School of Medicine, and a faculty psychiatrist in the outpatient division of the Connecticut Mental Health Center, both in New Haven.
She graduated from Brown University and received her medical degree from the University of Connecticut.


Knicks' Spirit Is Proving Hard to Beat
Even before the Knicks arrived here today, there was a sunny atmosphere surrounding the team.
How good are the Knicks (32-15)?


Housing And Fear Upend Integration
LIKE a family secret that will not stay hidden, the reality of school segregation keeps forcing itself into the light, exposing the unresolved and politically explosive issues of race, class and poverty in American life.
Two current cases raise difficult questions in the long battle to integrate schools.
In a civil trial under way in Hartford, Conn., the plaintiffs are arguing that linking city and suburban schools is the only way to produce true economic and racial integration.
In Richmond, Va., a judge recently delayed an order to end the practice of "clustering" white students in a few classes at a mostly black school.


Con Edison Crew Unearths Bones Near Early Black Graveyard
A Con Edison crew installing transformers for the city's Department of General Services yesterday unearthed several dozen human bones believed to be from the Negros Burial Ground in lower Manhattan, prompting calls for an investigation into who gave permission for the job.
The digging in front of the Tweed Courthouse-Criminal Court at Chambers and Elk Streets was halted about 3 P.M. after archaeologists and preservationists convinced workers that they were disturbing the oldest municipal African cemetery known in the United States.
The scene is about 200 yards southeast of a site that was uncovered in 1991, halting construction of a Federal office building.


Recent Sales
Basking Ridge  $320,000
19 Coppergate Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old colonial, porch, updated kitchen; taxes $4,277.
Bergenfield  $97,000
75 Vreeland Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 31-year-old Cape Cod; 1-car garage, eat-in-kitchen, fenced yard; taxes $4,126.
Hillsdale  $304,000
27 Winthrop Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 25-year-old ranch; finished basement, 2-car garage, 2 fireplaces; taxes $4,880.
Mahwah  $375,000
10 Bayard Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old contemporary; fireplace, 2-car garage, great room, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $4,921.
Park Ridge  $185,000
9 Second Street  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 80-year-old colonial; enclosed front porch, 1-car garage, eat-in kitchen; taxes $3,732.
River Vale  $377,500
859 Teller Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 34-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, fireplace, c/a, full basement; $7,441.
OTHER AREAS Willington, Conn.  $131,500
19 Burt Latham Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 22-year-old ranch; large deck, formal dining room, family room, 1.2 acres; taxes not available.
Mount Vernon, N.Y.  $302,500
244 Primrose Avenue  6-bedroom, 3 1/2-bathroom, 63-year-old Tudor: sunroom, dining room, modern eat-in kitchen, den, wine cellar; taxes $6,991.
East Meadow, L.I.  $211,500
381 Bellmore Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 31-year-old split level; dining room, family room, finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $7,200.


URUGUAY WEIGHS OUSTING BASQUES
For almost two years, the Trainera was arguably the most popular restaurant in town.
Politicians and this city's intelligentsia crowded its tables for the authentic Basque cuisine and political discourse that were the daily fare.
"People always wondered about the owners, but it really didn't seem to matter, this is a quiet country," said Cesar Aguiar, director of Equipos Consultores Asociados, a polling firm.
"Many Uruguayans have Basque ancestors, including the President. And besides, the food was terrific."


The Clinton Economic Plan's Winners and Losers
THE economic plan that President Clinton unveils this week will be the biggest earthquake to hit the nation's economy since President Reagan took office 12 years ago, turning many industries topsy-turvy, leaving some badly damaged and some better-off.
The plan will reshape the economic landscape, the President's aides say, by creating a tax credit for business investment, establishing a broad-based energy tax, cutting capital gains taxes for new businesses and seriously attacking the budget deficit.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 24 about the resurgence of Pasadena misstated the location of the Roxxi restaurant.
It is near the California Institute of Technology, not in Old Town.
A map with the article showed the Rialto Theater incorrectly.
It is in South Pasadena; the site shown on the map was actually the Raymond Theater.


How Milosevic Stole the Election
Milan panic, the American businessman turned Serbian politician, flew to Nis last December not knowing what to expect.
He was coming to the town, an industrial center in the southern part of Serbia and a stronghold of President Slobodan Milosevic, for the first major rally of his campaign for President of Serbia.
The hope was that at least a few thousand people would turn out.
Initial signs were not encouraging.
The Mayor told him not to come, factory managers said they would not receive him and there had been too little time to organize supporters.
But when Panic pulled up to the Ambassador Hotel at 3 P.M. he was speechless.
There in the town's main square, chanting his name rhythmically and eagerly awaiting his appearance, was a crowd of more than 20,000.


Profile/Dean Kamen Inventing Heroes For the 21st Century
FOR someone who barely made it through high school and was kicked out of college, Dean Kamen seems an unlikely champion for American education.
But Mr.
Kamen, a self-made millionaire, entrepreneur and electromechanical wizard, did poorly in school more because of a lack of motivation than a lack of smarts.
And he believes with his own brand of fiery intensity that America is fast becoming, as he puts it, a sort of "banana republic" as its educational system, particularly in science and technology, loses the attention of more and more children.


Recent Sales
Bristol, Conn.  $105,000
43 Marine Court  3-bedroom, 1-bath, new Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, expansion potential; taxes not yet available.
Burlington, Conn.  $133,000
23 Main Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old raised ranch; country kitchen, tiled laundry room, large family room, 0.75 acre; taxes $2,619.
Willington, Conn.  $131,500
19 Burt Latham Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 22-year-old ranch; large deck, formal dining room, family room, 1.2 acres; taxes not available.
Mount Vernon, N.Y.  $302,500
244 Primrose Avenue  6-bedroom, 3 1/2-bathroom, 63-year-old Tudor: sunroom, dining room, modern eat-in kitchen, den, wine cellar; taxes $6,991.
Pelham, N.Y.  $260,000
473 Esplanade  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 73-year-old tudor: dining room, fireplace, deck, dressing room, porch; taxes $7,109.
Pound Ridge, N.Y.  $243,500
210 Kitchawan Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 28-year-old ranch: dining room, deck, family room, office, laundry room, 2.2 acres; taxes $4,841.
OTHER AREAS East Meadow, L.I.  $211,500
381 Bellmore Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 31-year-old split level; dining room, family room, finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $7,200.
Glen Head, L.I.  $275,000
2 Cedar Lane  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 65-year-old Tudor; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, fireplace, oak floors, plaster walls; taxes $2,300.
Basking Ridge, N.J.  $320,000
19 Coppergate Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old colonial, h/w floors, porch, newly updated kitchen; taxes $4,277.


Ralph Lemon's Search for a Private Nirvana
Ralph Lemon's recent dance season at the Joyce Theater was something to fax home about.
Virtually every aspect of his program of four pieces, including three premieres, was startling.
There was the sheer energy of his dancers, rocketed like projectiles into the air but landing lightly on the ground or on each other (the body as surface).
And, as the evening progressed, there was the surprising realization that introductory or final images from one piece would often spill into another.
Not merely an experiment in formal structures, this exploration of beginnings and endings (in the end was the beginning?) served as an allegory for the spiritual quest suggested by titles like "Phrases Almost Biblical" and "Their Eyes Rolled Back in Ecstasy." But Mr.
Lemon, one of the most creative modern-dance choreographers to emerge during the 1980's, is too imaginative to be rooted in the literal.


The Electronic Ties That Bind
It's a damp winter evening, and the streets of Paris do not beckon, but who needs to feel cut off?
Why not a game of chess or chance?
Perhaps a look at bargain vacations in the Caribbean?
Or maybe it's a good time to find a date for the weekend?
All without leaving home, of course.
For many people, the solution lies in Minitel, a computer service that works with an unassuming little box, a small computer screen and a keyboard linking some 6.5 million French homes and offices to 20,000 different services, from airline bookings to bank transactions, from home delivery of three-course meals to "convivial" -- read, sexy -- message exchanges.


By Bus: Europe Or the Prairie
Perillo Tours, which has operated bus tours of Italy for 48 years, will expand its European itineraries for the first time this year to include major cities in England, France and Spain.
A 12-day tour ($2,899 to $2,999 a person from New York) will visit London, Paris and Rome, and a 14-day tour ($3,159 to $3,259a person from New York) will go to Madrid, Barcelona, Venice, Florence and Rome.
The rates include air fare, hotels, Continental breakfast and most dinners, sightseeing and full-time tour escorts.
Seventy-seven departure dates for the two programs have been scheduled from April 26.
Information: (800) 431-1515 or (201) 307-1234.
Another well-established bus tour company, Maupintour, has a new program this year to celebrate the 150th anniversary of the Oregon Trail, a 14-day tour in the states the pioneers traveled: from Independence, Mo., through Kansas, Nebraska, Wyoming and Idaho to Oregon.
Rides across the prairie in covered wagons and on horseback and chuck wagon cookouts are planned.


The Art of Love
The agenda was love.
More specifically, the true marriage of passion and art.
The New York Times Magazine asked five artist couples to create valentines and, honoring the wayward nature of love, kept the assignment as fluid as possible.
The couples were told that their valentines could be to, with or about each other.
If love overflowed, it could even be addressed to the world at large.
It could be two images or one, sentimental or not.
Ellen Phelan and her husband, Joel Shapiro, both painters, decided to face off with opposing valentine couples, at opposite poles stylistically but thematically joined.
For her valentine, Phelan enlisted the children's dolls that she has used in her paintings in recent years.
The dolls, she explained, "stand in for many adult emotions, in a slightly distanced form."


Days of Change


Data Update
*4*VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
*4*(Residential in millions of dollars)
Dec. 92
Dec. 91
Change
New York
295.4
273.1
+ 8%
New Jersey
143.5
122.2
+17%
Connecticut
73.1
96.0
-24%
*4*Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
7.99
8.05
8.93
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.17
5.21
6.00
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.84
7.92
8.78
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.04
5.03
5.85
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.89
7.94
8.82
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.77
4.76
5.91
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.06
8.11
9.11
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.64
5.81
6.39
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.41
3.41
4.23
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.53
7.53
8.25
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


SILENCE OF THE FROGS
I have grown dismayed at the response to your article on the dwindling frog population, "Silence of the Frogs." It seems that every issue in recent weeks (Letters: Jan. 10, Jan. 24) has featured some letter writer's unamusing quip about the "plethora of princes" or an inanity about the effect the problem may have on French restaurants.
Are your readers really so blase about the environment?


U.S. Somalia Pullout Worries Relief Workers
The planned large-scale withdrawal of American troops from Somalia, expected to begin next month, is drawing concern from relief workers, who fear a rapid transfer to United Nations leadership will undermine the stability the United-States led operation has created so far.
In addition, the United Nations force, which will be headed by Turkish Lieut.
Gen.
Cevit Bir, will have less than half the troops the American-led force had, but will face the additional responsibility of extending the foreign military presence into northern Somalia, where disarmament is likely to prove trickier.


A Texas Town Devoted to the Pecan in All Its Forms
IN my first three hours in San Saba, Tex., the self-proclaimed Pecan Capital of the World, I learned there are two sure ways for an outsider to show ignorance.
The first is to order a Lone Star instead of a Budweiser.
The second, far more serious, is to say the word PEE-can.
My friend and I got that abrupt lesson at the Capshaw Cattle Company, the steakhouse-cum-club outside town that's the only place to get a drink under any label in mostly dry San Saba county in central Texas.
The straight-talking owner, Kay Capshaw, settled down at our table immediately after hearing us ask for the Easterners' brew and soon set us straight on peh-CONS.
These are more than just a nut in San Saba and in Texas, which will outproduce even Georgia this year with 55 million pounds.


Those Cabs At Newark Airport
This response is long overdue, but I thought it would be useful to set the record straight on a subject that we take very seriously.
While the Port Authority Police carry out an extensive enforcement program to stop illegal hustlers from harassing unsuspecting passengers, it is regrettable that we hear statements such as those put forth by Gene Maeroff in a letter to the New Jersey editor ("The Cab Problem at Newark Airport, Nov. 22"), implying that hustlers perform a needed service.


New Trial In Killing Of Student
Two years after Christian Prince, a Yale University sophomore, was killed in a robbery on a downtown street here, a local youth is about to go on trial for a second time in the slaying.
Mr.
Prince was the first Yale student to be killed on campus since 1974.
His death shook the Yale community, and the first trial exposed tensions between the minority community and the university.


Perspectives: Home Building in Queens; The Detached Garage Reborn in Flushing
ASK the major home builders in Queens what they are doing with the land they bought a few years ago for home construction and they will probably say they are sitting on it.
Not literally.
Just waiting for the market to turn upwards enough so they can project sale prices that would reasonably justify the prices they paid for development sites.
They will also need more enthusiasm from lenders on advancing the capital for construction.


New Maxim? Chop on Wood
It's back to kitchen basics -- wooden cutting boards -- according to a finding by University of Wisconsin microbiologists.
Dean O. Cliver and Nese O. Ak, who were looking for ways to sanitize wooden cutting surfaces, instead found that the woods (all seven tested) quickly killed food poisoning bacteria that survived and multiplied on plastic cutting boards, which have been touted as safer for years.
Within three minutes, deliberately contaminated wooden boards had destroyed 99.9 percent of the microorganisms and by the next day not a single bacterium could be recovered from them.


Eileen Brennan, John M. Conlon
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas A. Brennan Jr. of Eastchester, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Eileen Doran Brennan to John Matthew Conlon, a son of Dr.
Elizabeth T. Conlon of Crestwood, N.Y., and the late John M. Conlon.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Brennan, 29, is an associate at Burke Horan &amp; Macri, a New York law firm.
She graduated from the College of the Holy Cross.
She and her fiance received law degrees from Fordham University.
Her father is a lawyer for the Hearst Corporation, the publishing company in New York.


SURFACING
TELEVISION --
Ross Perot:
The man, in his "United We Stand" ads on MTV, urges people to send him $15.
The puppet Ross Parrot, making its debut this April on Sesame Street, insists that kids start using the alphabet again.
LANGUAGE --
"A Zoe Baird problem":
See "nannygate." A quandary faced by many middle-aged politicians and the President.
Solution: a child-free appointee.
MUSIC --
Pregnant divas:
What with Whitney Houston's, Vannessa Williams's and Annie Lennox's pregnancies, there could have been a special category at the Grammys on Feb. 24. (But Ms. Lennox had a six-and-a-half-pound girl last Tuesday.)


U.N. HALTS FLIGHTS TO BOSNIA CAPITAL IN DISPUTE OVER AID
In what appeared to be a growing battle of wills, the United Nations today countered the Bosnian Government's refusal to accept relief supplies for Sarajevo by suspending all aid flights into the Bosnian capital.
The suspension, ending the missions that have sustained the besieged city for nearly eight months, was ordered by the United Nations military command here and by United Nations relief officials in Geneva, who said they saw no point in risking the lives of international air crews to fly in food and medicine if the aid was not going to reach Sarajevo's 380,000 residents.
Supplies Are Refused
The action followed the decision on Friday by the Bosnian Government to refuse any further relief supplies for Sarajevo until the United Nations also undertook the delivery of aid to other besieged Muslim communities in eastern Bosnia.


U.S. ENVOY MEETS RUSSIAN
Mr.
Bartholomew met the Russian Foreign Minister, Andrei V. Kozyrev, today and said the two countries shared "a basic commonality of view" on the importance of the problem and its possible consequences for Europe.
Mr.
Bartholomew described the talks as "open" and "very, very positive," but he was careful not to proclaim agreement on the issues and did not answer questions from reporters.
Mr.
Bartholomew, appointed by President Clinton on Wednesday, had come to Moscow to seek Russia's direct involvement in reaching a broader peace, given Moscow's traditionally close ties to fellow Slavs in Serbia.


Hilo and the Hula
To the Editor: Lenore Magida's article, "In Search of the Real Hula" (Dec. 27), certainly points up the need for all current and future Americans to try to perpetuate the various cultural aspects of this country's rich diversity. .
We recently enjoyed a special experience at the Napili Kai Beach Club on Maui.
There, each Friday evening the Napili Kai Foundation, whose members consist of 20 to 30 children from the Napili and Lahaina townships, give a wonderful hourlong performance of many Hula dances.
The dinner audience is asked to make voluntary contributions to the nonprofit foundation that educates local children in the hula and instructs them in the language, history, ecology and the arts and crafts of Polynesia.


Learning About Birds And Their Watchers
I was especially interested in the Jan. 17 column "In the Natural State," dealing with my old friend on The Newark Sunday News, Roger Barton.
Through his weekly articles on the editorial page, I learned a great deal about the birds and the folk who watch them.
I met Mr.
Barton at The Newark News, where I too was employed.
He was a friendly, warm personality.
And through him I became a bird watcher and eventually a member of the Audubon Society.


Talking: Subleasing; Defying The Rules In Co-ops
TOUGH economic times can tempt otherwise law-abiding people into questionable dealings.
Symptomatic of this has been a rise in the number of shareholders in New York City co-ops who have been subletting without their board's approval.
"Nowadays, whenever anyone calls me to say they have a 'discreet' sublet to offer, I know exactly what they mean," said John Griffin, president of Griffin Realty Group, rental specialists in Manhattan.


INSIDE
The Prince, Older and Wiser
Prince Charles spoke at the College of William and Mary, with the parallel between the marriage of the college's patrons and his own painfully evident.
Page 36.
New York Political Mystery
It is the hot parlor game in the little world of New York politics: What happened to Harold Ickes's chance for a White House job?
Page 41.
News Summary, Page 2 Obituaries, Page 54 Weather, Page 55 Radio, Updated TV, Page 53


Devils Rediscover Power in Their Play
The Devils took the body and crashed the net with abandon against the Flyers this afternoon, and were rewarded with a 6-4 victory at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Inspired performances by Stephane Richer and Bernie Nicholls, each with a goal and two assists, made for the most productive outing in the last eight games for the Devils.


The 45, Hole and All
WHAT: The seven-inch single.
The anti-CD.
The new currency on the rock-and-roll fringe.
Sure, anyone can stroll into a mall record store and walk out with a stack of $15 compact disks.
But it takes a truly devoted fan, a bit of an obsessive really, to storm a mom-and-pop record shop in desperate search of the latest 45 by Mudhoney.
Singles are again being recognized as the purest distillation of the record-listening experience.
They're simple, with just one song a side.
They're lo-fi, made of good old-fashioned vinyl.
They're cheap, about $2 to $5 apiece.
And they're eminently collectible.
The band Pavement isn't even famous yet, and its first single has a market value of about $100.


The Death of Golf's Greatest Tree
DURING a Masters practice round several years ago, Sam Snead was playing with a young touring pro, perhaps Greg Norman, who had a reputation as a big hitter.
On the tee of the 13th hole at Augusta National, a dogleg left par-5 of 465 yards, Snead pointed to the cathedral spires of Georgia pines at the corner of the dogleg.
"When I was younger," Snead said, "I used to go right over the top of those trees."


A Dutch Director Trafficks In a Bit of Deja Voodoo
A vacationing couple stops at a gas station beside the highway.
The young woman goes inside to buy some cold drinks and is never seen again.
That is the premise of "The Vanishing," the psychological thriller starring Jeff Bridges, Kiefer Sutherland and Nancy Travis that opened earlier this month.
It is also the premise of "The Vanishing," the Dutch movie that played in America two years ago.
Both films were directed by George Sluizer (pronounced SLY-zer).
Although Janet Maslin, writing in The New York Times, did not find the new version the equal of the old, she had called the original "gripping" and written that "Mr. Sluizer's direction has the spooky precision of nonfiction crime writing."


A Mother-Daughter Confrontation
KAY FAIRCHILD, who thrives on such things, picks out the finest ornamented bone china and a sterling silver pattern named "Morning Dew With Trellis" for her daughter, Angela.
But to Angela, who has bought a scarlet wedding dress, "a fork is a fork is a fork."
Kay is an insulated Westchester matron, swathed in mink and stuck on Wedgwood.
Angela, a documen tary film maker, leads a "whole other way of life." She wears a "Save the Crocodiles" sweatshirt.
Kay thinks a crocodile would make a terrific chaise longue.
And so on.


Try Gas. (Keep Oil.) It's Better. (It's Not.)
Last fall, Mary Ann and Anthony Pasquale replaced the oil burner in their house, in Whitestone, Queens, with one that uses natural gas.
"I think it's warmer," Mrs.
Pasquale said.
"We keep the thermostat around 69, and it's so hot in here sometimes. Before, we kept it at 72 and it wasn't as warm."
But, she added after a moment, maybe that was just her imagination.
Heating experts would agree with that theory; fuel choice should not make any difference, they say.
No matter, the Pasquales are happy.
Major Marketing War
Rose Randolph is not.
After the 35-year-old oil burner in her house in Flushing broke down last October, Mrs.
Randolph called Consolidated Edison.
The utility arranged for a contractor to install a new natural gas furnace that now keeps her house warm.
But her last two monthly bills were $143 and $165, she said, compared to the $100 or less that she used to spend for oil every month.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: King of Prussia, Pa.; Upgrading A Regional Mall
A REGIONAL mall just into its fourth decade here is moving forward with plans to expand and add the area's first Nordstrom store by 1996.
The Plaza at King of Prussia, one of two regional malls in this community 25 miles northwest of Philadelphia, unveiled plans for the Nordstrom store in December, part of an effort to draw higher-income shoppers.


From Seed, the Journey to the Perfect Plant
THOSE who grow their own plants from seed find there is something rather special in the doing.
Of course, many gardeners would rather wait until late spring and buy the few vegetable or annual seedlings they need.
But just as many delight in growing their own plants from seed.
The greatest advantage in growing your own is the selection possibilities.
Many times some of the more unusual flowers or vegetables are not available from garden centers.
Also, seed sharing is one of the strongest binds in gardening friendships.


Again: It's Hillary Rodham Clinton. Got That?
What, Hillary Rodham Clinton's press secretary would like to know, is in a name?
"The fact is," the press secretary, Lisa Caputo, said recently in mild exasperation.
"Hillary Rodham Clinton has been the First Lady's name all along, since 1982. We're at a loss as to why people think this is something that we're just trying to change now."


Public &amp; Private; The Lone Pilgrim
The other night I read from her work at a memorial service for the writer Laurie Colwin, whom I met only once but admired enormously.
The essay, "Alone in the Kitchen With an Eggplant," has always seemed particularly evocative of the way young single women live in New York City, where Laurie lived and, incredibly, died at age 48.
It is about entertaining in an extremely small apartment.
"Naturally, there being no kitchen, there was no kitchen sink," she wrote.
"I did the dishes in a plastic pan in the bathtub and set the dish drainer over the toilet."


Catherine Smith, D. G. O'Brien Jr.
Catherine C. Smith, an anchor for ABC Radio Networks in New York, was married there yesterday to Douglas G. O'Brien Jr., the news director of WQCD-FM in New York.
Judge Jerald R. Klein of New York City Housing Court officiated at Cameo's restaurant.
Mrs.
O'Brien graduated from St.
Mary's College in Notre Dame, Ind. .
She is the daughter of Germaine B. Smith of Lancaster, Pa., and the late Jules L. Smith.


Fly Me, Fly My Dogs
William and Pat Buckley's trans-Atlantic seating arrangements are determined by their dogs.
In late January, the couple flew to Switzerland for their annual winter sojourn, bringing along, as usual, their three Cavalier King Charles Spaniels.
The Buckleys, however, were unable to sit together because of a Swissair rule that allows only one dog in each section of the plane (unless the dogs are small enough that two can fit into one carry-on bag).


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: February 14, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor.
2
2
BYGONES, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $5.99.) A dinner party attended by a woman, her former husband and their two grown children reveals family strains and love.
3
4
THE ROAD TO OMAHA, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $6.99.) A retired general and a lawyer scheme to take possession of the state of Nebraska on behalf of an Indian tribe.
4 *
8
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A woman's death leads to an investigation involving the American-Japanese rivalry.
5
3
BLINDSIGHT, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $5.99.) A woman physician seeks to find the cause of a series of strange deaths of Manhattan yuppies.
6
30
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
7
55
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
8
3
GUARDIAN ANGEL, by Sara Paretsky. (Dell, $5.99.) The private eye V. I. Warshawski probes a case involving pet dogs and Chicago scandals.
9
44
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
10
4
LINE OF FIRE, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Jove, $5.99.) The fifth volume of the series "The Corps" tells of an attempt to rescue two marines in World War II.
11
21
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a farming family.
12
7
MCNALLY'S SECRET, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.99.) A sleuth's pursuit of a stolen block of priceless stamps uncovers scandals.
13 *
5
BEYOND EDEN, by Catherine Coulter. (Onyx, $5.99.) A young woman trying to escape menaces from her past is aided by a private investigator.
14
16
A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, by Norman Maclean. (Pocket, $4.99.) Three tales of the outdoors in western Montana.
15
2
DAMIA, by Anne McCaffrey. (Ace, $5.99.) A woman helps a besieged universe by exerting the power of love; a sequel to "The Rowan."
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
5
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
2
7
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Plume, $13.) Factors affecting the environment.
3
16
THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF MALCOLM X, with the assistance of Alex Haley. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The life story of the black leader.
4
484
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
5
19
ALIVE, by Piers Paul Read. (Avon, $5.99.) How members of a rugby team survived a plane crash.
6
91
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
7 *
18
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist describes a war against women's rights.
8
1
HILLARY CLINTON: The Inside Story, by Judith Warner. (Signet, $4.99.) A biography of the First Lady.
9
2
WOMEN ON TOP, by Nancy Friday. (Pocket, $5.99.) The changes in social life that have affected the sexual fantasies of women.
10
1
WRITTEN BY HERSELF, edited by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $15.) An anthology of autobiographical writings by 25 19th- and 20th-century American women.
11 *
1
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's account of her childhood and adolescence.
12 *
15
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Vintage, $11.) Political essays.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
121
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
2
104
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
3
79
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
10
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1993. (World Almanac/Pharos, $7.95.) The latest edition of a standard reference work.
5
5
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Can the Id Overtake the Ego?
To the Editor:
The most interesting thing about Stephen Holden's article was not his pigeonholing of Rodgers and Hammerstein as the superego of American musical theater (with Stephen Sondheim as the id!), but the accompanying article about all the Rodgers and Hammerstein projects this year.
Especially interesting was the statistic that there are
2,700
productions of Rodgers and Hammerstein musicals each year.


A Window on Lives Lived in the Shadows
"Significant others: artist Wives of Artists," at the Kraushaar Galleries, opens a small window on a big topic: the two-artist relationship, its joys and tribulations.
It's more an outline for an exhibition than a full-fledged show -- hors d'oeuvres, you might say.
It outlines an expanse of art and historical knowledge -- as well as an emotionally fraught terra incognita -- and leaves you wanting more.
But the show is also an impressive feat for a commercial gallery to have pulled off, one that stirs the mind, thrills the eye in its best moments, and sometimes almost breaks the heart.
It is as much a compliment as a complaint to say that the show at Kraushaar (Fifth
Avenue at 57th Street, through Feb. 27) makes you wish that someone else, preferably a museum, would turn around and do it all over again, only bigger and more comprehensively.


Sound Bytes; Prodding Digital PC's Toward the Winner's Circle
Enrico Pesatori is the new general manager of personal computer operations at the Digital Equipment Corporation.
Although Digital is domestically the second-largest computer company (behind I.B.M.), it was, until last year, a loser in the PC business.
Today, PC's are one of the bright spots as Digital struggles to revitalize its business.
To help focus its PC strategy, Digital turned to Mr.
Pesatori, a dapper Italian who for the last two years had guided a restructuring of PC operations at Zenith Data Systems.
Before joining Zenith Data in 1990, Mr.
Pesatori spent 21 years as an executive with Ing.
C.
Olivetti &amp; Company.


Corrections
A listing for a Seattle Symphony concert in the Television section today includes incorrect information about its radio simulcast.
The concert, tonight at 11:00 on Channel 13, will be broadcast on WQXR, 96.3 FM.


Sharon Johnson, Andrew Tennant
Sharon Kay Johnson, the head of design at KM Krizia, a men's sportswear manufacturer in New York, was married yesterday to Andrew Wellman Tennant, a television and movie writer and director in Los Angeles and New York.
The Rev.
Tom Davis officiated at the First Baptist Church in Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
Mrs.
Tennant, 36, graduated from Skidmore College.
She is the daughter of Bruce A. Johnson of Dorset, Vt., and the late Judith K. Johnson.
The bride is the stepdaughter of Diane Johnson of Dorset.


Real Incest and Real Survivors: Readers Respond
To the Editor:
I anticipated a challenge like Carol Tavris's when I wrote the courtroom fantasy in "Dancing With Daddy" and created the red-faced prosecutor who insists that my story of being molested by my father "is nothing but a tissue of lies from start to finish!" But I never expected such charges to come from a writer I admire, one who apparently considers herself a feminist.
Ms.
Tavris's assertion that I "never actually remembered" being abused by my father puzzles me, since one of the themes of my memoir is the very process of remembering what happened.
Certainly we all interpret our experiences; finding meaning in life is the quintessentially human activity.
And certainly there is ambiguity wherever we look.
Indeed, this is another important theme of "Dancing With Daddy": the "gentle, compassionate, temperate . . . lovable" physician was the same man who raped his daughters.


Lost in the Name Game
WHAT do you call someone who is 23? (Or for that matter, someone 31 or 18 or possibly 12?)
Journalists, marketing executives -- many over-30's everywhere -- seem suddenly desperate to know.
Each week brings a new round of cute, all-inclusive names, each guaranteed to be
the
generational logo.
And with these pronouncements come handbooks and guides to this mysterious New Youth and many talk-show dissections of New Youth character, as well as polls, profiles, articles -- each offering up the definitive traits of the postboom, pre-millennium set.
It's as if half the world had just noticed that many, many people were born during the 1960's and 70's.


Real Incest and Real Survivors: Readers Respond
To the Editor:
I read Carol Tavris's essay with great interest.
As someone who treats many young women who have questions about sexual abuse, I found the essay a welcome breath of fresh air in an atmosphere polluted by hysteria and irrational treatment.
All too often, talk show hosts and overeager therapists jump on the bandwagon of abuse, with no good, much less scientific, basis for their conclusions.


THE COMPANY HE KEEPS
Thanks to Michael Kelly and Maureen Dowd for sharing their insights about our new President ("The Company He Keeps," Jan. 17).
It should come as no surprise that Bill Clinton is recanting his campaign promises, as they were designed only to promote his being elected.


Confusion on Research On Magnetic Therapy
I understand there has been some confusion regarding the mention of North Shore Hospital in "Magnetic Therapy to Relieve Arthritis Pain"  [ Jan. 17 ] .
The article was accurate, since the work described was indeed done at that institution.
However, the use of their name without their permission was unfortunate, and they are entitled to be upset, because their investigator on the staff who completed the work had not formally notified North Shore University Hospital of their collaboration with Bio-Magnetic Therapy Systems Inc.
Further, the paragraph which began by mentioning the experimental laboratory work done at their institution went on to describe the clinical studies at our center.
Although this was clearly a new sentence, casual readers might assume that clinical studies had also been done at North Shore, which is not the case.
As a result they received numerous phone calls asking for a treatment modality not available at North Shore.
RICHARD MARKOLL, M.D.
Bio-Magnetic Therapy Systems Inc.
Melville


On Sunday; Dueling Delis Need Solomon On Cedar Lane
NOAM SOKOLOW is an entrepreneurial wonder.
He began working the kosher catering circuit at age 12, saved his money, skipped college and four years ago, at 21, opened his own delicatessen, Noah's Ark, on Cedar Lane.
It's popular among hip Orthodox Jews and is prospering where two delis before him failed.
Friday, in the midst of a blizzard, 15 people wait ed for lunch takeouts.
He introduced home delivery, early-bird specials, a frequent diners club.
His customers love to roll their eyes and moan about the huge portions.
"His rotating dinner specials are a big plus," said George Feintuch, a regular.
The clientele considers Mr.
Sokolow a hard-driving workaholic, but a fair man.
A waiter sidled up to him and whispered, "Mrs. Feintuch wants the sweet potato fries instead of potato pancakes on the special."


Taking Aim At Health Issues
FIVE pieces of news will be of interest to travelers with health concerns.
For wheelchair users going to Britain.
A British company is renting vans with hydraulic lifts that can handle up to 550 pounds and with locking clamps for wheelchairs.
The vans have space for as many as seven other passengers.
The British rates vary by vehicle and season, with a Mazda for four days this summer $:290, or $419 calculated at a rate of $1.445 to the pound, and $:430 for a week, or $621.
For automatic shift, the company offers a Ford at $:315, or $455, for four days and $:475, or $686, for a week.


The Peek of Fashion
Is it lingerie or is it apparel?
When spring comes, the line will blur between finery meant for the boudoir and that intended for the salon.
Designers of avant-garde fashions have used the airiest fabrics, and the delicate details from nightgowns and peignoirs, to create costumes meant to be worn in public.
Are they for everyone?
No, of course not.
But for the daring, this is a delicious new turn on style.


New Choices With Alaskapass
The Alaskapass, good for travel on ferries, buses and trains in Alaska and the Yukon Territory, will come with expanded options this year, including travel along the Lynn Canal in southern Alaska and a narrow-gauge railroad between Skagway and Whitehorse.
Now in its fourth year, the Alaskapass includes passage on Alaska state ferries serving Prince William Sound and the Aleutian Islands; buses operated by Greyhound Lines and other carriers, and Alaska Railroad trains to Anchorage, Seward and Fairbanks.


THE REFORMATION OF A STREET PREACHER
The "father, teacher, politician" once again basks in the limelight and relishes every moment ("The Reformation of a Street Preacher," by Catherine S. Manegold, Jan. 24).
Al Sharpton made his most obvious transition when he ran for the Senate.
He is now a full-fledged politician.
I was one New Yorker who was in no way "startled by his new, buffed image." He's "sharp," but he must do more and talk less before he makes his mark as a man of good will.
BRAD SHERMAN
New York, N.Y.


Q and A
Condo Self-Management Question: I live in a condominium conversion and some members of the board have proposed considering self-management using an accounting firm to handle the financial aspects.
We unit owners, however, have been informed that our mortgages would be in jeopardy if we did not have professional management and that we would not be able to sell because buyers would not be able to get mortgages.
I contacted my mortgage company and found that it does not require this.


RECORD BRIEF
Scott Hamilton: 'Scott Hamilton With Strings'
Concord Jazz CCD-4538; CD and cassette.


P.L.O. and Israel Move To Talking Peace Again
IN a quick, early victory for its Middle East diplomacy, the Clinton Administration squelched the squabbling at the United Nations last week over Israel's deportation of 400 Palestinians from the fundamentalist Hamas group and nudged the Palestine Liberation Organization toward resuming peace talks with Israel.
The Security Council welcomed Israel's decision to take back 101 Palestinians as "a step in the right direction." But it said it wants the others taken back soon, as it had ordered.
Israel will do so by year's end, maybe sooner.


SHOULD DOCTORS TELL THE TRUTH?
The key to sharing knowledge with a patient is telling the truth with hope.
I know of patients who have died when a doctor's words took hope away.
Norman Cousins called it "psychological malpractice." The simple statistic that more people die after holidays and birthdays lets you know that goals and events lead people to "postpone" death.


Saturn Adds a Wagon to the Line
FOR a while there, I thought I had figured it out, figured the easy way to get through the winter.
Two years ago, I had shelled out 400 bucks for a snowblower, and Long Island hadn't had more than a dusting of snow since that day.
Alas, the magic seemed to be gone, I thought, flailing my way through what was indeed a surprise snowstorm over the Northeast, which unfortunately included the Long Island Expressway.
Weaving through pileup after pileup, I was feeling particularly sorry about the two expensively crumpled Mercedes-Benzes at the side of the road.


A Challenge
To the Editor:
Quick: Whistle me three songs from any Andrew Lloyd Webber show.
ALLAN JEFFERYS Pinehurst, N. C.


Identity of Pedestrian Killed by Bus Sought
Police investigators were trying yesterday to determine the identity of the woman whose body was badly crushed when she was struck and killed by a bus in Harlem.
"We're not sure whether she slipped and fell when the bus drove by or if she was hit," said a police spokesman, Sgt.
John McCluskey.


Table With a View
To the Editor: This responds to the complaint that Tauck Tours gave preferential treatment to couples in tables, rooms and group photos (Letters, Nov. 8).
My husband and I have taken four Tauck Tours, including one to the Canadian Rockies in 1989.
Our hotel rooms varied in size from very small lake-view room with twin beds at Lake Louise to a huge corner room with oversized bed in Banff.
Because of the large number of tourists in the area, our tour director always made our dinner reservations by phone the afternoon we were to arrive.
We were encouraged to join other people on the tour when dining because the best restaurant tables were usually for groups of four or more.


Riley's Success Deserves Cheers
To the Sports Editor:
Harvey Araton's article ("Riley's Tight Rein May Limit Knicks," The Times, Feb. 4) leaves me aghast.
Pat Riley takes his team to first place after the Knicks have floundered for years, almost knocks off the Chicago Bulls in the playoffs, brings the Knicks back this year to first place again, and this is called a limited result!
The man's a great coach with superior results.
JAMES L. CUNJAK Old Bridge, N.J.


The Special Is Steak, and More Steak
HAPPY days are here again, or maybe they never stopped at Peter Luger's.
For the crowds that mob this venerable Great Neck steakhouse, the words recession and cholesterol do not exist.
At a time when many Long Island restaurants are struggling, Peter Luger is packed.
Prices are not the reason, for there are no bargains here.
The standard steak for one is $26.25, and the menu's lone appetizer, shrimp cocktail, costs $10.50 for four shrimp or $15.25 for six.


Seton Hall-Villanova: It's Overtime, as Usual
Seton Hall and Villanova can't seem to get their scores settled in regulation.
Going into tonight, two of the last three games the teams had played against each other had gone into overtime.
But with 11 minutes left tonight, and the Pirates leading by 42-32 and rolling, it seemed as if there would no overtime for a change.


Real Incest and Real Survivors: Readers Respond
To the Editor:
We cannot go back to square one in our understanding of incest, although Carol Tavris's essay is a good try.


Topics of The Times; New Yorkers, Wet and Nutty
Friday in New York began with flakes the size of saucers and by noon had moved on to flakes the size and shape of needles.
The sidewalks were either cleared and icy or uncleared and snowy; the gutters were monuments to slush and clogged drains.
All of which made Friday, one New Yorker reasoned, a perfect day for errands.
Who, after all, would be nuts enough to go out?


CLINTON PROPOSES ALTERING MEDICARE TO SAVE $35 BILLION
President Clinton will seek at least $35 billion in savings from Medicare over the next four years by limiting payments to doctors and hospitals and by trying to increase premiums for elderly people with high incomes, Administration officials said today.
The proposed savings, three times what President George Bush sought unsuccessfully in 1992, are part of what Mr.
Clinton describes as a bold program to reduce the deficit and its long-term burden on the American economy.
He will announce the outlines of that program in a speech to Congress on Wednesday, but the details may still be modified.


From Ashes To Flashes
NAN KEMPNER'S sleeves were an accident waiting to happen.
On Monday night, at a small dinner at the Italian Consulate toasting Gianfranco Ferre's new store on Madison Avenue, the long-legged, fashion-loving socialite was wearing a creamy white silk blouse by the designer of honor.
It had a pair of architecturally impressive, twisting, pleated, puffy troubadour-style sleeves that spread out from her wrists and went all over the table.
In a moment of careless conviviality, you could grab hold of one of those sleeves thinking it was the end of your napkin and make a real mess of things.
"When I sit next to you with this blouse on you
know
about it," Mrs. Kempner said in one of those good-natured raspy voices caused by years of cigarette smoking.


On That Data Highway, Watch the Tollbooths
To the Editor:
"Building the Electronic Superhighway" (Jan. 24) omits a critical element of the current Internet -- that it has been operated largely on a fixed-cost-per-site charging basis.
This has yielded tremendous benefits to students, staff, faculty and researchers on campuses and at companies.


Court Jester Returns
Go ahead and call them the Geriatric Globetrotters, if you must, but 14 years after he ended his 22-year professional career, MEADOWLARK LEMON is rejoining the Harlem Globetrotters.
Lemon, who was signed to play through April 10, the end of the team's current trot, will begin his second farewell tour at Madison Square Garden next Saturday.
And just how old is he, anyway?
Lemon isn't exactly saying.
"I'm between 1 and 100," he said.(AP)


rs. Beuerlein, Anthony Leness
Maureen G. Beuerlein, the coordinator of corporate development for New York Downtown Hospital, was married yesterday to Anthony V. Leness, a managing director of investment banking at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
David Reed, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the home of Christine Leness, the bridegroom's mother, in New York.
Mrs.
Leness graduated from the Newton (Mass.) College of the Sacred Heart.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Matthew F. Geraty of New York, where her father is the president of the M. S. Geraty Furniture Company.
The bride's first marriage ended in divorce, as did that of the bridegroom.


Risks in Rio
To the Editor: "Rediscovering Rio" by James Brooke (Jan. 3) made the point that "though there are risks, the city offers ample rewards." As a periodic visitor to Rio over the past 15 years, I'd suggest that though there are rewards, there are ample risks.
The threat is pervasive, and a constant topic of conversation.
During my most recent business trip about a year ago, we were repeatedly advised by the staff of our hotel not to walk even a block -- in daylight -- without an escort.
Not only did a private car take us everywhere, we were also cautioned to be sure that it was our designated driver, and not an impostor.


Correction
A report in the Night column last Sunday about the presentation of an award to Laurie Tisch Sussman by Kitty Carlisle Hart, chairwoman of the New York State Council on the Arts, at the Mother Hale Awards for Caring misidentified Ms.
Sussman's position at the Children's Museum of Manhattan.
She is its chairwoman; Bette Korman was the founder.


A Dead Friend, a Living Memory
The day Nick Anderson last saw Benjy Wilson, his closest friend and one of his high-school basketball teammates, it was sunny but cold in Chicago, and it was windy.
The date was Tuesday, Nov. 20, 1984.
The wind was blowing down South Vincennes Avenue, where the lunch-time crowd of students had spilled out from Neal F. Simeon Vocational High School, a three-story red brick building that is a converted cookie factory.


Kathrine McCoy, Scott A. Bartlett
Albert and Margaret McCoy of Bridgehampton, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kathrine Finley McCoy to Scott August Bartlett, a son of M. Keith and Patricia Bartlett of Penn Yan, N.Y.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss McCoy is an architectural designer in Bridgehampton.
She graduated from Vassar College and received a master's degree in architecture from Columbia University.
Her parents own and operate W. F. McCoy Petroleum Products Inc., a fuel distributor, and the McCoy Bus Company Inc., a bus service, both in Bridgehampton.


Vaccinations Are Often Free, But Many Children Miss Out
Long after the hour of her scheduled appointment had passed, Michele Bryant sat with her 2-year-old son in the waiting room of the New York City Department of Health clinic in Fort Greene, Brooklyn.
She had little choice but to wait it out in the dreary room on a snowy Saturday: As a single mother with a full-time job that offered no health benefits, she had neither the time nor the money to go to a private pediatrician to get her son vaccinated.
"I got up this morning at 6:30 to bring him here," Ms.
Bryant said, as her son, Taurean, scurried along the rows of plastic seats, restless after two and a half hours in the clinic.
"This is what you have to do. If you love your child, you want them to have the best care you can get." Struggling With Bureaucracy
Vaccines are free and readily available in public health clinics in New York and many other states.


Bus Driver Is Killed as Storm Leaves New York Region
The third major storm of the winter -- a two-day blow of driving snow, icy rain and stinging sleet -- tapered off across the metropolitan region yesterday, but caused a fatal bus crash in Rockland County and delayed many travelers.
It also left scores of minor accidents on treacherous highways, thousands of homes without power and a landscape ranging from deep drifts to seas of slush.


H.M.O.'s as Solution
To Health Care Crisis
Your insightful article about the recent explosion of H.M.O. enrollments in the Northeast and specifically in New York State ("As Crises in Health Grow, So Do the H.M.O.'s," Jan. 10) is a valuable resource for policy makers looking for solutions to the nation's health-care crisis.
All they need to do is follow the direction which their constituents are increasingly turning to for quality, affordable and comprehensive health care, and they will go a long way toward putting the nation's health-care system back on its feet.


Special Tools Help Drywall Installation
GYPSUM wallboard is a nearly ubiquitous building material.
But because it comes only in large heavy panels, amateurs new to remodeling often find it intimidating to order and install on their own.
Here is a basic guide to the steps, including tips that can benefit even experienced amateurs.
Finishing wallboard, which consists of covering seams and fasteners with tape and filler, is not discussed.


Lovin' Spoonfuls
On the subject of sweets for wooing your sweet, Jacques Torres, the pastry chef at Le Cirque, harks more to the spirit of St.
Valentine than to a Hallmark greeting card.
His Valentine desserts, which can take hours to prepare, are an act of devotion.
To render their filigree and flounce, requires an adherence to form as elaborate and courtly as a sonnet.
Unlike other cuisine, the best of which is often impressionistic, pastry-making requires precision.
The care it takes to sculpture strawberries into hearts, to spin sugar, to coddle and stir a pastry cream until it is thickened but not curdled, is a result of diligence and patience, two attributes of ardor that somehow got lost between Victorian love and contemporary courtship.


With Volatility Rising, Traders Are Twitching
AS details leak out regarding President Clinton's economic plan, the financial markets are getting nervous.
Not necessarily scared, but jerky.
There are good reasons for such concerns.
While public attention in Washington focused on nannies and gay soldiers, the emerging Clinton economic strategy appears to be based on lessons learned from Ronald Reagan: A President's power is greatest at the beginning of an Administration, while the economic statistics are most important in the last year of a term.


Special Tools Help Drywall Installation
GYPSUM wallboard is a nearly ubiquitous building material.
But because it comes only in large heavy panels, amateurs new to remodeling often find it intimidating to order and install on their own.
Here is a basic guide to the steps, including tips that can benefit even experienced amateurs.
Finishing wallboard, which consists of covering seams and fasteners with tape and filler, is not discussed.


An Italian Festival
The Consul General of Italy honors Gianfranco Ferre at the Italian Consulate, Feb. 8.


Hanna Casper, Roger George
Gerhard Casper, the president of Stanford University, and his wife, Dr.
Regina Casper, both of Stanford, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Hanna Yael Casper, to Roger Edward George, a son of Helen Frankenfield of Myrtle Beach, S.C.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Casper, 25, graduated magna cum laude, with distinction in history, from Yale University.
She is a third-year law student at the University of Virginia.
Her mother is a professor of psychiatry at the Stanford Medical School.


Correction
An editorial on Sunday, Jan. 31, misattributed the "perfect Super Bowl question." Duane Thomas, a running back for the Dallas Cowboys, was asked whether Super Bowl V would be the ultimate game.
He said, "They're playing it again next year, aren't they?"


The New Gadgets: Do You Need Them?
What the world needs now, the electronics business thinks, is a format war.
The contenders are Sony's mini-disk (MD) unit, marketed as a portable replacement for cassette players, and Philips's digital compact cassette (DCC) machine, a home stereo component that plays and records the new DCC's as well as plays familiar (analog) cassettes.
The sales pitch is that both devices will provide digital recording capability
and
be supported by major labels releasing prerecorded music.
Will MD or DCC take off commercially the way compact disks did?
Or will they go the way of the Betamax, quadrophonic sound and the eight-track cassette?
To get an idea, I've been toying with both new machines, switching between CD, MD and DCC, at home and with a higher-quality system elsewhere.
So far, I haven't been impressed.


From Seed, the Journey to the Perfect Plant
THOSE who grow their own plants from seed find there is something rather special in the doing.
Of course, many gardeners would rather wait until late spring and buy the few vegetable or annual seedlings they need.
But just as many delight in growing their own plants from seed.
The greatest advantage in growing your own is the selection possibilities.
Many times some of the more unusual flowers or vegetables are not available from garden centers.
Also, seed sharing is one of the strongest binds in gardening friendships.


Book of Speeches to Mine Cuomo's Silver Tongue
Saying that he wants to "find every way I can to get the truth out about New York State," Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is planning to publish a book of favorite speeches he has delivered over the years.
"I'm not offering them as demonstrations of artistry, but as a description of the central ideas that I believe have been at the heart of the New York proposition for the last dozen or so years," Mr.
Cuomo said last week.


No So Fast on Competition Changes
Top officers from the United States Olympic Committee came to the organization's board meeting this weekend with two ambitious notions, then quickly backed down today on both fronts.
The first idea, hatched at a recent retreat for the officers and supported by Dr.
LeRoy Walker, president of the U.S.O.C., would have eliminated an unspecified number of American athletes from future Olympics who qualified but were deemed to be non-contenders.
The concept was debated today in a town-hall forum and elicited strong, negative feelings.


No Safe Sex, Please. It's Fiction.
Jackie Collins has prefaced her next steamy romance novel with a warning.
Following the title page of "American Star," which Simon &amp; Schuster will publish in early April, there is this disclaimer:


Manager Showalter Meets the Meddler
The grainy black-and-white picture on the television screen displays a high school football game from 21 years ago.
There are no snazzy cleats, no fancy uniforms and no high-fives.
Just a tiny team from the Florida panhandle, Century High School, rolling over the toughest competition in the state behind a skinny, left-handed quarterback named Nat Showalter.
Fast forward nine years, switch the videotape and Nat has become Buck, a minor league nickname that has stuck.
He is a .300 hitter for the Yankees' Class AA club in Nashville and sports sideburns that would now make the teen-agers from Beverly Hills drool.
Showalter is batting fifth and playing first base and he is preceded in the lineup by future major leaguers Don Mattingly, Willie McGee and Otis Nixon.
Incidentally, Mattingly is in left field.


Oy Gevalt! New Yawkese An Endangered Dialect?
Tawk to a young New Yawkuh dese days and de foist ting you may notice is dat he aw she don't tawk like dis no maw.
Although New Yorkers' emphatic, finger-in-the-chest style of talking is alive and well, the oi of Toidy-Toid Street, the er of Erster Bar and the dises, dems and doses of legend have gone the way of Automats, Ebbets Field and American-born taxi drivers.


Karen Fein, J. C. McAlhany 3d
Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth Fein of New Canaan, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Karen Elizabeth S. Fein to Joseph Carlisle McAlhany 3d, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
McAlhany Jr. of Greenville, S.C.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Fein, 24, graduated from Bryn Mawr College.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in Chinese literature at Columbia University.
Her father is the executive vice president of Falcon Electronics, a distributor of electronic products in Milford, Conn.
Her mother is the company's president.


Habyan Loses In Arbitration
Continuing to execute better off the field than on, the Yankees extended their salary arbitration winning streak yesterday.
An arbitrator, Theodore High, ruled for the Yankees and against John Habyan, a relatively low-paid member of their relief-pitching corps.
Clubs have won six cases this year, players three.


FEB. 7-13: Uncommon in Boston; How Many Perks Should A University Head Get?
First it was the chairmen of some Fortune 500 companies who came under fire with their multimillion-dollar stock options.
Then the chief of the United Way had to resign after disclosures about his half-million-dollar salary and perks.
Now, it seems, the get-rich-quick ethos of the 80's may have spread to academia.
John R. Silber, the combative 66-year-old president of Boston University, is being investigated by the Massachusetts Attorney General because of his unusually high pay and his financial ties with some of the university's trustees.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Monday
Early Feb. auto sales, millions, annual rate
7.6
6.3
Wednesday
Jan. housing starts, millions, annual rate
1.3
1.3
Jan. building permits, millions, annual rate
1.21
1.22
Thursday
Jan. consumer price index, percent change
0.1
0.2
Dec. trade deficit, billions of dollars
7.6
8.0
Jan. industrial production, percent change
0.3
0.5
Monday: Holiday  Wednesday: President Clinton gives State of the Union speech  Thursday: Alan Greenspan gives semiannual Humphrey Hawkins speech


Court Sets Deadline for Statewide Mediation
THE State Supreme Court last week called for a far-reaching change in the way municipal courts handle thousands of minor disputes.
The court required that by the end of the year, all the state's 535 municipal courts must have access to so-called neighborhood dispute resolution programs.
As it now stands, when your neighbor refuses to turn down his stereo or keep his dog off your lawn, you can sign a police complaint and go through the anxiety and inconvenience of a trial.
Or, if you happen to live in a municipality that has a neighborhood dispute resolution program, you may find yourself and your neighbor in front of a mediator instead of a judge.


Kotite Reaps Reward Of Successful Season
NORMAN BRAMAN, the owner of the Philadelphia Eagles, likes a coach who is decisive, a coach like RICH KOTITE, who took the Eagles to the playoffs last season in his second year as head coach.
Come to think of it, Braman is a decisive sort himself, decisive enough, anyway, that when he thought about extending Kotite's contract he went ahead and did it, tagging on an extra year that will give Kotite job security through the 1994 season.  (AP)


Mutual Funds; When Gold Funds Didn't Shine
EVEN though gold is viewed as a haven in times of international turmoil or when inflation spikes, it is the only stock fund category to have lost value in the 10 years ended Jan. 31.
What happened?
For one, gold prices weakened as the supply of gold and gold derivatives increased.
And South African mining stocks, which account for the biggest share of these funds' holdings, have seen bad times.


FEB. 7-13: North Korea; A Showdown Looms Over a Nuclear Site
After its embarrassment in Iraq, where it failed to detect an advanced nuclear weapons project begun years before the Persian Gulf war, the International Atomic Energy Agency made a vow: not again in North Korea.
Now the agency, an affiliate of the United Nations, is about to face the first real test of its resolve.
For months it has been sending teams of inspectors to Yongbyon, the heavily guarded nuclear site that North Korea kept sealed until overwhelming international pressure forced it to open the gate last May.
The inspectors found much to suggest a bomb project, but no smoking gun.
In November, they took the North Koreans by surprise by asking to see two nearby buildings that intelligence reports -- presumably supplied by the United States -- suggest were being used as a makeshift nuclear waste dump.
If true, the waste could provide evidence the Communist regime of Kim Il Sung has been producing far more plutonium than it has admitted.
The inspectors have been repeatedly refused entry, most recently in an inspection that ended 10 days ago.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
R.I.P. for Pets
HOWARD GLASSMAN used to make attache cases.
Now he makes pet coffins.
"It's a different economy," he said.
"You have to go with the flow."
A manufacturing visionary, Mr.
Glassman reasoned that the recession meant fewer yuppies' carrying briefcases, but not fewer pets' dying or owners' grieving.
With all the love that pets give, he said, animals deserve to go out in style.


Erie County Entangled in Sales-Tax Feud
For the second time in two years, Erie County faces drastic cutbacks in everything from law-enforcement and social programs to library and museum operations because of what many see as a political food fight.
By a single vote, the Erie County Legislature failed to meet a deadline of midnight Thursday for reauthorization of the county's 8 percent sales tax.
Barring a last-minute reprieve, the sales tax will revert to 7 percent on March 1, costing the county $88 million a year.


In Westport, 1 Director, 2 Plays and 3 Actors
FROM the late 1940's to the early 1950's, Christopher Fry was England's premier playwright.
His themes, characters and language were elevated, elegant and whimsical.
Then his star was eclipsed by John Osborne, who jolted the establishment with rudeness and anger.
End of crash course in dated British drama.
Christopher Fry?
John Osborne?
To contemporary theatergoers such once-celebrated names have been relegated to academic references and archival obscurity.
Credit the directors of the Fairfield County Stage Company in Westport for having a go at Fry esoterica, but bless them for getting Nancy Marchand to dust it off.


Outspoken Judge Enlivens Quiet Court
The Connecticut Supreme Court, the state's highest appeals panel, has not been a place of flash and dazzle.
Known until the 1960's by the unfortunate formal title of the Supreme Court of Errors, the seven-member panel has been seen as a conservative, often technical-minded body that generally shuns sweeping constitutional pronouncements in favor of unanimous, bland consensus.
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. seems bent on changing all that, and Associate Justice Robert I. Berdon is leading the charge.


Printers Inc.
READ ALL ABOUT IT!
The Corporate Takeover of America's Newspapers.
By James D. Squires. 244 pp.
New York: Times Books/Random House. $20.


POSTINGS: 2 Midtown Seminars; Advice on Revitalizing Main Street
Over the last couple of years the New York Main Street Alliance, a nonprofit business education group, has cosponsored six workshops -- five upstate, one on Long Island -- on how to revitalize "main street" businesses.
Response was so good, said Peter Mosbacher, the alliance's executive director, that it's bringing the show to New York City.
The workshop, cosponsored by the city's Department of Business Services, will be held two mornings, Feb. 24 and 25, at the Municipal Art Society, 457 Madison Avenue near 48th Street.
It will kick off with a video on three successes: Myrtle Avenue in the Ridgewood section of Queens and streets in Far Rockaway, Queens, and Burnside Avenue in the Morris Heights section of the Bronx.
The focus will then shift to how local Development Corporations can help.


The Pope Confronts Islam
Pope John Paul II returned home from his 10th African tour last week after a journey that, while restating some of the Vatican's most familiar principles of personal morality, seemed more than ever to sharpen the distinctions between Christianity and Islamic fundamentalism.
The eight-day journey took the Pope first to Benin, Africa's so-called "Cradle of Voodoo," then on to Uganda, the epicenter of the continent's AIDS epidemic, and finally to the Sudan, where a fundamentalist-backed military regime is fighting a civil war with Christians and animists that some of his bishops have called genocide.


To Meet Ashe Was to Remember Him
To the Sports Editor:
I met Arthur Ashe twice.
The first time was 20 years ago, the second 10 years ago.
He made the same lasting impression on me that he made on many people and for those who never met him, the story of our meeting is worth retelling.


Special Guests
Iris Love's party salutes Westminster show dogs. Tavern on the Green, Feb. 8.


Rise of Christian Right Splits a City
Stung by a real estate market that left shopping plazas and office buildings empty in the mid-80's, this city began to use its reputation for conservatism to tap a growing field of employment: evangelical Christian organizations.
In the view of economic developers, these were enterprises that could invigorate commerce without fouling the natural splendor here at the foot of Pikes Peak.
And the religious groups believed they could fit comfortably in a community that prizes the conservative ethic.


Business Partners


Commercial Property: Bartering Real Estate; A 'Creative Way' To Dump a Lease
LUFTHANSA GERMAN AIRLINES had an all-too-common problem: It was consolidating its operations and it no longer needed the 2,000 square feet of retail space it occupied on Lexington and 59th Street.
It had a long lease and was paying $250 a square foot, nearly twice what the space could command on the open market.
Lufthansa had options.
It could keep the unneeded space through 2009, when its lease runs out.
It could sublet it, and get maybe 55 cents on the dollar.
Or, it could trade it for advertising time and aviation fuel worth the face value of the lease.


GUNMEN, $150 A DAY
Jane Perlez's Endpaper on Somalia (Life and Times: "Gunmen, $150 a Day," Jan. 24) was flawed and inaccurate.
The Perlez view, as we see it, is that too many television crews, "with too much equipment," arrived late, when the worst was over.


North Korea Spurns Nuclear Agency Demand
North Korea, in a growing challenge to the International Atomic Energy Agency, said late on Saturday that it would reject a demand to inspect two sites believed linked to its suspected nuclear weapons project.
If the effort is pressed, it warned, it will take a "countermeasure for self-defense."
In a defiantly worded dispatch issued by the Korean Central News Agency, the Communist regime of President Kim Il Sung accused the United States of "trying to attain its sinister purpose" by manipulating the Atomic Energy Agency, a United Nations affiliate, to spy on "military objects" that are not part of what it insists is a civilian nuclear power project.


The Man Who Would Be Liszt
Virtuosity has a bad name in some circles, and Glenn Gould courted and abetted those circles, but music lives by it.
Certainly Gould did; it is central to his special appeal, which is casting its spell anew on a mesmerizing series of videos from Sony Classical.
The first volume of "The Glenn Gould Collection" (on 12 video cassettes or 6 laser disks) includes Beethoven's "Ero ica" Variations, taped in 1960.
Watch the beginning of the fugue.
If you play the piano, imagine what your hands would have to do to produce this kind of clarity at this speed; imagine what electric jolts would have to be coursing through your insides to produce this decisiveness of rhythm, how weightless you would have to feel to ride the long lines without bumping to the ground.
You can't do it.
Only Gould could do it.
This is virtuosity: he could imagine and execute musical maneuvers that were beyond the capacity of others, and the others were, and are, amazed.


Russia Chooses Mediator for Balkan Peace Talks
In a move underscoring Russia's hopes of playing a major role alongside America in resolving the Balkans crisis, Moscow told the Security Council on Friday that it was sending a high ranking expert on the former Yugoslavia to serve as its own mediator in the peace talks under way here.
The envoy, Deputy Foreign Minister Vitaly I. Churkin, who has been directing Russian policy on the Balkans in Moscow, will occupy a similar position to that of Reginald Bartholomew, the senior American diplomat named by President Clinton earlier this week as Washington's special envoy at the New York negotiations.


FEB. 7-13: A Reformer Is Fired; Can Anyone Survive The System To Rebuild New York City's Schools?
If you offer $195,000, will they come?
That is one of the many troubling questions being asked after the New York City Board of Education last week ousted Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez, the highest paid school official in the country.


No Longer Rock's Playthings
Kim Gordon crouches in a miniskirt, her words balancing rage and desire above Sonic Youth's nervous guitars.
Headlining a benefit concert for reproductive rights, Donita Sparks of the all-female group L7 curls her lip, carves out a guitar riff and snarls into the mike: "Get out of my way or I might shove." Courtney Love stares boldly from a photograph in Spin magazine, baby to breast, her ratty hair and decidedly un-Barbie-like body breaking the dictums of feminine convention.
Kathleen Hanna of Bikini Kill gives the microphone to a girl in the audience at a show, and the fan pours out her own stories of abuse and escape.
Female rebellion has challenged rock's fraternal order since the beginning; some women have always insisted they would rather play than be playthings.
But today women, especially on the alternative rock scene, have entered a new phase of awareness and determination.
The reproductive rights movement in rock, spearheaded by L7 and the organization Rock for Choice, grew to national proportion in the last year.
Now female rockers are beginning to extend that activism into the realm of identity politics, with groups like the Bohemian Women's Political Alliance and youth subcultures like riot grrrls.


How to Extract the Poisonous Fangs From a Hateful Word
To the Editor:
In writing a biography of the blues guitarist Stevie Ray Vaughan, Joe Nick Patoski and I had to grapple with many of the issues concerning the use of the word "nigger" you discuss in "Rap's Embrace of 'Nigger' Fires Bitter Debate" (front page, Jan. 24).


Made in Connecticut: Public Opinion on Detroit
FOR more than a quarter of a century, Robert D. Knoll has been viewing Detroit, figuratively speaking, from a vantage point in Connecticut -- and sometimes reacting as if he had just tasted a lemon, or bought one.
From a former drag strip in East Haddam, Mr.
Kroll is in charge of testing cars for Consumer Reports, the monthly magazine whose 5.1 million subscribers are interested in getting the most for their consumer dollar.


Corrections
An essay on Jan. 24 about Paris, past and present, mistranslated the phrase "C'est sympa d'etre celiba taire." As used by the Eurofit Club, it means "It's fun to be single," not celibate.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEARNING TO DANCE And Other Stories.
By Sharon Oard Warner.
New Rivers Press, paper, $7.95.


Sports of The Times; Violence, Violence, Everywhere
AND a happy St.
Valentine's Day to you.
The subject for today is violence.
I've been meaning to get back to the Riddick Bowe-Michael Dokes travesty at Madison Square Garden last Saturday night, but first let's skip quickly through yesterday's paper.
Violence.
Michael Jordan properly suspended for punching and head-butting Reggie Miller.
The National Basketball Association did it even though the Bulls had a big national cable-television game with the Knicks on Friday night.


The Prairie as an Act of Devotion
DAKOTA
A Spiritual Geography.
By Kathleen Norris. 224 pp.
New York: Ticknor &amp; Fields. $19.95.


Political Memo; Amendment on Budget Shows Power in Revival
Before they defeated the balanced-budget amendment by a handful of votes last year, House opponents described it as the constitutional equivalent of hanging garlic in the window to ward off vampires.
Those vampires are back again, in the form of mounting deficits and angry voters frightened that the national debt will impoverish their children.
And so is the same improbable coalition of Congressional conservatives and liberals pressing for another vote on the amendment in the spring, and hoping to enlist Ross Perot's United We Stand America organization to push them to victory.


Communist Party Chief Calls for a Purge in Tibet
The newly appointed Communist Party leader of Tibet is calling for a purge of officials who do not take a tough enough stance against the Dalai Lama, according to a confidential speech smuggled out of Tibet.
The speech suggests that the Chinese authorities are planning a further crackdown in the region.
It also underscores the party's apprehension that some officials are nominally Communists but remain secretly loyal to the Dalai Lama, the Tibetan spiritual leader, who fled Tibet in 1959 and now lives in India.


Recent Sales
East Meadow  $211,500
381 Bellmore Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 31-year-old split level; dining room, family room, finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $7,200.
Glen Head  $275,000
2 Cedar Lane  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 65-year-old Tudor; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, fireplace, oak floors, plaster walls; taxes $2,300.
Great River  $682,500
351 Great River Road  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 17-year-old brick colonial; family room, study, sunroom, deck, 2-car garage; taxes $14,000.
Kings Park  $172,000
5 Bowman Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 24-year-old ranch; dining room, family room, basement, pool, deck; taxes $5,700.
Nissequogue  $280,000
152 Wilderness Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 27-year-old contemporary; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, deck, 2 acres; taxes $7,400.
Sea Cliff  $235,000
57 12th Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 100-year-old Victorian; dining room, new eat-in kitchen, fireplace, wraparound porch; taxes $1,600.
OTHER AREAS Willington, Conn.  $131,500
19 Burt Latham Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 22-year-old ranch; large deck, formal dining room, family room, 1.2 acres; taxes not available.
Mount Vernon, N.Y.  $302,500
244 Primrose Avenue  6-bedroom, 3 1/2-bathroom, 63-year-old Tudor: sunroom, dining room, modern eat-in kitchen, den, wine cellar; taxes $6,991.
Basking Ridge, N.J.  $320,000
19 Coppergate Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old colonial; porch, updated kitchen; taxes $4,277.


Conflict, Fury, Highs, Lows And Humidity
A cold front is bearing down on the Northeast like the 82d Airborne on red alert.
Unless something is done about it, it will be here by sunrise.
But of course, nothing can be done about it.
That is the tragedy, the pathos, the great ineluctable drama of our inconstant climate.
And that drama, in turn, is perhaps why we watch the Weather Channel.


Memorial for New Jersey Marine Killed in Somalia


Symphonist


A Decision: Feuds, Phone Calls and Fernandez
Claire Shulman, the Queens Borough President, had not slept well, agonizing through the night over which way to go on the New York City Schools Chancellor's future.
It was 8 A.M. the day before the Board of Education's vote.
Mrs.
Shulman was still in her nightclothes, but it was time for a decision.
She phoned Carol A. Gresser, her appointee on the board, whose vote would be decisive.
For weeks, they had been discussing whether to renew Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez's contract.
They went over all the same ground again.


Women Who Were Photographers
I am surprised at the headline "Four Who Photographed for Stieglitz," which appeared over the review by Helen A. Harrison on Jan. 31.
The esteemed women about whom Ms.
Harrison writes did not photograph "for Stieglitz," even though their work appeared in Camera Work, the publication he initiated and edited.
Gertrude Kasebier was a highly acclaimed and highly paid New York portraitist, Eve Watson-Schutze's name was said to be a "household word" in Philadelphia, and Alice Boughton specialized in theatrical work.
Along with West Coast photographer Anne Brigman, these women were part of a larger group who in the late 19th century turned to the medium as a means of personal expression.
They would have photographed had Camera Work and Stieglitz not existed.
NAOMI ROSENBLUM Long Island City The writer is author of "A World History of Photograpy."


Berliners Object to Doubts Over New Capital
Berlin officials are complaining that continued debate over this city's future as the German capital is upsetting potential investors and hindering the process of national unification.
Parliament voted in June 1991 to move the federal Government from Bonn, where it has been for more than 40 years, to its traditional home in Berlin.
At the time the vote was taken, officials estimated that the move would cost $7 billion.


A Requiem in Images For the Victims Of a Japanese Disaster
THE deadly effects of mercury have been known for as long as the element has been mined, which is many millenniums.
Yet the effects seem always to have been taken for granted, as in the case of the Mad Hatter, who is not so much an invention of Lewis Carroll as a fact of industrial life in 19th-century England.
Mercury, or quicksilver, was a vital ingredient in the manufacture of hats like that worn by the character in Tenniel's illustrations for "Alice in Wonderland."
Came the 20th century and the chemical was still as commonplace in industry and photography darkrooms as well as in medicine, where it was used as a cathartic and as a treatment for syphilis.


NOTES
Cher, who is seen nowadays mostly in infomercials for hair- and skin-care products, apparently doesn't want to spend much more time chatting on a couch.
She just turned down an offer from Fox Television for her own talk show.
"That had been discussed but it isn't going to happen," said Cher's spokeswoman, Lois Smith.
"Do we
need
one more talk show?"
The television adaptation of "Tales of the City," Armistead Maupin's chronicle of gay and straight life in San Francisco, is likely to star Olympia Dukakis in the role of Mrs.
Madrigal, the landlady at 28 Barbary Lane, where all the main characters live.
"We are in negotiations," said her agent, Gene Parseghian.
The six-hour series will be produced by Channel 4, the commercial British network.


The Derby Winner? Try Picking a Starter First
The Kentucky Derby will be run 10 weeks from next Saturday, and the toll is already mounting.
Gilded Time, the early favorite since he won the Breeders' Cup Juvenile last fall, is undefeated in four starts in his young career but he has been troubled by a persistent foot injury and missed 12 days of work.
He probably won't run in the principal early prep race on the West Coast, the San Rafael, in two weeks.


Patricia Durner, Stephen Verdesca
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Durner of Allentown, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Patricia Kay Durner to Dr.
Stephen Arthur Verdesca, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Arthur Verdesca of Morristown, N.J.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Durner, 29, graduated from Hamilton College.
She is an editor of Bank Securities Journal and Bank Insurance Marketing, magazines published by I.D.D., financial publishers in New York.
Her father is an accountant in Allentown, where her mother, Marilyn M. Durner, teaches home economics at Springhouse Junior High School.


Duck Breasts Make for Easier Cooking
MOST people cook duck one way: whole and in the oven.
The problem with roasting it is that when the legs are done, the breast is often dry.
But now it is becoming increasingly easy to find duck breasts sold separately in good butcher shops and specialty stores.
Duck breasts are simple to cook, low in fat (if you don't eat the skin) and make perfect meals for two people.
The other day at the Farmers Market in Manhattan's Union Square I bought one whole duck breast (two halves) that provided more than enough meat for two meals.
On one night we had the duck hot with vegetables, and the following day we served the leftover meat with a frisee salad.
Duck breast salad makes an excellent first course, light supper or lunch dish, and it is at its best when the greens are chilled and the duck is still warm.
The flavor of the meat is brought out by Chinese spices, and goes very well with young greens in a vinaigrette flavored with walnut oil and toasted hazelnuts or a mustardy balsamic dressing served with frisee lettuce.


The Week of the Economy
On Wednesday President Clinton, who in his campaign promised better economic times, will finally reveal his program.
He is expected to propose measures to create jobs and to shrink the Federal deficit.
Since Election Day, the economy has shown signs of improving.
But many problems remain.
The two coasts continue to suffer very high unemployment.
Markets for America's exports are in the doldrums, and major corporations are shedding jobs.


From Seed, the Journey to the Perfect Plant
THOSE who grow their own plants from seed find there is something rather special in the doing.
Of course, many gardeners would rather wait until late spring and buy the few vegetable or annual seedlings they need.
But just as many delight in growing their own plants from seed.
The greatest advantage in growing your own is the selection possibilities.
Many times some of the more unusual flowers or vegetables are not available from garden centers.
Also, seed sharing is one of the strongest binds in gardening friendships.


Holiday Tomorrow
Washington's Birthday will be observed tomorrow. Here are holiday schedules. NEW YORK
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal, state, and city closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Option to close.
PARKING Alternate-side rules suspended.
SANITATION No pickups, street cleanings, or recycling.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Buses, subways, Long Island Rail Road and Metro-North on holiday schedules.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal and state closed, local option to close.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Option to close.
SCHOOLS Option to close.
TRANSPORTATION N.J. Transit will be on holiday schedules. CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal and state closed, local option to close.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION New Haven Line on holiday schedule.


1993 Guides Are Issued
Michelin has published its 1993 Red Guides to Italy and Germany.
In the Italy guide, Enoteca Pinchiorri, a restaurant in Florence, was promoted from two stars to three, Michelin's highest rating, and the Ambasciata in Quistello in northern Italy got a second star.
Eighteen restaurants were newly granted one star.
In the guide to Germany, the Schwarzwaldstube, a French restaurant in Baiersbronn, east of Strasbourg, France, was awarded a third star.
Another French restaurant, L'ecole, in Bad Laasphe, east of Cologne, gained a second star, as did Weinhaus Bruckenkeller in Frankfurt.
There are 21 new one-star restaurants.


THE ECONOMY: PROBLEMS AND REMEDIES UNEVEN RECOVERY The Pacific UNEMPLOYMENT: 8.9% Declines in the aerospace, banking, real estate and entertainment industries have taken the bloom off the California perennial. And environmental regulation, traffic congestion and land-use restrictions may slow growth for a long time. The Mountains and Southwest  UNEMPLOYMNET: 6.6% This diversified economy has proved better equipped than most to weather the recession. Now it has a chance to pick off the high-technology plums from California, whose problems have left some businesses disillusioned. "UNEVEN RECOVERY" Trouble on Two Coasts A slow, unbalanced recovery means hard times for California and the Northeast, along with stagnating living standards across the nation. While regional disparities are common, the strains of adjustment are particularly acute this time. By January, when the national unemployment rate had fallen to 7.1 percent, two of the regions below had jobless rates that were considerably higher. And that spells big trouble for Washington, which must reconcile pressures to get the sluggards moving without overheating the economy as a whole. "UNEMPLOYMENT" Regional rates in January. The Midwest UNEMPLOYMENT: 6.2% The rust belt wasn't invited to the economic party of the 1980's. But by missing the real-estate boom, it escaped the hangover afflicting other regions. Slimmed-down manufacturers are benefiting from export growth. The South UNEMPLOYMENT: 6.8% Low wages and pro-business governments give the region an edge in attracting cost-conscious industry. But much of the South still lacks a highly-skilled work force. And the suburban sprawls of Florida and Texas are feeling the strains of pollution and congestion. The Northeast UNEMPLOYMENT: 7.9% The Northeast has had many problems in common with California. Connecticut is undergoing the agony of military procurement cutbacks; Massachusetts is suffering from shakeouts in the computer industry and in banking. Increased profits at banks and on Wall Street are beginning to help New York, but the region's old industrial cities may never regain their former vibrancy. "STAGNANT LIVING STANDARDS" Income Has Eroded Americans enjoy the highest living standard in the world. But for the past two decades, pay has slid, and more Americans households have had to have two income earners to produce even modest gains in family incomes. The wages and benefits of younger, less educated wo


A Minor Paper Cut Could Rip Mets Apart
Call the Mets crazy, but they are prepared to open spring training this week with another announcement of energy and optimism.
All limbs of consequence have been reattached; all wounds of the psyche have been healed by a winter of blessed silence and relative anonymity, and all signs indicate a diminished level of competition in the National League East.


A Political Whodunit; Suspects Abound in the Downfall of Harold M. Ickes
Late on the night of Jan. 13, in the Governor's Mansion in Little Rock, Ark., Harold McEwen Ickes had a painful conversation with a friend he had known since they protested the Vietnam War together.
They should have been exultant, since Mr.
Ickes had just spent more than a year helping to make that friend President of the United States.
For weeks, Bill Clinton's team had made no secret that Mr.
Ickes, a liberal New York labor lawyer who had lent his tactical canny to a string of losing Presidential campaigns, was the leading choice to be deputy chief of staff.
After all, he had headed Mr.
Clinton's primary campaign in New York, managed the Democratic Convention and been deputy director of the transition.
Agreed That He Should Withdraw
But there, on the night before Mr.
Clinton was to announce his senior staff appointments, Clinton aides told Mr.
Ickes for the first time that his law firm was under investigation for its work for a union that Federal prosecutors say was mob-controlled.
The two old friends agreed that Mr.
Ickes should withdraw.


Special Tools Help Drywall Installation
GYPSUM wallboard is a nearly ubiquitous building material.
But because it comes only in large heavy panels, amateurs new to remodeling often find it intimidating to order and install on their own.
Here is a basic guide to the steps, including tips that can benefit even experienced amateurs.
Finishing wallboard, which consists of covering seams and fasteners with tape and filler, is not discussed.


SHOULD DOCTORS TELL THE TRUTH?
Surely, "truth dumping" by physicians can have adverse effects, but patients also must take responsibility for directing these interactions.
Recently, in the course of investigating a serious symptom, I informed my doctor that I did not wish to accompany him on a "rule-out journey," as he considered the various diagnostic possibilities.
My reason was this: The more I knew, the more anxious I would become, thereby causing further stress to my immune system.


Sandra Bell, Randolph Calhoune
Mr. and Mrs.
Fred C. Bell of Milton, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Sandra Jean Bell to Randolph P. Calhoune, a son of the late Jack Calhoune and Mildred Calhoune.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Bell, 26, is an investigator with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in Boston.
She and her fiance graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is a health science specialist at the Boston Veteran's Administration Medical Center in Jamaica Plain, Mass.
Her mother, Dr.
Anne Bell, is a psychiatrist at the Veteran's Administration Medical Center in Brockton, Mass., and has a private practice in Milton.


POSTINGS: New Headquarters; Banco Di Roma Buys on East 51st
Joining the ranks of banks relocating from lower Manhattan to Midtown, Banco Di Roma has bought 34 East 51st Street for its New York headquarters.
The 10-story, 42,000-square-foot building sold for $11.9 million.
Banco Di Roma had been leasing offices at 100 Wall Street.


Tuition Made Fairer
To the Editor:
"Tuition Made Easy" (Op-Ed, Feb. 4), John Silber's plan for an educational endowment fund, shifts the full burden of tuition to the student, while spreading payments over the years a student's employment generates income.
However, the plan encourages runaway tuition increases by making tuition payments relatively painless.


Duck Breasts Make for Easier Cooking
MOST people cook duck one way: whole and in the oven.
The problem with roasting it is that when the legs are done, the breast is often dry.
But now it is becoming increasingly easy to find duck breasts sold separately in good butcher shops and specialty stores.
Duck breasts are simple to cook, low in fat (if you don't eat the skin) and make perfect meals for two people.
The other day at the Farmers Market in Manhattan's Union Square I bought one whole duck breast (two halves) that provided more than enough meat for two meals.
On one night we had the duck hot with vegetables, and the following day we served the leftover meat with a frisee salad.
Duck breast salad makes an excellent first course, light supper or lunch dish, and it is at its best when the greens are chilled and the duck is still warm.
The flavor of the meat is brought out by Chinese spices, and goes very well with young greens in a vinaigrette flavored with walnut oil and toasted hazelnuts or a mustardy balsamic dressing served with frisee lettuce.


Karen Roskind, Robert J. Sobel
Karen Denise Roskind, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert G. Roskind Jr. of Sherborn, Mass., was married last evening to Robert Joseph Sobel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney Sobel of Roslyn, L.I.
Rabbi Daniel H. Liben officiated at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Boston.


A Nation of Decent, Law-Breaking Citizens
SISSELA BOK, the country's greatest authority on lying and cheating, wants a national amnesty declared.
After all, President Carter did it for draft evaders.
And who is to come shuffling forward this time, begging forgiveness?


Heather Atwood, David Rabin
Carole C. Fitch of Boxford, Mass., and Jacob M. Atwood of Boston have announced the engagement of their daughter, Heather Anne Atwood, to Dr.
David Louis Rabin, the son of Sydell and Arnold Rabin of Maplewood, N.J.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Atwood, 32, a painter, lives in East Thetford, Vt.
She graduated from Simmons College and received a master's degree in painting from Dartmouth College, from which her fiance received an M.D. degree.
Her father is the senior partner with Atwood &amp; Cherney, a law firm in Boston.
Her mother is a mental health care worker for Fidelity House Inc., a nonprofit organization in Lawrence, Mass., that provides care and opportunities for the mentally handicapped.
The prospective bride is also a stepdaughter of John Fitch of Boxford.


Positional Finesse, Then a Grand Finale
FOR many players, the ideal way to win is to outplay your opponent positionally and create one or more combinations that deliver the coup de grace.
Why the combinational finish?
Because strong opponents rarely collapse unless hit with high-power ammunition.
This was the pattern in Games 2, 3 and 4 of the Judit Polgar-Boris Spassky exhibition being played in Budapest.
For depth of combination, maybe the 16-year-old Polgar's victory in Game 4 of the $200,000 match is pre-eminent.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
LIFT EVERY VOICE AND SING.
By James Weldon Johnson.
Illustrated by Elizabeth Catlett.
Walker. $14.95. (All ages) The text to the well-known and well-loved black anthem, written for Lincoln's Birthday 1900, is set on pages facing powerful linocut illustrations made and printed by a distinguished black artist in 1946 and 1947.
The music and lyric appear at the end.


Paul McCartney Reaches for Past Glory
Paul McCartney lights on a surprising variety of topics on his new album, "Off the Ground." There is an angry broadside against vivisection, a bit of populist utopianism, a starry-eyed paean to nature's beauty, a couple of Elvis Costello collaborations that peek at the dark side of romance and, as one expects from a McCartney album, a few ballads celebrating naive, untroubled love.
If there is a unifying undercurrent, it is McCartney's determination to have his work reconsidered.
It's no secret that he was disappointed by the failure of his last studio outing, "Flowers in the Dirt" in 1989, to reach the top of the charts, despite critical enthusiasm and a world tour that broke attendance records.
Many of his fans wanted only to bask in Beatles and Wings hits and were hardly tempted by the new material.


Expressway Noise Walls Disputed
IN 1914 Robert Frost wrote, "Something there is that doesn't love a wall." In 1993 a lot of folks who live next to the towering new noise walls of the Long Island Expressway would call Frost a man of great vision.
"The Wall," as it has come to be known, snakes almost continuously along both sides of the superhighway between Exits 41 and 58.
It varies in height from 12 to 30 feet, depending on the topography and the traffic noise.


Driver Listed as Serious
RODNEY WHITE, the 37-year-old driver from Gaffney, S.C., who was injured on Friday in the crash at Daytona Beach, Fla., that killed Joe Booher, 51, of Montmorenci, Ind., was still listed in serious but stable condition at Halifax Medical Center in Daytona Beach, according to LARRY BALEWSKI, a track spokesman.


Jennifer Corwin, David J. Glick
Dr. and Mrs.
Martin E. Corwin of Livingston, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jennifer Beth Corwin, to David Jay Glick, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph A. Glick of Wilmington, Del.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Corwin, 30, is an associate at the Washington law firm of Van Ness, Feldman &amp; Curtis.
She graduated from Johns Hopkins University and received a law degree from George Washington University.
Her father is chief of the ophthalmology department at St.
Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston.
Her mother, Rellye Corwin, is a travel agent at Travel in Style in Livingston.


Birthday Party
Gettysburg College honors a historian.  Pierpont Morgan Library, Feb. 11.


Education in the Arts Is an Education for Life
To the Editor:
The dire state of the arts in school curriculums, which you discuss in "As Schools Trim Budgets, the Arts Lose Their Place" (front page, Feb. 3), is as much about the perception of art as about budgetary constraints.
Too often the arts are viewed as a frill.
However, serious study of the arts is one of the best ways to educate a young person for college and work.


Entrepreneurial Energy Sets Off a Chinese Boom
A few years ago, Wang Junjin was a traveling salesman, a Chinese Willy Loman whose second home was a ponderous, creaking sardine can of a train carrying him 38 hours each way to the factories in Hunan Province that bought his badges and insignias.
Mr. Wang found a better way. He and his brother started an airline.


Evolution Among the Fakes
There's a whimsical fake-fur coat that's perfect for Feb. 14.
It's printed all over in multicolored hearts on a black background of plush fabric that resembles beaver.
The coat just happens to be one of the most worn about town this winter.
City streets sometimes seem like zoos, with the proliferation of fake furs in exaggerated animal patterns fashioned after zebras, tigers and Holstein cattle.
Leopard spots range from those resembling the black dots of Somali leopards, which recall campy images of Gloria Swanson in matching coat and turban, to the spoof of Vivien Westwood's leopard coat with its magnified spots.
And for those who will have none of the animal markings, a favorite is the clock-walker's coat.


Jill Grossman, Steven Walder
Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth S. Grossman of Great Neck, L.I., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Jill Ellen Grossman and Steven Gary Walder, a son of Justin P. Walder of Short Hills, N.J., and Ellen Walder of North Miami, Fla.
Ms.
Grossman, 25, is the assistant line coordinator for Wilroy Inc. in New York, a maker of women's apparel, of which her father is the president.
She graduated from Boston University and is to receive a master of arts degree from New York University in May.
Her father also is the chairman and chief executive of Brownstone Studio Inc. in New York, a women's clothing catalogue, for which her mother, Joan Grossman, is the product development manager.


Tracey Taylor, C. R. Frattaroli
Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Starke Taylor 3d of Dallas have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Tracey Elizabeth Duggan Taylor and Christopher Robert Frattaroli, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Frattaroli of Morris Township, N.J.
Ms.
Taylor, 26, was the coordinator of President George Bush's Daily Point of Light recognition awards and a member in his re-election campaign staff.
She and her fiance graduated from Duke University.
Her father is the president and founder of Sovereign Asset Management, an investment management company in Dallas.
Ms.
Taylor's grandfather Mr.
Taylor Jr. is a former Mayor of Dallas.


Miss Johnson, Joseph Cece
Mary Laurie Johnson, a lawyer with the Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association College Retirement Equities Fund in New York, was married yesterday to Joseph William Cece, the president and publisher of TV Guide magazine in Radnor, Pa.
The Rev.
Winston Charles performed the ceremony at St.
James's Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Cece, 30, graduated from Randolph-Macon Woman's College and received a law degree from New York University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles E. Johnson Jr. of Anniston, Ala.
Her father, who is retired, was the minister of the Episcopal Church of St.
Michael and All Angels in Anniston and a professor of English at Jacksonville (Ala.) State University, where her mother, Anne Johnson, is a professor of English.


Alicia Grimaldi, Matthew Brzycki
September wedding plans have been announced by Lucian and Audrey Grimaldi of Woodbridge, N.J., for their daughter, Alicia Bernadette Grimaldi, and Matthew Mark Brzycki, a son of Marian Brzycki of Wyoming, Pa.
Miss Grimaldi, 32, is a trade-book editor at Peterson's Guides, a publishing company in Princeton, N.J.
She graduated from Rutgers University.
Her father develops new branches for the APA Truck Leasing Corporation of North Bergen, N.J.
Her mother is the coordinator of junior volunteers at Rahway (N.J.) Hospital.


Street Guns: A Consumer Guide
THE NINES
People seeking guns for personal combat want reliable "stopping power" -- the devastation to human tissue when a bullet strikes.
That requires a bullet with a diameter of 9 millimeters, similar in size to a caliber of .357 of an inch.
Larger bullets have greater stopping power, but must be fired from bigger guns that are hard to conceal, heavy to carry.


Who'll Command U.S. Peacekeepers?
Cautiously, and with little fanfare, the United States is edging away from one of the guiding principles of its foreign policy for the last half-century: when American troops are put in harm's way, they are put there strictly under American command.
In major conflicts like the Korean War and the Persian Gulf war, as well as in many smaller international military enterprises since the end of World War II, the United States has supplied the preponderance of forces and demanded command.
The Pentagon has insisted upon that, and in the person of Gen.
Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, still does, at least as a matter of doctrine.


Whose Story Is History Anyway?
I am amazed and appalled at how the same event can be interpreted in such strikingly different ways.
Dan Heller of Redding (Letters, Jan. 31) says "Capt. John Mason and his English did not massacre the Pequots . . .  In a massacre a defeated and helpless foe is rounded up and killed en masse." He further describes how Mason's forces "chased the Pequots into their fortified village . . ."
Mr.
Heller's interpretation is bizarre.
Neil Asher Silberman describes the burning of the Pequot village at Mystic in "The Pequot Massacres" in the Spring 1989 issue of MHQ: The Quarterly Journal of Military History.


Dites-Moi Pourquoi?
To the Editor:
As much as Rodgers and Hammerstein were trying to play out "messages," they were also trying to entertain millions of people who were trying to forget a world war.
I'm not so sure I would call their more sentimental attempts "icky-poo infantile." Try singing some of those songs to kids -- remember that back then there was such a thing as family entertainment -- and you'll find that they love them.
BETSY FENTRESS St.
Louis


Making a Go of It the Old-Fashioned Way, Through Bartering
AMONG the things Finn Dankilde, owner of the Pampered Pet, in Fishkill, has acquired during the last three years are a second-hand Audi for his daughter at college, the services of an accountant for his business and his personal tax returns, dental care for all four members of his family, tickets to the Virginia Slims tennis finals at Madison Square Garden and meals at good Manhattan restaurants for his wife and himself.
Yet no money changed hands in any of the transactions.
Instead, Mr.
Dankilde paid for everything with credit, the "trade dollars" he gets from barter exchange.
Mr.
Dankilde is a member of the International Trade Exchange, a publicly held barter company with 74 offices and 16,000 members nationwide, known as ITEX.
Increased Purchasing Power
"In terms of volume of business, Westchester is in the top seven nationally," said Bruce Kamm, the head of the New York/Westchester office of ITEX.
Mr.
Kamm recently completed plans to build a Westchester office in Bedford, not for cash but by bartering for building materials and the services of architects and contractors.


Bald Intimidation
Quentin Crisp once defined an existentialist as someone who shaves his head when he begins to lose his hair.
I became an existentialist last spring.
I had been losing hair slowly for four years.
The person who tipped me off to this process was Al Gore.
In 1988, Senator Gore, running in the New York primary, addressed a breakfast meeting in the Grand Ballroom of the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, where I observed him from the balcony reserved for reporters.
Gore, then 39, was billing himself as a Young New Voice.
When I got home, I reported to my wife that the Young New Voice had a patch of thin growth sitting in the center of his head, like a yolk in a fried egg -- whereupon my wife told me that people who lived in thinning heads should not throw stones.


Transit Authority Fixes Damaged Brakes on Subway Cars
Transit Authority engineers have fixed 110 subway cars that were braking to a halt in emergencies well outside safety limits and have begun examining the emergency brakes of the system's other classes of cars, all of which in recent tests failed to meet their specifications, the authority said yesterday.
The agency said it was not necessary to pull the cars out of service immediately because the signal system has a built-in margin of safety to allow for the possibility that trains might not stop within their specified braking distance.


Never Let That Dramatic License Expire
I'd feel a lot better about "St. Joan" if it were the first presentation of the National Actors Theater, not the fifth.
But Tony Randall's classical acting company is well into its second season, and only now is it showing signs of competence.
While "St. Joan" would be a good production to build from, it's a bit dismaying to think that this is what the troupe has built
to
.
Of course, the enterprise began with an immoderate boast -- "America's Finest Actors" in "Civilization's Greatest Plays" -- that no one believed for an instant.
The more accurate claim these days would be "New York State's Regional Theater on Broadway." Still, progress of any kind is progress and not to be sniffed at.
"St. Joan" (at the Lyceum Theater) looks and sounds more substantial than anything that has preceded it.


Real Incest and Real Survivors: Readers Respond
To the Editor:
As a professional authority on incest and one of the few writers whom Carol Tavris cites with respect ("Beware the Incest-Survivor Machine," Jan. 3), I must protest her meanspirited and completely gratuitous attack on incest survivors.
I also wish to affirm my solidarity with the grass-roots women in the incest-survivor movement: the social workers, popular authors and victim advocates for whom Ms.
Tavris displays such contempt.
Self-help books make an easy target because they try to reduce complex issues to simple language.
They often contain errors, exaggerations and just plain sloppy thinking.
However, they also serve a valuable social purpose.
They reach millions of people who feel isolated and ashamed, bringing them words of compassion and understanding.


Body Parts Provide Artists With Theme
IF the title "Major Medical" does not immediately attract visitors to the current show at City Without Walls, there is always the poster.
This masterly piece of appropriation features an image painted by an anonymous contemporary of Durer's.
Its subject is a man in bed with two doctors in attendance.
Considering that he has just had his leg amputated, the patient looks astonishingly tranquil.
But then, the scene may represent a miracle, for the surgeons busy attaching the leg's replacement wear halos, the nurses are angels and, though the severed limb lies in plain view on the floor, there is not so much as a hacksaw to be seen, let alone a drop of blood.
No doubt this medieval Norman Rockwell had his reasons.


Dr. Albert Anderson, 65, Expert On Rehabilitation of the Disabled
Dr.
Albert D. Anderson, who became a doctor to disabled patients and an expert on rehabilitation through his own struggle with a rare disease, died Monday at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 65 and lived in the Bronx.
He had been in a coma since being stricken by pneumonia in July, his family said.


Help for the Helping Hands in Death
ON Tuesday, the lower house of the Dutch Parliament put its stamp of approval on the world's longest-running experiment in medical euthanasia, giving more legal protection to doctors who carry out dying patients' requests to be killed.
But by leaving euthanasia on the books as a crime punishable by up to 12 years in prison, the legislators recognized the degree of anxiety, ambivalence and religious reservations still surrounding the practice.


Effective? Maybe. Profitable? Clearly.
THE Tokos Medical Corporation, which sells a service that detects early labor in pregnant women, recently started a program to reward obstetricians who ordered it for their patients.
In its files the company called the program "Dr. Deal." The deal: earn up to $20,000 annually on an investment of $1,000.


Q and A
Condos in Jackson, Wyo.
Q.
Can I get information about renting a three-bedroom condominium in Jackson Hole or Teton Village, Wyo., this summer?
Are there any special events in July and August? -- Kathryn Green, Providence, R.I.
,


Foreign Affairs; No Miracles For Bosnia
Hardly anything is ruled out for Bosnia, senior Clinton Administration officials told me on Friday.
We're still looking at most options, they insisted.
But the subtext was unmistakable: Not now, not for months and probably never will U.S. bombers attack the Serb cannons that are pounding Sarajevo, or send troops to protect the city or provide arms to the overmatched Bosnian Muslims.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
120.65
124.35
127.88
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6580
1.6591
1.6265
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2545
1.2616
1.1874
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.4220
1.4460
1.7715
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Struggling to Hear the Shot That Killed Lincoln
Earlier this month in Washington, Ford's Theater celebrated its 25th birthday as a resident theater.
The restored building and auditorium -- a 130-year-old National Historic Site -- are dedicated to Abraham Lincoln's love of the performing arts.
Among those present on Feb. 2 was Ken Burns, the producer of the epic "Civil War" documentary series for television.
In the opening moments of his speech to the audience, Mr.
Burns traced the hours preceding the night of April 14, 1865, and its immediate aftermath.
On that evening, President Lincoln and his wife had gone to Ford's to see a comedy, "Our American Cousin," five days after the end of the Civil War.
The actor John Wilkes Booth crept into the Presidential box after the play began.
During a burst of laughter from the audience, Booth fired his pistol, fatally injuring Lincoln.
This article is adapted from the remainder of Mr.
Burns's talk.


The Need to Engage the Classroom
To the Editor:
The high-capacity computer network has the potential to make the nation's public school system more equitable, providing access for economically and geographically disadvantaged school districts to all sorts of learning resources.


THE COMPANY HE KEEPS
Your pre-Inauguration piece was fun reading on a Sunday afternoon.
However, I was struck by the remark about Clinton's "promise" to "numb the nation" with future events focused on such topics as health care, welfare reform and the environment.
Do you still not "get" the significance of Ross Perot's charts?
Do you think that people are content to rely on televised news clips and trendy articles for information?


A Non-U.S. Leader for Troops
The United States is edging away from the longstanding principle of deploying American troops only under American command.
Page 18.


In the Region: Connecticut; Darien's Rocky Road to Affordable Living
LOW-COST housing, traditionally a minor concern for the wealthy communities of Fairfield County, is stumbling up the priority ladder.
Darien is fairly typical.
Having built only 80 rental units since the 1950's, mostly occupied by its own elderly residents, it is close to approving a 30-unit condominium complex called Prindle-Hopkins at Leroy Avenue and Squab Lane.


Real Incest and Real Survivors: Readers Respond
To the Editor:
As a survivor of childhood sexual abuse, I am deeply disturbed by the cynical and cavalier tone of Carol Tavris's critique of "the abuse-survivor machine." Most offensive is Ms.
TRACY MYERS Newark, Del.


London Tickets
To the Editor: The question of obtaining tickets for the Chelsea Flower Show in England, May 25-28, was raised in the Q. and A. column on Nov. 15.
The response mentioned various ways of securing tickets but did not mention my company, Edwards &amp; Edwards.


Denise Brine, F. F. Gonzalez
Denise Kent Brine, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Brine of Bryn Mawr, Pa., was married last night to Fernando F. Gonzalez, a son of Blanca Gonzalez Cuzan of Miami and the late Alfredo Gonzalez Cuzan.
The Rev.
Timothy Dobbins, an Episcopal minister, officiated at the Church of the Redeemer in Bryn Mawr.
Mrs.
Gonzalez, 32, is a substitute art teacher in the Radnor, Pa., school district.
She graduated from William Smith College and received a master's degree in teaching from the Maryland Institute College of Art.
Her father is the president and chief executive of the Merian State Bank and the Knoblauch State Bank, both in Philadelphia.


A Whirlwind of Hatreds: How the Balkans Broke Up
ANNOUNCING that it would bring "the full weight of American diplomacy" to the search for peace in the Balkans, the Clinton Administration last week signed on to a plan that aims to stop ethnic killing by dividing Bosnia and Herzegovina into 10 provinces.
Though the Administration wants revisions, it is essentially backing the peace plan, devised by Cyrus Vance, the United Nations mediator, and Lord Owen of the European Community, that Clinton officials had criticized as likely to reward Serbian aggression.
In explaining the change, Secretary of State Warren M. Christopher echoed the argument made by Lord Owen last week in the successful campaign that he and Mr.
Vance waged to win over American skeptics: It's too late to do anything else.


A Vast Volcano Cluster Is Found Rumbling in Depths of the Pacific
Scientists mapping the sea floor 600 miles northwest of Easter Island, in the South Pacific, have found what they say is the greatest concentration of active volcanoes on earth.
Using sonar scanning devices to peer into the ocean depths, the scientists aboard the research vessel Melville were surprised to discover 1,133 seamounts and volcanic cones in an area about the size of New York State.
Many of the volcanoes rise more than a mile above the ocean floor, and some are almost 7,000 feet tall, with their peaks 2,500 to 5,000 feet below the sea's surface.


And the Real Winner Is . . .
I felt very bad when I read the story about the mapping contest  [ "Classroom Lessons About a 'Fragile' World," in some copies on Nov. 15 ] .
I was the winner, not Urmeel Patel.


Gains Tax
To the Editor:
The recently issued advisory opinion referred to in your Jan. 10 Perspectives column about the New York gains tax superficially appears to be an effort by the Department of Taxation and Finance to recognize the reality of a depressed market.


Arms Inspectors Say Iraqis Are Cooperating
The latest United Nations weapons inspection team to arrive in Iraq completed its first day of work today, and the team leader said the Iraqis had not interfered.
"The Iraqis are doing their job," said Patrice Palanque of France, who is leading a 13-member team of ballistic missile specialists.
"When we are asking them to do something which can help us to do it in a fast manner we have no problem with that."


Gretchen Dykstra, Nathan Leventhal
Gretchen Dykstra, the president of the Times Square Business Improvement District, was married in New York on Friday to Nathan Leventhal, the president of Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts.
Mayor David N. Dinkins performed the ceremony at Gracie Mansion.
Ms.
Dykstra, 44, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the University of Wisconsin and received a master's degree from the Bank Street College of Education.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 31 about public housing referred incorrectly to the site of a project in Croton-on-Hudson.
The housing is to be built on land in the village center, not on a former dump.


Rezoning of Vacant Shopping Center Raises Fears
WHEN the Oyster Bay Town Board granted a special-use permit in 1991, to Syosset Village Associates to develop a shopping center with a supermarket, specialty shops and boutiques, there was little community opposition.
But when the board recently approved a revised plan to build instead a single large retail store, residents speculated about a Kmart and sued the town.
The site is the vacant former North Shore Mall at Jericho Turnpike and Lafayette Drive.


Racers Wave Multinational Flags
A race boat's nationality is usually marked by the flag it flies.
But in this year's Whitbread Round the World Race, mergers of every sort are shaping campaigns into multinational alliances.
They include rather obscure efforts by yachtsmen from the former Soviet Union.
Others are more highly charged campaigns led by newcomers to the round-the-world scene like Chris Dickson of New Zealand and Dennis Conner of San Diego.


In China, Incomes Are Low but Everything Is Cheap
One of the puzzles for many visitors to China is how to reconcile the apparent wealth around them with China's official per capita income of just $370 a year.
Part of the explanation is that interpreting China's economic statistics can be a nightmare.
Prices, for instance, are so low that income statistics are misleading.


Deborah Zajac, W. G. Churchill
Deborah Jeanne Zajac, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael J. Zajac of Lavallette, N.J., was married yesterday to William George Churchill, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Howard H. Churchill.
The Rev.
Carlton Lee performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.
Mrs.
Churchill is a vice president at Smyth Executive Inc., an executive search firm in New York.
She graduated from the University of Miami.
Her father, who is retired, was a senior vice president of the American Cancer Society.


Saudi Rulers Resisting Pressure From Two Sides
In a high-stakes gamble for King Fahd and his Western allies, including the United States, Saudi Arabia is fighting a wave of Islamic fundamentalist opposition and demands for democratic reforms by tightening one of the most confining political systems in the Middle East.
The measures, which followed a period of liberalization during the Persian Gulf crisis, have included the arrest and imprisonment of militant clerics, a refusal to grant promised political reforms and tighter press censorship, including a ban on the import of satellite dishes.


Corrections
An article on page 24 of The Times Magazine today, about 10 artist couples who have created valentines, refers incorrectly to one artist.
Joel Shapiro is primarily a sculptor, not a painter.


At Daytona, a Rookie Looks Like a Favorite
Jeff Gordon, the 21-year-old rookie causing a stir at the Daytona International Speedway this month, looks as if he ought to be parking cars for Bill Elliott and Dale Earnhardt instead of racing against them at 190 miles per hour.
In fact, when Rick Hendrick, a car owner, sat down last year to sign Gordon to a long-term contract, Hendrick admitted to a certain apprehension.


Mary Hughes, Peter Tevebaugh
Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Hughes Jr. of Skillman, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Mary Elizabeth Hughes to Peter M. Tevebaugh, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Richard Tevebaugh of Woodbridge, Conn.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Hughes, 28, graduated from Springfield College and is studying for a master's degree in social work at the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the vice president of business and finance at Rider College in Lawrenceville, N.J.
Her mother, Peggy Hughes, is a real-estate broker with John T. Henderson Inc., a real-estate company in Princeton, N.J.


Real Incest and Real Survivors: Readers Respond
To the Editor:
Carol Tavris's essay was merely the latest wave of the backlash attempting to deny the emerging truth about the abuse that is inflicted on children in our society.
There is indeed the dramatic polarization Ms.
Tavris describes, and her essay places her directly on the side of those who provide support for "molesters, rapists, pedophiles and other misogynists," a side one certainly should apologize for choosing.
When people like Ms.
Tavris are frightened by the number of women who are described by checklists such as mine, their solution is to attempt to kill the messengers, professionally speaking, by impugning their methods or motives.
Despite Ms.
Tavris's assertion that "Secret Survivors" presents groundless theories, unsupported by research, my conclusions are compiled from extensive interviews with survivors and from field observation, and are supported by many studies.


Volunteers Become Partners In Education
AS school budgets are cut and more teacher aides and library assistants are let go, schools are increasingly tapping a valuable source of free staffing: volunteers.
Parents, elderly people, business executives and others are donating their time to fill the gaps left as budgets have been trimmed over the last few years.
In Norwalk, for instance, the number of parents participating in the Volunteers in Norwalk Schools program has grown from 1,600 four years ago to about 2,500 today.


A la Carte;  A Word From Restaurateurs Can Yield Dividends Abroad
THE knowledge of Long Island restaurateurs extends far beyond Nassau and Suffolk Counties.
Recently, the Long Island restaurant connection resulted in a meal of wild boar, kid and homemade sausages at a rustic, yet luxurious, Sardinian hilltop hotel; a walk down the side of a Sicilian cliff overlooking the Mediterranean to an atmospheric seafood restaurant frequented by locals, but unknown to tourists, and a visit to an elegant mirrored, high-ceiling, crystal-chandeliered dining room in one of Europe's traditional grand hotels.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
HEMINGWAY The American Homecoming. By Michael Reynolds. Blackwell, $24.95.


Trip to Mark Warsaw Revolt
On April 19, 1943, 400 young Polish Jews began a 28-day uprising against the Nazis, during which time more than 13,000 Jews were killed in the Warsaw ghetto and 6,000 were sent to the death camp in Treblinka.
An eight-day tour that will commemorate the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising will take place starting April 15.
Organized by Orbis Polish Travel Bureau, Lot Polish Airlines and Jewish Heritage Tours, the trip departs from New York and Chicago.
Participants will attend a memorial service, flower-laying ceremonies at various ghetto sites and a special performance in memory of heroes of the uprising.
Also included will be visits to Treblinka and Auschwitz-Birkenau and to Lublin and Cracow.
The tour is $1,599 a person (based on two in a room) from New York and $1,648 from Chicago; there is an additional charge from other United States cities.
The tour price includes round-trip air fare, transfers, bus transportation, hotel accommodations and daily buffet breakfast.


Hilo and the Hula
To the Editor: After reading Robert Reinhold's Hilo article, "Hawaii's Gentle Throwback" (Dec. 27), I thought visitors might enjoy two other delightful attractions in Hilo on the Island of Hawaii as much as I did.
Each is free, and can be visited in under an hour.
At Akaka Falls State Park, one can walk on a paved loop trail that runs through a profusion of ginger, ti, bamboo and other tropical vegetation to reach two impressive, thundering waterfalls: 100-foot-high Kahuna Falls, then 420-foot-high Akaka Falls.
This lush park is five miles inland through sugar cane fields, off Route 19 at Honomu.


Retirees Reinvent Themselves as Actors and Volunteers
MANY elderly people go south after retirement.
Millie and Charlie Easter went Hollywood.
Shortly after the couple retired nine years ago and moved from Somerset County to a retirement community in Berkeley Township, in Ocean County, a commercial photographer discovered them ice skating and hired them to pose for a pharmaceutical advertisement.


Toney Wins the Title, and a Friend
At the end of the night, James Toney and Iran Barkley turned toward each other and hugged.
Their war of words -- and their war in the Caesars Palace ring -- ended with mutual respect.
Toney won Barkley's International Boxing Federation supermiddlweight title tonight, but it seemed almost as important that they put aside their bitter dislike for each other during a post-fight news conference.


Through His Lens, Avedon Looks Forward and Back
NAME: Richard Avedon.
IDENTITY: Photographer.


A Balancing Act for TriBeCa Zoning
IN TriBeCa, city planners have seen the present. And they think it may work.
They are trying to reconcile zoning policy with the realities of the existing neighborhood.
Also, in something of a departure, they are trying to coordinate their work with simultaneous designations by the Landmarks Preservation Commission.
"I thought it was important to see if we could have zoning and historic district designation complementary," said Richard L. Schaffer, director of the City Planning Department and chairman of the City Planning Commission.


Barbara Gans, Patrick Devney
Ernest and Beilla Gans of Howard Beach, Queens, have announced the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Barbara Irma Gans to Patrick James Devney, a son of Catherine Devney of Ellensburg, Wash., and the late Dr.
James W. Devney.
A September wedding is planned.
Dr.
Gans, 32, graduated from New York University and received a Ph.D. in physical chemistry from the University of Chicago.
She is completing a National Research Council postdoctoral fellowship at the Naval Research Laboratory in Washington.


Piano Duos in Recital in Westport
FOR 20 years, Performers of Connecticut has been organizing and presenting concerts by local artists, and to mark the anniversary occasion, 12 pianists are convening today at the Westport Arts Center for a 3 o'clock recital of duets.
"In olden days," said the group's piano events coordinator and one of the keyboard dozen, Eve Dillingham, "four-handed piano playing was a way of courtship, so Valentine's Day seemed the perfect time for this particular concert. The modest reserved ticket price of $20 was also chosen in appropriate tribute to the anniversary."
Ms.
Dillingham will be partnered by David Allen Wehr; the other performing duos are Ruth Steinkraus Cohen and David Korevaar, Natalie Ryshna Maynard and Mark Salman, Elizabeth Lauer and Linda Maranis, Milette Alexander and Frank Daykin and Genevieve Chinn and Allen Brings.
Concert profits will go toward a project bringing classical music to urban schools.
For more details, call 227-8998.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a report in the Making a Difference column last Sunday about McKee/McNeil Productions, a record production company started by Lonette McKee, referred incorrectly to its relationship to 40 Acres and a Mule Musicworks.
The two companies are not affiliated.


2 Trail Blazers Backed
The N.B.A.
Players Association filed a grievance on behalf of TRACY MURRAY and DAVID JOHNSON of the Portland Trail Blazers, who were fined $10,000 or more by the team and suspended without pay for three games after two 16-year-old girls said the players had sex with them in Salt Lake City last month.
No criminal charges were filed. (AP)


The Neediest Helps Two Friends Get By
Mary Ann W. gazed affectionately at the man sitting across the table and spoke of love.
Not the romantic love celebrated today with flowers or chocolate or brunches in cozy restaurants.
She described something different: a love between longtime friends that has deepened through years of suffering and tragedy.
"You never realize how you may need someone down the road," said Mary Ann, 60, reflecting on her relationship with her friend, Irving L., 70, whom she first met in the 1950's in their quiet seaside neighborhood of Far Rockaway, Queens.


Coolly Couture
THE new Gianfranco Ferre boutique may be a fashion maven's dream, but it's a housekeeper's nightmare.
Everything in the high-style, high-priced store is high-maintenance.
From the white synthetic-marble floors to the polished stainless-steel vitrines and chrome dressing-room doors, nearly every surface in the shop is a magnet for fingerprints and scuff marks.
And the clothes themselves -- raffia-trimmed skirts and jackets, woven-leather dresses, architectonic blouses -- would seem to require someone who knows not only dry cleaning, but also geometry, to care for them.


From Seed, the Journey to the Perfect Plant
THOSE who grow their own plants from seed find there is something rather special in the doing.
Of course, many gardeners would rather wait until late spring and buy the few vegetable or annual seedlings they need.
But just as many delight in growing their own plants from seed.
The greatest advantage in growing your own is the selection possibilities.
Many times some of the more unusual flowers or vegetables are not available from garden centers.
Also, seed sharing is one of the strongest binds in gardening friendships.


New Orleans Journal; A Sulky Undercurrent at Mardi Gras
It is Carnival time in the city that is passionate about Mardi Gras.
Although the big day falls on Feb. 23, the nonstop celebrating began this weekend, with the streets once again awash in parades and neighborhoods adrift in parties.
But beneath the glittery surface are signs of strain.
It is more than a year since a hotly debated city ordinance was adopted to desegregate white social clubs and parade clubs that sponsor the Carnival activities.


Mutual Funds; The Importance of Defining Small
SMALL stocks are the darlings of the mutual fund industry today, but it's caveat emptor for investors eager to jump on the bandwagon.
That's because "small," like beauty, is in the eye of the beholder.
Some funds that call themselves small-stock investments actually own stocks that are quite large.
Thus, "you can't make the apples-to-apples comparisons needed to invest intelligently," said Don Phillips, vice president of Morningstar Inc., fund researchers in Chicago.


Equation Finally Adds Up For Well-Traveled Newbern
Experiences like the one Melvin Newbern had Friday night are usually the stuff of fantasy.
Or at least something in a cliched made-for-television movie.
At the beginning of the season, the guard was trying to make a Nets team with a lot of talented guards; now he is on top of the world.
You can do the math yourself.
Too many talented guards equaled the Nets' showing Newbern the door.
"When I was up there I proved I could play," Newbern said of his experience in New Jersey.
"But it was a situation where they had a lot of guaranteed contracts and I knew I would be fighting an uphill battle."


Vox Pop, The Sound Of Politics
In times past, music played a subtle and important role in statecraft.
It was often considered a representation of the state in sound, an embodiment of its laws and tastes and character.
Rulers have recognized its power: Prince Esterhazy had Haydn on staff; Stalin and Hitler made such issues matters of life and death.
So what can we expect from the Clinton Administration?
The only evidence presented so far is the concert the Presidential Inaugural Committee produced last month in front of the Lincoln Memorial.
Before hazy memories of the HBO telecast of the event become deservedly hazier, it might be worth noting the relationship the Administration is trying to establish between music and society.
That was, after all, one of the points of the concert.
As James Earl Jones intoned, "Today, we, the people, celebrate America." This was to be an event by the people and for the people, with democracy and representation as important in music as in government.


Monica Meyer, Roy D. Vingan
Dr.
Monica Lynn Meyer, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Albert Meyer of North Woodmere, L.I., was married last evening to Dr.
Roy David Vingan, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Vingan of Stamford, Conn.
Rabbi David Holtz officiated at Temple Beth-El in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Dr.
Meyer, 27, is keeping her name.
She is a resident in obstetrics and gynecology at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York.
A graduate of Clark University, she received an M.D. degree from the Downstate Medical Center in Brooklyn, as did the bridegroom.


On Mogadishu's 'Green Line,' Nothing Is Sacred
The clocks at the Cathedral of the Croce del Sud stopped at 9:45.
The cherubs looked ever skyward as fire sent the roof crashing in shards to the floor.
White spaces where gilded crosses once hung tell of plunder, and the sepulchers of the bishops remembered only as Zucchetto and Colombo have been emptied.


Words Out in the Cold
The third edition of the American Heritage Dictionary has no
morals
!" exclaims William J. Slattery of Jamestown, R.I., who is otherwise entranced by the new dictionary.
He is mistaken about the absence of
morals
; that noun does not have its own separate entry, but it is entered under the adjective
moral
, and is crisply defined as "rules or habits of conduct, especially of sexual conduct, with reference to standards of right and wrong." Useful synonymy is added to differentiate among the adjectives
moral, ethical, virtuous
and
righteous
.


Streetscapes: The Cragswold; Deciding to Repair, Not Replace, the Casements
CHECK any building with steel casement windows in New York.
If it's not controlled by landmark protection, chances are that its windows are either in a gradual state of decay or are being replaced one by one.
To many apartment owners, repair problems with steel casements -- rust, balky mechanics, heat loss -- seem insuperable But the Cragswold, a 1928 co-op in Scarsdale, N.Y., has chosen a novel approach: It is repairing, not replacing, each of the windows in its Tudor-style apartment building.


THE COMPANY HE KEEPS
Your pre-Inauguration piece was fun reading on a Sunday afternoon.
However, I was struck by the remark about Clinton's "promise" to "numb the nation" with future events focused on such topics as health care, welfare reform and the environment.
Do you still not "get" the significance of Ross Perot's charts?
Do you think that people are content to rely on televised news clips and trendy articles for information?


Loss Is the Measure of Love
WRITTEN ON THE BODY
By Jeanette Winterson. 190 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $20.


The Executive Computer; PC Buyers Will Soon Face Choices Among Work Stations
PERSONAL computers and work stations, two of the fastest-growing areas of the computer industry, have been on a collision course for several years.
This may be the year of impact.
Sometime later in 1993, the two companies that have set the pace in recent years for PC hardware and software will climb to higher realms of performance.
The Intel Corporation is expected to introduce its Pentium microprocessor (nee the 586, successor to the 286, 386 and 486).
The Microsoft Corporation will introduce Windows NT, its first operating system designed specifically to take advantage of the power of the Pentium and other powerful microprocessors.


Crayons Today, Picasso Later
Metropolitan Museum of Art gives a party for the patrons of the next century, Feb. 10.


A Timely Definition Of Health Maintenance
As health-care consumers struggle to keep abreast of the growing reform lexicon, the article on H.M.O's provides a timely definition of the H.M.O. system of health-care delivery.
A fundamental difference between prepaid, group practice, managed health care and the fee-for-service system is that the former focuses on preserving health, and the fee-for-service system is designed to treat illness.


At Work; Labor Takes a Happy Breath
THE labor movement, represented by the leaders of its 33 largest unions, is gathering this week on the sands of sunny Florida for its annual winter meeting.
For the first time in more than a decade, it may not actually need the refuge that the swank of Bal Harbour provides.
For 12 years, in labor's view, the arriviste and the aristocrat stood shoulder to shoulder against the working person.
Now Citizen Clinton is in the White House and, labor would say, finally a few things are right with the world.
Mr.
Clinton has signed two executive orders reversing Reagan-Bush Administration positions on rules at Federal work sites and on the use of union dues.
He is considering amnesty for the striking air traffic controllers fired by Ronald Reagan.
He has appointed Robert Reich to resurrect the Labor Department from the near-death experience it has suffered under 12 years of Republican stewardship.


Clinic Lends a Hand in Rocking the Cradle
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON recently described the effects of her first few weeks in the White House.
"There has been so much to do initially," Mrs.
Clinton said in a report in The New York Times.
"Sleep has taken a back seat. I told Bill we have a budget deficit, an investment deficit and a sleep deficit."


Cupid Carries the Day


Glimpses of the Real Provence
BETWEEN the towns of Dragui gnan and Grasse in the Haut-Var, the upper region of the Var Department, runs a string of small fortified villages perched like fortresses atop the first folds of the lower Alps, across from the Esterel Mountains.
They are the counterparts of their better known and more touristic cousins in the heights above Nice: St.-Paul de Vence, Vence, Tourrettes-sur-Loup.
Built in the Middle Ages, with a history dating back before Jesus, they have names like Seillans, Bargemon, Fayence, Callian, Figanieres.
Some of their sinuous lanes, most of them closed to cars, are barely wide enough for two people to walk side by side.
Still paved with their original cobblestones with a middle gutter for the rainwater, they twist and sharply climb the slopes of the rock on which they cling.
Hiding behind their ramparts, the villages, built to fend off the attacks of the dreaded Moors, strangely evoke the medinas of Morocco.
Most have kept their 10th- or 11th-century castles intact, with a chemin de ronde still circling under the ramparts.
Of course, this region has been discovered, mostly by English lovers of Haute-Provence, and Scandinavians and Belgians keeping their secret quiet.
They have bought the medieval village houses and castles and renovated them into three- or four-story vacation homes full of character, with breathtaking views over the surrounding mountains.
Fayence, Seillans and Bargemon have been partly gentrified, yet they are still deeply Provencal, involved in the production of olive oil (cold-pressed, the best you'll find in the South of France), essential oils from jasmine and lavender, and the famous Rose de Provence, which you can taste and buy at the vineyards in the surrounding valleys.
If you time your visit in late winter or early spring, when the mimosa blossoms burst into a vibrant yellow along the quiet roads, you will catch a glimpse of an authentic Provence the summer tourist can barely see.


On the White Side Of Crossover Dreams
BLACK HISTORY MONTH is celebrated in a big way by the United in Group Harmony Association, whose 2,000 members are overwhelmingly white.
It is sponsoring a free concert this afternoon at the William Carlos Williams Cultural Center in Rutherford, N.J., and two others later this month at Symphony Space on Manhattan's West Side.


On the Road With Marlo Thomas
WHEN Marlo Thomas was on her honeymoon with Phil Donahue 13 years ago in Greece, she was particularly drawn to the ancient amphitheaters.
"You could feel the energy still, that something spiritual was going to happen -- the actors and audience are going to experience something together," she recalled.
"There's something very magical about that."
And that magic has sustained Ms.
Thomas in her latest theatrical endeavor, the role of Ouisa in John Guare's "Six Degrees of Separation," on tour since October and scheduled to run in her own backyard -- Stamford -- Tuesday through next Sunday at the Rich Forum.


A Time of Guarded Optimism
The trucks emptying dealers' booths on the night the Winter Antiques Show closed two weeks ago left with far less than they brought.
Crediting the mini sales boom to the recent surge in the economy and President Clinton's election, dealers in most categories said they had bettered last year's figures, despite an attendance lag in the second half of the nine-day event.
Long viewed internationally as the golden calf of all antiques fairs, the show had lost its pre-eminence in recent years, partly due to controversy over what some saw as mismanagement.
Hurt by the recession, the event also faced competition from the International Antique and Fine Art Dealers Show held here in October.
Now, with the winter show's luster somewhat restored, and the economy eased, sales are improving in American, Oriental and European artifacts as well as in silver and jewelry.


The Tangled Roots of Alex Haley
The opening scene of the CBS miniseries "Queen," based on the life of Alex Haley's half-Irish grandmother, shows a reluctant slaveowner protecting the woman he loves -- a woman he also happens to own -- from the condescension of his white friends.
"This is your home; it always will be," he tells the slave Easter, who later gives birth to his child, Queen.
"Besides, what would I do without you?"
In a startlingly romantic presentation of a relationship between a slave and her master, the slaveholder, Col.
James Jackson Jr., professes undying love to Easter even as he prepares to leave the plantation to join the Confederate Army.
Their affair is no secret to Colonel Jackson's wife, Lizzie.
Both villains and victims come in all colors in this production: Queen, who calls herself Little Miss In-Between, is abused by blacks as well as whites, and a white character mouths anti-Semitism.


A Show Proves Artists Make Money
MONEY has been a favorite subject of some American painters since the 19th century.
But a new exhibition, "The Realm of Coin: Money in American Art 1960-1990," at the Queens Museum of Art through March 21, displays a broader scope, with sculptures, photographs and installations.
Many of the pieces are humorous, like Tom Otterness's "Broken Humpty Dumpty" (1990), showing a fallen and cracked Humpty with huge bronze tates pennies falling from his cracked tummy.
Andy Warhol's silk-screened dollar signs in shades of red and purple pretty much sum up his desire to create art as product.


Breena Welch Lewis Holmes Jr.
Judge and Mrs.
Joseph R. Welch of Duxbury, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Breena Luighe Welch, to Lewis Ball Holmes Jr., a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Holmes of Wellesley, Mass.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Welch, 26, and her fiance are fourth-year medical students at the University of Massachusetts.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.
Her father is an associate justice of the Massachusetts District Court in Brockton.
Her mother, Barbara Welch, is an associate professor of English at Quincy (Mass.) College.


Love Conquers All for All Kinds of Couples
DR.
Anthony Gerardi, still smitten with his wife, Carolyn, after 33 years, decided that as a token of his enduring affection he would buy her a new setting for the diamond engagement ring he gave her those many years ago.
"This year on Valentine's Day, I want her to know that my love is as strong as it has always been," said the spectacled Scarsdale allergist, who was shopping last week at Wallach &amp; Sons Jewelers of Eastchester.
"Devotion and lots of compromise. That's what made it work for us."


New York City Union Leader Elected Head of Rainbow Coalition


Giving Small Businesses Some High-Tech Advice
SMALL businesses and entrepreneurs can now receive advice and counsel at a satellite State Small Business Development Center at the Polytechnic University Graduate Center in Hawthorne, which officially opened on last Monday.
The purpose of the center, a partnership between higher education, the state, the Federal Government and the private sector, is to help small businesses grow and thrive.
The counseling, training and research services available are thought to contribute to the stability and growth of small business in the state.
"The state prefers to open its small business centers on college campuses in order to take advantage of the college's resources and faculty," said Kathleen MacDonald, the dean of the Westchester campus.
"They came to Polytechnic because our reputation has made us especially valuable in this partnership."


Rangers' Toll Rises On Island
Don't ask Mark Messier about the last time his Rangers beat the Islanders at Nassau Coliseum.
The Ranger captain doesn't care if it was back in 1940, when the Rangers last won the Stanley Cup, or back in 1893, when Lord Stanley first presented his victory mug to the champions of Canadian hockey.
"I don't care if it was 100 years ago," Messier said tonight after the Islanders won by a 5-2 score.
"It doesn't matter."


Hilo and the Hula
To the Editor: I suspect that Robert Reinhold, in his wonderful piece on Hilo, saw something mythic about the place, something larger and more significant than the sleepy little town it will always be.


In Brazilian Town, It's Faith Versus Festival
With Carnaval drums already booming through Salvador's cobblestone streets, a truce has taken hold between two newly powerful forces in "black Brazil's" capital: the Carnaval business lobby and the African-Brazilian Candomble religion.
At first glance, it would seem that Salvador's loose network of dirt-floor Candomble halls would be a poor match for the multi-million dollar, high-technology festival juggernaut.
But the Carnaval establishment has capitulated to the Candomble priests over the use of religious images.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Jan. 30  MANHATTAN  Gramercy Park Area  $775,000
143 East 18th Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, one-family, 5-story town house; dining room, family room, 3 fireplaces, 1,800 sq. ft. of office space on the first two floors, 14.9- by 79.4-ft. lot; taxes $9,500 (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)  Greenwich Village  $285,000
70 East 10th Street  (Stewart House)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, terrace; maintenance $1,130, 52% tax-deductible (Broker: Faith Weinberg Real Estate)  TriBeCa  $275,000
366 Broadway (Franklin St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, dining room, 11-ft. ceilings; maintenance $1,307, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Sinvin Realty Co.)  Upper West Side  $2.225 million
115 Central Park West (72d St.)  (Majestic)  4-bedroom, 5-bath, 3,700-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned elevator, dining room, 4 exposures, Central Park view; maintenance $4,000, 30% tax-deductible (Brokers: Joan Blackett Schlank-Edward Lee Cave)  Upper West Side  $935,000
151 Central Park West (75th St.)  (Kenilworth)  3-bedroom, 3-bath 2,400-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; manned elevator, entry gallery, maid's room, Central Park view; maintenance $2,032, 58% tax-deductible (Brokers: Bellmarc Realty-LTG Realty)  BRONX  Riverdale  $50,000
3299 Cambridge Avenue  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 800-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; dining room, eat-in kitchen, hardwood floors, 3 exposures; maintenance $538, 53% tax-deductible (Broker: Trebach Realty)  Wakefield  $200,000
743 224th Street  2-family, semiattached brick house; 3 bedrooms, den in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; 1 bath in each; 1-car garage, 25- by 114-ft. lot; taxes $1,900 (Broker: ERA/Best Match Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Marine Park  $217,000
2142 East 34th Street  2-family attached brick house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each unit; semifinished basement, 2-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2.600 (Broker: Minichiello Real Estate Ltd.)  Park Slope  $485,000
153 Sixth Avenue  2-family attached bownstone; 4 bedrooms, 3 baths, dining room, 3 fireplaces in owner's triplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, fireplace in simplex; private driveway, 20- by 84-ft. lot; taxes $2,900 (Broker: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)
Sheepshead Bay  $200,000
2689 Brown Street  2-family semi-attached brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths in primary duplex; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in simplex; dining room; front and rear porches, 20- by 97-ft. lot; taxes $2,040 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  QUEENS  Forest Hills Gardens  $235,000
332 Burns Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, one-family attached town house; dining room, fireplace, 18- by 88-ft. lot; taxes $1,404 (Broker: Terrace Realty)  South Ozone Park  $125,000
111-08 122d 4Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family colonial; dining room, finished basement, detached 1-car garage, 35- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $960 (Broker: Kremer Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Royal Oak  $185,000
54 Lakeland Road  4-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached brick colonial-Cape Cod; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 50- by 135-ft. lot; taxes $1,700 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/ DeSimone Realty)  St.
George  $69,000
10 Bay Street Landing  (Bay Street Landing)  1,120-sq.-ft. open-space co-op in a converted prewar warehouse; 24-hr. doorman, 1 bath, 10-ft. ceilings, N.Y.
Harbor view; maintenance $683, 53% tax-deductible (Broker: Gateway Arms Realty Corp.)


John McKean, 85, Tudor City Resident And Tenant Leader
John F. McKean, a tenant organizer and community leader, died Friday night at his home in Manhattan.
He was 85 years old.
The cause of death was a heart attack, said his nephew, Kevin McKean.


28 Teams Start to Take Shape as the Hot Stoves Give Way to Spring
The Los Angeles Dodgers are ready for spring training to begin.
"We don't want to spend a lot more time thinking about last year," General Manager Fred Claire said, trying to expunge thoughts of the Dodgers' nightmarish last-place finish, their first since 1905.
"It wasn't much fun for anyone with the Dodgers last year. We're anxious to get started."


Rabin Declares the Deportations Crisis at an End
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin declared an end today to the crisis over nearly 400 deported Palestinians, an assessment rejected by Palestinian leaders, who also dismissed a new Security Council agreement intended to leave the dispute behind and to concentrate on restarting the troubled Mideast peace talks.
Mr.
Rabin said through a spokesman that the deportation issue "came to its conclusion" with a deal he struck on Feb. 1 with the United States to return 101 deportees right away and the remaining 295 by the end of the year.


Oil Heat Rare In Most of U.S.
For someone who listens to radio only in the Northeast it would be hard to guess, but oil heat is used in just 12.2 percent of American homes, and two-thirds of those houses and apartments are in Pennsylvania, New Jersey, New York and the six New England states.
Most of the country's homes, 51 percent, use natural gas.
Another 25.8 percent, particularly those in mild climates, heat with electricity.


New &amp; Noteworthy
GOETHE: THE POET AND THE AGE.
Volume One: The Poetry of Desire (1749-1790), by Nicholas Boyle. (Oxford University, $17.95.) During the years Nicholas Boyle examines, Goethe proved himself a multifaceted genius -- he became not only a writer but also an artist, scientist and public administrator.
This first volume of a two-part biography is "replete with penetrating insights and unsurpassed in thoroughness," Christoph Schweitzer said here in 1991.
There is, he added, "nothing comparable to this study in any language."
SUGAR STREET: The Cairo Trilogy III, by Naguib Mahfouz.
Translated by William Maynard Hutchins and Angele Botros Samaan. (Anchor/Doubleday, $11.) The third volume in this Nobel laureate's trilogy continues the story of the family of al-Sayyid Ahmad Abd al-Jawad, a Cairo patriarch.
In this novel, first published in Arabic in 1957, al-Sayyid Ahmad, a symbol of the old Egypt, has grown elderly and embittered; it is up to his grandchildren's generation to shape a new and independent nation.
Last year our reviewer, Ammiel Alcalay, said: "The ordinary nature of Mr. Mahfouz's world, with its willingness to confront the complexities of human intentions, makes it an extraordinary exception in a marketplace of manufactured ideas and is, for that, all the more admirable." Anchor/Doubleday has also issued a new paperback edition of Mr.
Mahfouz's 1967 novel MIRAMAR, translated by Fatma Moussa Mahmoud, edited and revised by Maged el Kommos and John Rodenbeck ($8.50).
Set in Alexandria, it traces the interwoven relationships of the residents of the Pension Miramar, whose lives are thrown into upheaval by a young servant girl.


Martha Evans and Geoffrey Morris
THESE days, when Geoffrey Morris tells people what he does, they often respond by starting a Crossfire-style political debate with him.
Mr.
Morris, 27, is the executive editor of National Review, a conservative journal that publishes everything from articles about America's moral decline to ads for Slick Willie T-shirts.
Recently, he's been invited to quite a few of what he calls "cocktail parties for the embattled."


Where Government Has No Talent
To the Editor:
While Government activities in a superhighway might be helpful, neither Government construction nor ownership of such a network would be.
Such a superhighway must embody the principles that Secretary of Labor Robert Reich has described under the heading of a "flexible production system." These principles are technological innovation, precision manufacturing and customization of product.
The Federal Government, however, has little reputation for or experience in these three areas.
RAYMOND G. CRAFTON  Edison, N.J., Jan. 25


Still Out to Lunch on Lobbyists
Give George Steinbrenner this much credit: he knows how Congress works.
With some well-placed campaign contributions and well-connected lobbyists, the owner of the New York Yankees won quiet approval from Congress last fall for a $58 million bailout for his family shipbuilding business.
There were no public hearings, and the Government officials who had rejected the firm's claims for contract overruns were never consulted.
Nor was there any way for the public to tell how much the lobbyists shelled out to wine, dine and otherwise persuade targeted lawmakers of the virtues of Mr.
Steinbrenner's plea.


Ashe Memory Honored
After a week of moving tributes to his inspirational leadership in the fight against AIDS, Athur Ashe's efforts are beginning to be honored in cash.
MAC WINKER, the owner of the Racquet Club of Tennis in Memphis, site of this week's stop on the men's tour, announced yesterday the establishment of a $1.25 million endowment to create an Arthur Ashe Chair for Pediatric AIDS research at the St.
Jude's Children's Research Hospital.


Robert W. Holley Is Dead at 71; Won Nobel for Work in Genetics
Robert W. Holley, a biologist who won the Nobel Prize for unraveling the genetic code of ribonucleic acid, or RNA, died Thursday at his home in Los Gatos, Calif.
He was 71.
The cause of death was lung cancer, said the Salk Institute for Biological Studies in La Jolla, Calif., where he was a fellow and professor since 1966.


Back to the Past


Yes, Massapequa Has A Fine Side, Too
"Live, and in Sizzling Color, the Trashing of the Island"  [ Jan. 24 ]  struck a nerve.
As a lifelong resident of Massapequa, I especially take offense at your subtitle "Sodom, Gomorrah and Massapequa."


Chase Reynolds, Charles Ewald
Deborah Chase Reynolds, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Russell S. Reynolds Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Charles Ross Ewald, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
William B. Ewald Jr., also of Greenwich.
The Rev.
John Bishop officiated at Christ Episcopal Church.
The Rev.
Neely Towe, a Congregational minister, took part in the ceremony.
The bride is known as Chase.
She is a freelance writer and photographer in Cody, Wyo., where she also is the director of the Breteche Creek Foundation, a nonprofit educational guest ranch.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University and received a master's degree in journalism from the University of California at Berkeley.


A Stereotype Bids Farewell To His Public
For seven years, a listener called the morning show on WBLM-FM in Portland, Me., at least twice a week, pretending to be "Frenchie," a word-slurring caricature of a French Canadian immigrant.
But while the calls were a popular feature on the show, which is heard all along New England's coast, the ethnic stereotype infuriated many French Canadians and stirred protests from anti-discrimination groups.
Now their voices have been heard, particularly by the source of their anger: This week the man called in to retire from the air.


Cities Attack Police Raises In New Jersey
Over the last decade, as cities and towns across the region strained to deal with recession, state restrictions on spending and increasing mandated costs, the salaries of many New Jersey police officers have doubled.
In places like Newark, Elizabeth and Trenton, starting police officers earn more than they do in New York and other big cities.
And throughout the state, mayors and other local officials complain that police salaries have grown faster than the rate of inflation and are consuming a ever-growing share of the budget.


Corrections
The Coins column on Jan. 31, about a Bill of Rights commemorative coin, referred incorrectly to the 12th Amendment of the original Bill of Rights.
It indeed became law -- in May 1992, as the Constitution's 27th Amendment, restricting the authority of Congress to vote itself raises.


Her Master's Voice
THE DEVIL AT LARGE
Erica Jong on Henry Miller. By Erica Jong. 334 pp. New York: Turtle Bay Books. $23.


SHOULD DOCTORS TELL THE TRUTH?
Knowing that physicians sometimes may be less than candid may make us suspicious of any diagnosis, however favorable.
Many now worry, am I being told the truth?
LEONARD SIMS
New York, N.Y.


Real Incest and Real Survivors: Readers Respond
To the Editor:
Bravo! Thank you for publishing "Beware the Incest-Survivor Machine."


Arthur Ashe: A Man of Artistry and Letters
It has been one week since Arthur Ashe died.
But for many of us, the shock still lingers, and there is this impulse to somehow reach out and address him -- in a vein he would understand, "Dear Arthur" -- because Arthur Ashe was forever writing letters to the people who mattered to him.
I don't think Ashe realized how many people truly loved him.
Maybe he wondered but wasn't sure.
After all, he was shy and had been away from the competitive limelight for a decade before being forced back into the public arena last April.


Masters Of Bunk
To the Editor:
I am grateful to Stephen Holden for exposing the "icky-poo" tarnish on the Rodgers and Hammerstein legacy.
But he does so from the vantage point of half a century.
It is worth recalling that others had observed it all along.


Let's Be Serious About Cutting Military Budget
To the Editor:
In "Press Harder on Deficit Reduction" (editorial, Feb. 5), you fail to press hard enough in calling for "a sharp cut in defense spending."


Wall Street;   'Most Admired' -- by Short Sellers, Too
TO celebrate Valentine's Day, send a bouquet of roses today to the chief executive of the company you most admire.
But do yourself a favor, too. Forget about buying the guy's stock.


Latin Conflicts Rooted in Complexities
To the Editor:
I applaud "As Ethnic Wars Multiply, U.S. Strives for a Policy" (front page, Feb. 7), a worldwide overview of the fruits of the concept of self-determination, which you trace back to Woodrow Wilson.
You make a necessary effort to shed light on the increasingly alien and impossibly complicated issue of ethnic conflict.
However, your superficial reading of Latin American cases misrepresents the nature of struggles in this hemisphere.


Orioles Invite Flanagan
What do you do about a 41-year-old reliever who had an earned run average of 8.05 last season while pitching 34 2/3 innings in 42 games without any saves and without a decision?
Invite him to training camp, of course.
That's what the Baltimore Orioles have done to MIKE FLANAGAN.
Why?
Perhaps because Flanagan is a streak pitcher who may be due for a hot streak.
Until he tailed off toward the end of last season, allowing 22 of the last 26 batters he faced to reach base and 15 of them to score, he had not allowed an earned run in 18 of his first 22 appearances. (AP)


Conversations/Nicole Hollander; A Valentine's Greeting from Sylvia: Find a Lover From Another Planet
SO, happy Valentine's Day, but Sylvia would tell you not to sit around expecting roses.
Not long ago, nose to the crystal ball, she looked across her cartoon-strip frame at a blank-faced young woman and announced: "You'll go to the senior prom with a football player who will become carsick on the way home."
But Nicole Hollander, creator of the blowsy, chain-smoking, mordant Sylvia, is softer of voice and, perhaps, of heart.
As Ms.
Hollander explained over the telephone the other day, she feeds on romance the way she wishes she could on chocolates.
"I adore relationships," she said, "like a political cartoonist adores politicians when they make grievous mistakes.


Shenanigans on a Tour of London
IN its Long Island premiere at the Arena Players Repertory Theater in East Farmingdale, "Lettice and Lovage" offers up its strengths and weaknesses like so many hors d'oeuvres at a festive party.
As a script the work by the British playwright Peter Shaffer is filled with enough dramaturgical problems to keep it off a college reading list forever.
But as a showpiece for acting and directing talent, "Lettice and Lovage" is near perfect.


GUIDE
SCREENING SHAKESPEARE
"Shakespeare From Script to Screen" is the title of a series of three film discussions to begin this afternoon at 2:30 at the Yale Center for British Art.
Murray Biggs, adjunct associate professor of English and theater studies at Yale, will compare movie and television versions of three Shakespearean characters: Henry V, Richard III and Falstaff.


A Strong Candidate For Best Junior Player
JUNIOR players, in international play, are those under 26 years old.
Naming the best in the world is difficult, since the junior population changes regularly, but one candidate for the title is the world's best woman junior, Debbie Zuckerberg of Manhattan, who turned 25 a week ago.
In 1991, she played a major role in the United States victory in the World Junior Team Championships in Ann Arbor, Mich.
She and Jeff Ferro of San Francisco, who is a day older, have a good chance to be on the winning team again in Denmark next July.
Their teammates, all very experienced, will be Leni Holtz of Los Angeles and Richard Pavlicek Jr. of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., both 23, Kevin Wilson, 24, of Rockford, Tenn., and Eric Greco of Annandale, Va.
Greco, 17, has a chance to become the youngest to win a world championship.


Visitor Attacks In Egypt Spread to Cairo
The attacks on foreign tourists in Egypt, limited until a few weeks ago to the southern part of the country, have spread to Cairo, with three recent assaults on tourist vehicles reported near the pyramids in Giza.
However, there were no injuries in the latest incidents.
On Feb. 4, according to Egyptian authorities, Muslim militants threw a bomb at a bus carrying 15 South Korean tourists, shattering the window of the vehicle, not far from the pyramids.
No one was hurt in the attack.


A Homey Theater That Loves Writers (But Not Broadway)
This season, two of the most anticipated Broadway productions will arrive in New York after earlier runs in California.
Part one of Tony Kushner's epic drama, "Angels in America," comes from the Mark Taper Forum in Los Angeles, while the revival of Peter Townshend's 1969 rock opera, "Tommy," has been seen at the La Jolla Playhouse.
A pair of Broadway productions with similar lineage may be coincidental, but their presence underscores the continuing role of the nation's nonprofit stages in developing new work for the American theater.
And there is more in California where they come from.


Bailey a Winner At Gulfstream
Jerry Bailey rode his fourth stakes winner in a month at Gulfstream Park today when the British-bred Stagecraft ran down the favored Roman Envoy in the homestretch and beat him by a neck in the $100,000 Canadian Turf Handicap.
In a tight photo finish, Roman Envoy had half a length on Carterista, who clung to third place by a nose over Social Retiree.


Doing More Than Bush, Less Than Advertised
TRACKING President Clinton's latest pronouncements on Bosnia, the economy and domestic policy, it is possible to divine the parameters within which he seems to be operating early in his term.
You can tune the Clinton Administration in on your political dial somewhere between the prudence of George Bush and the boldness of Mr.
Clinton's own campaign book, "Putting People First." The sound you will hear is something more than Muzak but less than John Philip Sousa.
And don't go fiddling with the volume control; it's set that way for a reason.
"Because Clinton was not elected by a majority he needs to be cautious, and because he needs to be re-elected by a majority he needs to be bold," said Kathleen H. Jamieson, dean of the Annenberg School for Communication at the University of Pennsylvania.
"And that is his dilemma."


Sushi and Bonsai by the Bay
EVEN before you enter the stores and restaurants in San Francisco's Japan Center, it is obvious that this is no ordinary mall.
Groups of elderly men cluster on wooden benches playing Go and other Japanese games; buckets of pussy willow and purple iris stand near a table where women are arranging formal ikebana floral displays, and posted notices advertise both a karaoke singing contest and a photography exhibit focusing on children in World War II detention camps.
This is the bustling core of San Francisco's relatively unpublicized Japantown, a compact community 12 blocks west of Union Square, where English is often a second language and street signs are bilingual.
Before World War II, most Japanese-Americans lived here.
Although today they reside throughout the Bay area, Japantown remains the center of their community's social and commercial life.


John Goldsmith, Ellen Feinman
Ellen Lee Feinman, a daughter of Natalie Roberts-Ulstad of Los Angeles and Elliott Feinman of Santa Fe, N.M., was married yesterday evening to John Joseph Goldsmith, a son of Barbara Goldsmith of New York and C. Gerald Goldsmith of Palm Beach, Fla.
Rabbi Joseph Narrowe officiated at the Kapalua Bay Hotel in Maui, Hawaii.
Mrs.
Goldsmith, 29, is a manager with Atlas Management, a children's television programming agency in Los Angeles.
She graduated from the University of California at Los Angeles.
Her father retired as the president of Merrill Lynch-Rodeo Realty in Los Angeles.
Her mother is a training director for the Jon Douglas Company, the real-estate brokerage in Los Angeles.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League  ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Agreed to terms with Bob Tewksbury, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
Basketball National Basketball Association  INDIANA PACERS -- Placed LaSalle Thompson, forward, on the injured list.
Activated Kenny Williams, forward, from the injured list.
Football National Football League  PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Announced they have extended the contract of Rich Kotie, head coach, for one year through the 1994-95 season.
Hockey National Hockey League  ST.
LOUIS BLUES -- Sent Bret Hedican, defenseman, to Peoria of the International Hockey League.
College  ILLINOIS -- Named Greg Landry offensive coordinator.


Maura McElhinney, Dana Coates
Dr. and Mrs.
A.
James McElhinney of Pelham, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Maura Elizabeth McElhinney to Dana Milton Coates, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Coates of Weston, Mass.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
McElhinney, 29, is a law student at Fordham University.
She and her fiance graduated from Lehigh University.
Her father, a professor of surgery at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York, is the chief of surgery at the Veterans Affairs Medical Center in the Bronx, where the future bride's mother, Mary McElhinney, is an infection-control nurse.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
RANGERS AID BENEFIT
The New York Rangers will shed their hockey uniforms for tuxedos when they appear at a benefit for the Exchange Club Child Abuse Prevention Center in White Plains.
The event will be be held from 7 to 10 P.M. on Wednesday at the Lake Isle Country Club in Eastchester.


Education in the Arts Is an Education for Life; Schools Make Decision
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 5 article on arts teaching in New York City schools states that "budget cuts have decimated arts programs in many cities." While this may be the case in New York City secondary schools, it cannot be used as an excuse in the elementary schools.
Elementary school principals, consulting with teachers, determine which cluster (specialist) positions to hire.
A music cluster teacher does not cost more than a science or geography cluster teacher.


The Economy: Pain and Candor
On his 29th day in office, next Wednesday, President Clinton will lay out a plan for economic revival that will be a test of his budget-making ability and his political salesmanship.
He emphasized the word sacrifice in his Inaugural Address.
Now comes the hammer.
Mr.
Clinton seems to be preparing to tell Americans they can kiss the promised tax cut goodbye and say hello to higher taxes all around.


NORWEGIANS SIGNAL DOUBTS ON EUROPE
Justifying Norway's long-delayed decision to seek membership of the European Community, Prime Minister Gro Harlem Brundtland argued last November that this large, empty nation on the northern edge of Europe could simply no longer afford to remain outside.
"No one is going to wait for us if we prefer to take our time to see what becomes of Europe," she told delegates from her Labor Party, who went on to approve the initiative.
"Now is the time to address our candidacy."


THE ECONOMY: PROBLEMS AND REMEDIES UNEVEN RECOVERY The Pacific UNEMPLOYMENT: 8.9% Declines in the aerospace, banking, real estate and entertainment industries have taken the bloom off the California perennial. And environmental regulation, traffic congestion and land-use restrictions may slow growth for a long time. The Mountains and Southwest  UNEMPLOYMNET: 6.6% This diversified economy has proved better equipped than most to weather the recession. Now it has a chance to pick off the high-technology plums from California, whose problems have left some businesses disillusioned. "UNEVEN RECOVERY" Trouble on Two Coasts A slow, unbalanced recovery means hard times for California and the Northeast, along with stagnating living standards across the nation. While regional disparities are common, the strains of adjustment are particularly acute this time. By January, when the national unemployment rate had fallen to 7.1 percent, two of the regions below had jobless rates that were considerably higher. And that spells big trouble for Washington, which must reconcile pressures to get the sluggards moving without overheating the economy as a whole. "UNEMPLOYMENT" Regional rates in January. The Midwest UNEMPLOYMENT: 6.2% The rust belt wasn't invited to the economic party of the 1980's. But by missing the real-estate boom, it escaped the hangover afflicting other regions. Slimmed-down manufacturers are benefiting from export growth. The South UNEMPLOYMENT: 6.8% Low wages and pro-business governments give the region an edge in attracting cost-conscious industry. But much of the South still lacks a highly-skilled work force. And the suburban sprawls of Florida and Texas are feeling the strains of pollution and congestion. The Northeast UNEMPLOYMENT: 7.9% The Northeast has had many problems in common with California. Connecticut is undergoing the agony of military procurement cutbacks; Massachusetts is suffering from shakeouts in the computer industry and in banking. Increased profits at banks and on Wall Street are beginning to help New York, but the region's old industrial cities may never regain their former vibrancy. "STAGNANT LIVING STANDARDS" Income Has Eroded Americans enjoy the highest living standard in the world. But for the past two decades, pay has slid, and more Americans households have had to have two income earners to produce even modest gains in family incomes. The wages and benefits of younger, less educated wo


From Painted Textiles, Poetic Images
ROBERT KUSHNER'S painted textiles straddle the ambiguous line that separates crafts from art.
In a show at the Montclair Art Museum, his bold brushwork is rendered on pieces of hand-woven silk sari cloths from India that are stitched to traditional obi sashes from Japan and sumptuous brocades.
This produces poetic images highlighted by threads of gold and luminous hues.
Mr.
Kushner is no stranger to the tensions between artists and crafts people.
"I feel that craft people resent my work being shown in fine-arts galleries," he said.
"And the art world doesn't take them as seriously as they would if I had tacked the fabrics down like an artist's canvas."


Of Love and Charity


Duck Breasts Make for Easier Cooking
MOST people cook duck one way: whole and in the oven.
The problem with roasting it is that when the legs are done, the breast is often dry.
But now it is becoming increasingly easy to find duck breasts sold separately in good butcher shops and specialty stores.
Duck breasts are simple to cook, low in fat (if you don't eat the skin) and make perfect meals for two people.
The other day at the Farmers Market in Manhattan's Union Square I bought one whole duck breast (two halves) that provided more than enough meat for two meals.
On one night we had the duck hot with vegetables, and the following day we served the leftover meat with a frisee salad.
Duck breast salad makes an excellent first course, light supper or lunch dish, and it is at its best when the greens are chilled and the duck is still warm.
The flavor of the meat is brought out by Chinese spices, and goes very well with young greens in a vinaigrette flavored with walnut oil and toasted hazelnuts or a mustardy balsamic dressing served with frisee lettuce.


Duck Breasts Make for Easier Cooking
MOST people cook duck one way: whole and in the oven.
The problem with roasting it is that when the legs are done, the breast is often dry.
But now it is becoming increasingly easy to find duck breasts sold separately in good butcher shops and specialty stores.
Duck breasts are simple to cook, low in fat (if you don't eat the skin) and make perfect meals for two people.
The other day at the Farmers Market in Manhattan's Union Square I bought one whole duck breast (two halves) that provided more than enough meat for two meals.
On one night we had the duck hot with vegetables, and the following day we served the leftover meat with a frisee salad.
Duck breast salad makes an excellent first course, light supper or lunch dish, and it is at its best when the greens are chilled and the duck is still warm.
The flavor of the meat is brought out by Chinese spices, and goes very well with young greens in a vinaigrette flavored with walnut oil and toasted hazelnuts or a mustardy balsamic dressing served with frisee lettuce.


Real Incest and Real Survivors: Readers Respond
To the Editor:
As the chief of the only inpatient psychiatric unit in the New York metropolitan area specializing in the treatment of incest survivors and dissociative disorders, at Holliswood Hospital, I was encouraged by Carol Tavris's evenhanded approach.
The current incest-survivor fad is partly an outgrowth of fuzzy 1980's notions of the "dysfunctional family" and the "inner child." Despite these excesses, it is important for readers to recognize that child abuse and child sexual abuse are not rare phenomena.


Planning Holocaust Center at Glen Cove Estate
THE four-digit number tattooed on Stanley Garczynski's arm is a constant reminder of the five and a half years he spent in the Auschwitz death camp as a Polish prisoner in World War II.
The number, 3470, is believed to be the lowest of any known Holocaust survivor alive in the United States today.
Although the war is long over, the memories and the fear remain for Mr.
Garczynski, who, fewer than four years ago, was the victim of a bias crime in his neighborhood in Westbury.
He now lives in a nursing home.


Japan Fears the U.S. Is Its Postwar Pal No More
ODDLY enough, one reason Japan worries about Bill Clinton is that unlike John F. Kennedy he never captained a boat that was sliced in half by a Japanese warship, and unlike George Bush he was never shot down over the Pacific.
In the iconography of American Presidents as seen from Tokyo, the World War II veterans who went on to occupy the Oval Office never bore a grudge.
Instead, they were magnanimous victors who, after vanquishing the old Japan, took an almost fatherly pride in its reconstruction.
They remembered the occupation, and regarded the Japanese as a bright, industrious ward who grew into America's strongest ally in the Pacific.
Most important, they were usually indulgent of the country's mercantilist tendencies, viewing them as a problem that should not be allowed to threaten the relationship.
The new President, as Japanese have reminded themselves time and again, grew up with a very different Japan.
He was a boy in Arkansas when Akio Morita began putting Sony radios into American homes.
By the time Mr.
Clinton reached law school, Nissans and Toyotas were beginning to jam the streets.
As a governor, he frequently took the red-eye to Tokyo in search of Japanese investments and factories for his state.
His Japan is first and foremost an economic competitor, hardly in need of America's help.


Rapwear. Soulwear. Hipwear.
WHILE the rest of the nation watched the Buffalo Bills lose the Super Bowl for the third year in a row, the post-soul generation went to Madison Square Garden to see Bobby Brown.
Before Dallas had scored its first touchdown, Seventh Avenue was already thick with young black teen-agers waiting to pass through any one of 11 metal detectors at the entrance.
Some, dressed in North Face ski jackets, Timberland boots, thermal face masks and baseball caps, stood silently in classic poses of roughneck cool.
Others, wearing silk and leather or cashmere and fur, ate chicken, drank beer and chatted like it was some kind of down-home open house.
On 33d Street and Eighth Avenue, meanwhile, the luminaries of the black pop world were jousting to get in.
Heavy D., the rapper, was quickly whisked past an extremely harassed phalanx of security guards and was escorted backstage, where Patrick Ewing, Queen Latifah and Andre Hurrell were gripping and grinning.
Inside, Kay Gee and Vinnie of Naughty by Nature worked the V.I.P. section in the audience, while an assortment of young men in gold-studded black leather paced around, shouting into cellular phones.


Shari Leventhal, Steven Kauderer
Shari Debra Leventhal, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Burton Leventhal of New York, was married yesterday to Steven Ira Kauderer, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Bernard Kauderer of Roslyn, L.I.
Rabbi J. P. Sternstein officiated at Temple Israel in New York.
Ms.
Leventhal, who is 29, is keeping her name.
She is an assistant United States Attorney in the Eastern District of New York.
She graduated from Vassar University, as did her husband, and received a law degree from Georgetown University.
Her parents own Newman &amp; Leventhal Caterers in New York.


Officers Arrest 18 At Party in Brooklyn
Undercover police officers posing as students arrested 18 people at a party in Brooklyn where high school students had been invited to try speed, the police said yesterday.
The police recovered 20 tabs of LSD, 17 tinfoil packets of marijuana, 11 plastic bags of marijuana, $1,562 in cash, six beepers, two marijuana joints, a .25-caliber automatic pistol and a set of brass knuckles from a house in Bensonhurst, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a Police Department spokesman.


Old Wine and New Bottle Add Up to Pepsi
Think of it as a free, unsolicited Rorschach test of our national character.
When a foreign film is remade to suit American audiences, its new version inevitably reflects some perception, fair or otherwise, of American tastes.
We are seldom forced to contemplate those tastes as bluntly as we are by "Sommersby," a post-Civil War version of "The Return of Martin Guerre" (1982), and "The Vanishing," a Hollywood remake of the identically titled 1991 Dutch thriller.
If we set out to commission a collective self-portrait, we would surely want something a bit more flattering.
The contrasts between these new films and their European predecessors are particularly fascinating because the originals are so quietly contemplative (and so good).
On the trip across the Atlantic, reflectiveness has been one of the first things to go.
American audiences are presumed to want more action, more explanation and more literal-minded detail to spell out the characters' inner thoughts.
It seems not to have mattered that both these stories rely on a profound sense of mystery.


FEB. 7-13: New Prison 'Pod'; Jail for Fundamentalists Challenged in Texas
It was conceived as a way to serve the Lord and serve time all at once.
But the God pod, as many inmates refer to the fundamentalists-only wing at a county jail in Texas, may wind up as a classic test case for the First Amendment.
The 48-cell pod, which jail officials in Fort Worth refer to as the Christian Rehabilitation Pod, is for Christians who receive Bible instruction, watch videos of evangelical preachers and sing hymns while they do their time or await trial.


Kuwaiti Parliament Is Acting Like One
THE United States and its Western allies in the 1991 gulf war have never been comfortable with the fact that their soldiers fought to restore the autocratic rule of the Kuwaiti royal family.
True, the war against Iraq had more to do with oil reserves than democracy.
But uneasiness about the ruling Sabah family's lack of democratic legitimacy, fed by public opinion in the West, has led to sustained pressure on Kuwait to open up its political system.
Even so, when the reclusive Emir, Sheik Jaber al-Ahmed al-Sabah, finally bowed to this pressure by holding parliamentary elections last October, expectations in the West, and among ordinary Kuwaitis, were not high.
History was not encouraging: The Sabah family disbanded the country's last elected Parliament in 1986, when it became too assertive.


NASA Is Forced to Release Photos of Challenger Cabin's Wreckage
Seven years after the Challenger disaster killed seven astronauts, including a schoolteacher, the space agency has been forced to release some of the many photographs it took of the shuttle's pulverized crew cabin.
Forty-eight pictures of the wreckage, which was recovered from the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean off Cape Canaveral, Fla., appear to show nothing startling about the fate of the Challenger and its crew.
But they could eventually help aerospace engineers design safer spaceships.


Data Bank/February 14, 1993


Thinking Globally About Education
Although I don't disagree with Sabino Rodriguez (Letters to the Editor, Jan. 31) about the need to acquaint suburban students with heritage of the Hispanic cultures in this country and to our south, I'm troubled by the apparent Japan-bashing he engages in.
I'm sure that Mr.
Rodriguez, as a teacher, knows that the literary tradition of Japan goes back further than that of any modern European language.
Far more seriously, anyone caring to look it up could see that a Japanese, Yasunari Kawabata, won the Nobel prize for literature in 1968.
Yes, the literature of Central and South America has produced an amazing number of Nobel laureates, including Gabriel Garcia Marquez, Pablo Neruda and Miguel Angel Asturias.
But Nobel prizes are both political and literary.
Why should India, with a literary tradition longer than Japan and the Americas combined, have only Rabindranath Tagore as a laureate?
On the other hand, why should Ireland, with a population not much bigger than Connecticut and tiny in comparison to the world population of Latin American writers, have birthed three laureates: Samuel Beckett, George Bernard Shaw and William Butler Yeats?


Real Incest and Real Survivors: Readers Respond
To the Editor:
As an incest survivor myself, I was deeply disturbed by Carol Tavris's indictment of current therapeutic approaches to healing from sexual abuse.
By questioning the validity of memories that are wrenched with such reluctance and with so much pain from their hiding place in the mind, Ms.
Tavris has done a tremendous disservice to survivors, whose strong need to disbelieve their own stories is a common phenomenon.
What must be understood by those who have not been abused as children is that sexual assault places victims in a nearly insoluble dilemma: either they are sexual perverts for "imagining" these horrendous events, or people upon whom their very life depended were perverts.
These are both intolerable ideas; therefore, memory of the abuse is repressed. (The Rev.) DOROTHY A. GREENE Larchmont, N.Y.


Real Incest and Real Survivors: Readers Respond
To the Editor:
If one is looking for current books about incest and sexual abuse, scholarly ones that are genuinely helpful, there are not many available.
As a survivor of incest, uncovering memories of abuse during the past year, I have searched the libraries and bookstores for books and journal articles that would teach me about the process of memory repression and memory retrieval.
I have also sought books that would help me make some sort of sense of my experience.
A very helpful book, Judith Herman's "Trauma and Recovery," is rightfully touted by Carol Tavris in her essay.
Unfortunately, Ms.
Tavris is right when she says that most of the available books on incest are not as well documented as Dr.
Herman's.
However, in spite of their limitations, I have found popular books, including "The Courage to Heal," useful in my healing process.


Houston Gallery
To the Editor: I was surprised to see that Robert Suro did not mention the Menil Collection in "What's Doing in Houston" (Jan. 10).
A highlight for many travelers, the Menil Collection is showing, through Feb. 21, the Rene Magritte retrospective exhibition, which was such a success recently at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
It displays 150 works by the Belgian surrealist in a stunning installation.
Admission is free.
PAUL WINKLER  Director, Menil Collection Houston


RETURN TO GILLIGAN'S ISLAND
Thomas Howell 3d was always a conniving son of a gun, but who, in his wildest dreams, would have suspected he'd dump his cherished wife, Lovey, for the young tart posing as his missus in your Fashion pages ("Return to Gilligan's Island," by Hal Rubenstein, Jan. 17)?


What's in Place With Cable
To the Editor:
Your article overlooked the potential contributions of a highly advanced, and nearly ubiquitous, communications industry -- cable television.


Mitterrand Sets Foot in Vietnam and Makes an Offer


'I Don't Hate Homosexuals'
A villain to homosexuals but a hero to ultra-conservatives, Will Perkins says he is no extremist.
"I don't hate homosexuals," said Mr.
Perkins, a car dealer who initiated the anti-gay-rights measure, Amendment 2, in Colorado.
"I have homosexual friends."


Clinton Keeps Driving His Message of Public Sacrifice
Determined to train public attention on the economic package he will announce next week, President Clinton today repeated his pitch that the plan would require sacrifice, especially from wealthy special interests.
But Mr.
Clinton also sought to allay fears that his program would lead to drastic spending cuts in important programs.
He tried, for example, to quash rumors that he intended practically to do away with plans for a costly space station.


Religion and Law Clash, And a Boy Is Still Missing
In the 10 months since her son, Shai, disappeared amid a struggle over his care and religious training, Hana Fhima has lived a life of despair and suspicion.
The only indication he might be safe came in May, shortly after he disappeared, in the form of two letters, apparently in his handwriting and asking that no search be made, but with a nonexist ent return address in Brooklyn.
Now, the authorities have charged the two people Mrs.
Fhima has accused from the start -- a Hasidic rabbi and his wife -- with the kidnapping of her son.
But the boy remains missing, and Mrs.
Fhima's anguish appears no closer to an end.


St. John's Wins Battle Against B.C.
St.
John's and Boston College became entwined last night in one of those Big East basketball games that had a closer resemblance to assault and battery than pass and shoot.
The Redmen persevered but just barely, 65-61, and retained first place.
"Like hand-to-hand combat," was the way Boston College Coach Jim O'Brien described the action.
For example, five technical fouls were called in the second half, three against St.
John's, after a 17-point lead by the Redmen had evaporated.


You Can Grow Cold, But You Can't Harvest It
SO, do you have a few pounds of bulbs moldering away in the cellar because you didn't put them in the ground?
Is the rosebush you planted last fall going to heave itself out of the ground once the earth thaws because you didn't mulch?
Did your baby fig tree croak because you forgot to wrap it in burlap?
My fig did.
In the interest of saving plants' lives, following is a game plan for late winter-early spring. (A note to obsessive types: I'll come out with similar advice on a quarterly basis; there isn't room for the whole 12 months here.)


Cards Sign Tewksbury
BOB TEWKSBURY and the St.
Louis Cardinals had an arbitration hearing scheduled for Thursday, but they reached agreement yesterday on a $2,625,000 salary, halfway between the numbers they submitted.


Colombia Hardens Line In Hunt for Drug Lord
In his first two years as President of Colombia, Cesar Gaviria did his best to make peace with Pablo Escobar, the leader of the Medellin cocaine cartel, trying to stop the drug-related violence that made every Colombian a potential victim.
He allowed Mr.
Escobar to dictate the terms of his own surrender and turn his jail into a luxurious villa.
But Mr.
Escobar escaped in July during a bungled attempt by the Government to move him, and now a new wave of violence has hit the country.


Bumpy Ride
To get anywhere by train these days, Russians must be prepared to pay double the normal price to gangs who've already secured all the tickets.
Thousands wait in dank, dim airports for planes that may or may not fly.
When they do, a gift is often required to secure a seat.
The rotting away of Communism, with its hypocrisy about equality while its bosses lived like mafia dons, has sanctified greed.
Every transaction in this grasping dawn is a negotiation.
Moving around the Soviet Union -- "one-sixth of the earth's surface," as socialism's flacks were fond of bragging -- was never less than an ordeal.
Now, after the
razval
, or collapse, it's almost impossible.


New Rules Pose Conflict For Interns
DR.
Daniel C. Kombert is a young doctor in his first year of postgraduate training at the Westchester County Medical Center here.
As a student of internal medicine, he learns not only from his daily experiences with patients but also from his interactions with many of the 85 faculty internists from the neighboring New York Medical College who teach at the hospital.
Dr.
Kombert has fire in his eyes and an impassioned devotion to his calling.
But there are times when his ardor is against the rules.


In Israel, a Saint Brings a Boost to a Minority
Once a year in midwinter, this drab, remote town becomes a magnet for thousands of Jewish believers from around Israel.
They flock to the tomb of a revered holy man in search of health, wealth and happiness.
The faithful are Israelis of Moroccan origin who in recent years have created an annual revival-style meeting at the grave of Rabbi Yisrael Abuhatzera, who in his life gained a reputation for having divinely endowed powers.


Corrections
Because of a production error, an article and a picture caption on page 23 of the Arts and Leisure section today are missing lines of type at the bottoms of the columns.
Readers wishing a corrected version of the article may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Tech Notes; For the Forgetful Motorist
DRIVERS who never left their headlights on by mistake need read no farther.
But for those who have had the dismal experience of coming back to a dead battery, a device that monitors battery drain will prevent recurrences.
If you leave your lights on, the Battery Buddy switches off the flow of electricity from the battery before it is drained too far.
Hit a reset button and your battery is back in business.
The Battery Buddy consists of a microprocessor that monitors the electrical flow and outside temperature.
It is strapped to the battery and connected to a terminal.


A Gunman Kills Two, Then Himself
After luring his estranged wife to his mother's apartment with the promise of a Valentine's Day gift, a Brooklyn man shot and wounded his spouse yesterday and killed his mother and a man who was in the apartment, the police said.
The gunman then killed himself.
The shootings shattered the Sunday calm in the six-story, beige brick apartment building at 40 Linden Boulevard in East Flatbush, where officers found the bodies about 12:40 P.M. after receiving a call from a neighbor.


Marisa Viravaidya, Douglas Clayton
Marisa Isabella Viravaidya, the daughter of the late Dr.
Samak Viravaidya and the late Dr.
Isabella Robertson Viravaidya, was married in Bangkok, Thailand, yesterday to Douglas Wiltshire Clayton, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
James Chatterton Clayton of Camden, Maine.
A former Prime Minister of Thailand, Anand Panyarachun, performed the Buddhist ceremony at the Oriental Hotel.
Mrs.
Clayton, a graduate of Connecticut College, is a former manager of the New York Times bureau in Bangkok.
Her father and mother were physicians in Bangkok.


Joy Garrett Dies at 47; Acted on TV and Stage
Joy Garrett, an actress who performed in soap operas and on the New York stage, died on Thursday at the U.C.L.A.
Medical Center in the Westwood section of Los Angeles.
She was 47.
Rich Elbaum, a spokesman for the medical center, said the cause was liver failure.


Dance in Review
'In the Night'
New York City Ballet  New York State Theater


Review/Ballet; New Zealanders With a Nabokov Idea
A ballet company with Royal in its title might bring to mind a huge opera-house troupe more geared to the classics than to experiments.
But the Royal New Zealand Ballet, which made its New York City debut on Saturday night at Brooklyn College, is a relatively small group (22 dancers on tour) that performs especially well in the contemporary works of its obviously eclectic repertory.


Patents; Reading Faxes Between the Lines
A Canadian inventor has received a patent for a low-technology system of disguising facsimile pages so that only a designated recipient can read them.
But it is a cumbersome process that will also double facsimile costs.
Existing systems require fax machines that can scramble or encrypt faxes.
But Geoffrey Taylor has invented a method for masking the page that goes into an ordinary home or office fax.


For Foreigners, Pitfalls Abound
Despite a surge in investment and optimism about its economic prospects, China remains a difficult place for foreigners to do business.
American Standard, which made the Chinese President's whirlpool bathtub, says it is now making money at its joint venture in this small southern city, 40 miles north of Guangzhou.
But in its first few years it lost money, and like other American ventures it faced an army of unexpected challenges.


7 Haitians Held at Guantanamo Unconscious in a Hunger Strike
At least seven Haitian refugees protesting their detention here by refusing food have lost consciousness and received emergency treatment here.
Almost 270 are being kept out of the United States because they or family members are infected with the virus that causes AIDS.
In the 16th day of the fast, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson visited them to draw attention to their situation and to pressure the Clinton Administration to deal with the restrictions keeping the refugees out of the United States.


Markets Closed
All financial and commodity markets in the United States will be closed today in observance of Washington's Birthday.
Government offices, most banks and many businesses will also be closed.


Child Care in Europe: Admirable but Not Perfect, Experts Say
In the fractious debate in the United States over child care for working parents, experts and other commentators are saying America should look to other industrial nations, especially in Western Europe, as models.
And a survey of those countries makes it clear that arranging child care is a far easier matter in Europe.
But it is not easy for everyone. And it is not easy everywhere.


Knicks Lose Magic Touch in 3d Overtime
It was the longest Knick game of the season, as well as the most bizarre.
And when it finally ended, after three overtimes of crazy, exciting basketball, it was a bitter loss for the Knicks to digest.
New York's seven-game winning streak ended today with the Orlando Magic's 102-100 victory before a frenzied crowd of 15,151 at the Orlando Arena and a national television audience.


Bridge
Many famous personalities, both in and out of the world of bridge, have had interesting things to say about the game.
"I would have children taught bridge as a matter of course . . . " said Somerset Maugham.
"When all else fails -- sport, love, ambition -- bridge remains a solace and an entertainment."


After Wood and Baird, Illegal-Nanny Anxiety Creeps Across Many Homes
In Washington, Hispanic nannies who are in this country illegally worry that they will soon be deported.
In Central Park in Manhattan, nannies debate whether it is better to be paid over or under the table.
And around the country, parents wonder whether hiring a nanny has become a test of character.
In the wake of the White House's withdrawal of two candidates for Attorney General, Zoe Baird and Judge Kimba M. Wood, because of how they hired and paid nannies, the nation is percolating with largely unanswered questions about child-care workers.


Showalter Will Stir A New Yankee Drink
Some introductions have already taken place.
A telephone call here, a news conference there and a fan festival last weekend, which enabled the newer Yankees to get acquainted with their teammates.
Still, when Yankee pitchers and catchers begin reporting to spring training in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., in three days, the real personalities will start to emerge.
There are many new faces. Paul O'Neill, meet Jimmy Key. Spike Owen, meet Jim Abbott.


Document Search Shows Lincoln the Railsplitter Was Polished Lawyer
Searching for scattered documents in musty courthouse records all over central Illinois, a handful of Lincoln scholars are uncovering hundreds of previously unknown cases that show Abraham Lincoln was not a country boy who earned his keep telling juries homespun tales but a polished lawyer who had a major appellate practice and was so respected that he presided as the judge in hundreds of cases.
These new documents, many written in his recognizably clear handwriting, reveal that behind the rustic style Lincoln sometimes used before juries, he was a sophisticated professional, capable of briefing and arguing the most complex civil and criminal cases in the state and Federal courts.


Clinton Gambles on Plan For Federal Spending
The economic plan that President Clinton introduces on Wednesday will trumpet spending for education, job training and public works as the key to building a richer nation, his aides say.
But these investments could prove the biggest gamble of his Presidency.
The reason: the public may not see the benefits for years -- if ever.


CHRONICLE
BILL MOYERS, the PBS journalist and former White House press secretary, says he was approached by the campaigns of BILL CLINTON and ROSS PEROT about the vice presidency.
But Mr.
Moyers quickly told both candidates he was not interested, he said in an interview published in the Feb. 20 issue of TV Guide magazine, The Associated Press said.
"Well, I got entreaties from the Perot camp as to whether I would be interested in running," Mr.
Moyers said.
"But I didn't let them go far enough that it was ever serious."


Britain and Iran Harden Positions on Rushdie
Britain and Iran marked the fourth anniversary of Teheran's death edict against Salman Rushdie today with an intensifying war of words: Iranian clerics vowed again that they would never retract the death sentence, and London warned that unless they did, the two nations would be unable to resume full diplomatic relations.
The exchange came as Britain and the Islamic republic appeared to be hardening their public positions over the fate of the author, whose 1989 book, "The Satanic Verses," led to the decree or fatwa, based on charged that he blasphemed against Islam.
Over the weekend, Iranian religious leaders reaffirmed the death sentence, and the Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, the nation's leading cleric, dismissed concerns in Britain and other Western nations over Mr.
Rushdie.


Again, Violence Stuns a Frightened Neighborhood
As he walked along Prospect Avenue in the Bronx yesterday -- just after the police carried away six bodies from a nearby apartment -- 14-year-old Lee Gonzalez pointed to two large outdoor murals that memorialize two victims of violence in this South Bronx neighborhood.
"That reminds you about how bad it is around here," said the teen-ager.
"You have to learn to watch yourself here. It's like an instinct, it's the Bronx instinct. You need it just to survive walking down the block."


A Borough's Birthright
To the Editor:
Re your Feb. 5 editorial on renaming the Bronx Zoo: As one who was born and raised in the Bronx, and recalls its legitimate claim to a rewarding social and cultural life, I can agree that the International Wildlife Conservation Park will bring confusion when it replaces Bronx Zoo.


Latin America's Regional Trade Boon
After years of nationalistic trade protection, Latin America is finding that regional trade agreements can provide an enormous spur to its economies.
Not only are the accords increasing trade within Latin America, but they drop tariffs for overseas trade as well, and the result has been a sharply expanding market for the United States.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-7  THE CHRISTOPHER APPROACH


No Quick Payoffs
The spending for education, job training and public works that President Clinton will announce may not produce benefits for years.
Page D1.


Books of The Times; Catalogue of Accusations Against J. Edgar Hoover
Official and Confidential  The Secret Life of J. Edgar Hoover  By Anthony Summers  Illustrated. 528 pages.
G.
P.
Putnam's Sons. $25.95.


Phils Sign Mulholland
The Philadelphia Phillies signed pitcher TERRY MULHOLLAND to a one-year contract for more than $2.6 million yesterday, avoiding what would have been the team's lone arbitration hearing this year.


Soccer Hero Is Ailing
BOBBY MOORE, who captained England's soccer team to victory in the 1966 World Cup, revealed last night in London that he is suffering from liver cancer.


Out Lures Publisher Of Publishers Weekly
To some people, it might seem a curious leap from being publisher of Publishers Weekly to publisher of Out, a gay magazine.
But that is exactly what George L. Slovak Jr. is doing, and he sees nothing curious about it.
"For the first time," he said in an interview late last week, "I will be able to fully incorporate all aspects of my life."


Dance in Review
'Ballet Builders'  Marymount Manhattan Theater


Television
WHEN the King of Pop met the Queen of Talk, they made music that the network television business hasn't heard in at least a decade.
The audience ratings for Oprah Winfrey's interview with Michael Jackson on Wednesday night on ABC dwarfed those for mega-events like the Academy Awards telecast and rivaled those for the biggest show of them all, the Super Bowl.
It was a television phenomenon of such magnitude that it had network programmers and advertisers talking in lofty, even cosmic terms.


Ewing Gets All-Star Advice From O'Neal
Patrick Ewing has never said so publicly.
But some people suspect he is disappointed that the fans voted for Shaquille O'Neal as the starting Eastern Conference center for next week's All-Star Game while Ewing finished a distant second.
Ewing had a chance to prove a point today when the Knicks played the Orlando Magic, and Ewing and O'Neal resumed a rivalry that should last for years.
Both Ewing (34 points, 14 rebounds) and O'Neal (21 points, 19 rebounds, 9 blocks) had sparkling moments.


Pharmaceuticals' Blue Chip May Be Fading
Central New Jersey, an international center of the pharmaceutical industry, is being pushed to center stage in the United States' campaign to contain health costs.
Scattered across the state's midsection -- in the rolling hills here, the corporate campuses of Princeton, the urban clutter of New Brunswick and elsewhere -- is the world's largest concentration of companies that create and market prescription drugs, companies whose steady growth and investment have been the envy of other corporations even in recessionary years.


John McKean, 85, Tenant Leader And Former Real-Estate Executive
John F. McKean, a tenant organizer and community leader, died on Friday night at his home in Manhattan.
He was 85 years old.
The cause of death was a heart attack, said his nephew, Kevin McKean.


Booming China Is Dream Market for West
When President Yang Shangkun, a stocky 86-year-old who praises the virtues of self-abnegation, takes a bath these days, he steps into a $7,000 whirlpool tub made by American Standard Inc.
The Communist Party leader, Jiang Zemin, a rotund fellow who likes to talk about self-sufficiency, installed the same model last year in his own bathroom.
The Communist leaders seem to like them, for they ordered eight more, and even inquired whether they could obtain whirlpool bathtubs in which two people could bathe together.
Inroads at Last
The swishing eddy around President Yang perhaps symbolizes as much as anything the inroads that foreign companies are finally making in the Chinese market.
Foreign businesses are pouring investment into China -- $11 billion in 1992, perhaps more than any other country has received -- and are enjoying some spectacular successes in selling everything from hamburgers to lipstick.


Fast Start Elevates Devils to 3d Place
The tempo was set two seconds after the opening face-off, when Eric Lindros viciously cross-checked Bernie Nicholls.
In the next two minutes, there were two more penalties on the Flyers, and the Devils went on to make Lindros and his friends pay a high price for their indiscretions.
It took the Devils 8 seconds to score after the first penalty, and 11 seconds after the second, both with two-men advantages.
They scored their third power-play goal before the game was 4 minutes 8 seconds old, and the Flyers never came close after that.


Trade Policies Under Review in Washington
The Clinton Administration has begun to review trade policies toward China, but does not expect to reach any decisions for at least a month or two, Administration officials say.
Mid-level officials from the State Department, the Treasury Department, the Commerce Department, the Agriculture Department and the Office of the United States Trade Representative have been reviewing options and will begin meeting soon to draft a single Administration position, the officials said.
But the issue has received almost no attention so far from senior officials, and the outcome is unclear.


Bachrach Joan Mariel Tormey, Geoffrey Milton
Joan Marie Tormey, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James B. Tormey Jr. of Garden City, L.I., was married yesterday to Geoffrey Paul Howard Milton, the son of Alice Milton of Langley, England, and the late Maj.
Eric Milton.
The Rev.
Vincent Biaggi performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Mrs.
Tormey-Milton, 37, is a management supervisor, in Jamaica, Queens, for the in-flight services department of Delta Air Lines.
She is also a freelance artist.
A graduate of Georgetown University, she received a master's degree in painting from the Rosary College Graduate School of Fine Arts at the Villa Schifanoia in Florence.
Her father is an obstetrician and gynecologist in Rockville Centre, L.I.


A Campaigner Adjusts To Life as the President
Minutes after he announced Janet Reno as his choice for Attorney General on Thursday, President Clinton strolled into the Oval Office to bask in the congratulations of four of his top aides and Vice President Al Gore.
Flushed with a sense of victory, he allowed two reporters into the room and reminded them that they had been with him only a year ago when he was fighting for his political life in the New Hampshire primary.


Transactions
WEEKEND Baseball  National League


Relief Director in Bosnia Calls for Tougher Action
Declaring that the United Nations relief operation in Bosnia had reached a "crucial moment" because of harassment by the warring sides, the official responsible for the operation appealed today to Western governments, including the United States, to take decisive new steps to insure that relief supplies get through.
The official, Jose-Maria Mendiluce of Spain, spoke with anger and alarm of the crisis that has arisen here with all three armies fighting the Bosnian war delaying, blocking and attacking convoys of supplies needed to keep an estimated 1.6 million people from dying of starvation, disease and cold.


Samarkand Journal; Tamerlane's Land Trembles: Bloodshed at Gates
The spicy enchantments of Samarkand have enticed megalomaniacs for centuries, from Alexander the Great, who captured it in the fourth century B.C., to Genghis Khan and Tamerlane, who planned to make it the capital of the world and who is buried here under the world's largest chunk of green nephrite.
Since 1930, Samarkand has not even been the capital of Uzbekistan, and the city of some 400,000 people is tatty these days.
A pervasive odor from the drains wafts over the streets, blending with the more piquant smell of grilling shashlik.
Where the fabled Silk Road once ran, it is rare to see anything more luxurious than poorly spun polyester.


Is It Fab 5 Or Flub 5? Michigan Still Unsure
At the point in their second season together when the lights begin to shine more intensely, the University of Michigan sophomores must now deal with a question that could face-guard the Fab Five all the way into March.
Which is brighter: The brilliance of their skills, awareness and compatibility or the glare of their inconsistencies at the worst possible moments?


Dance in Review
'Romeo and Juliet'
New York City Ballet  New York State Theater


Patents; Dried Blood For Emergency Uses
A California company has patented freeze-dried red blood cells that emergency medical personnel can carry around at room temperature for weeks or months at a time.
Present methods of storage require red blood cells to be refrigerated.
If a transfusion patient is too far from the blood source to receive unrefrigerated blood (which lasts only a few hours), the delay while transporting the patient to the blood source can be fatal.
The problem is particularly acute for soldiers wounded in battle.
In Vietnam, the military relied on helicopter evacuation, but many soldiers died who might have been saved if fresh blood had been at hand.


Patricia Murphy, Joshua Nosanchuk
Dr.
Patricia Lynn Murphy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard J. Murphy of Breezy Point, Queens, was married last evening to Dr.
Joshua Daniel Nosanchuk, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerome S. Nosanchuk of Ithaca, N.Y.
The Rev.
Giles Spoonhour, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Union League Club in New York.
Rabbi Charles Davidson took part in the ceremony.
Dr.
Murphy is a fellow in cardiology at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, where her husband is a first-year resident in internal medicine.
She graduated from Brooklyn College and received her M.D. from the State University Health Science Center at Brooklyn.


Out Lures Publisher Of Publishers Weekly
To some people, it might seem a curious leap from being publisher of Publishers Weekly to publisher of Out, a gay magazine.
But that is exactly what George L. Slovak Jr. is doing, and he sees nothing curious about it.
"For the first time," he said in an interview late last week, "I will be able to fully incorporate all aspects of my life."


Review/Television; Three Painters' Views of Black Life in America
Tonight comes the premiere of "The Living Canvas," a new PBS series about art.
Presided over by Billy Dee Williams, who describes himself as "a painter who acts," the hourlong program offers a view of his off-camera, on-canvas work and the efforts of two other black artists, Dean Mitchell and Thomas Blackshear 2d.
Mr.
Mitchell, whose representational style may remind you of Hopper or Wyeth, tells of his desire to celebrate the hard-working people of the rural Florida town of Quincy, where he was brought up.
You have probably seen the work of Mr.
Blackshear, known professionally as T.B.
II, on advertisements for Coca-Cola and Anheuser Busch; he recently turned out a set of portraits of eminent black Americans for the United States Postal Service.
Black entertainers figure in Mr.
Williams' somewhat abstract paintings.


Big East Goes to Garden: It's No Favorites Allowed
The home-court advantage in the tumultuous Big East is a compelling factor with two-thirds of the conference games this season having been won by home teams.
Some questions arise as the stretch run to the March tournaments continues:


Rent-to-Own Stores Becoming a Consumer Issue
Buying on the installment plan is the American way.
But it requires credit -- unless you're shopping at what is known as a rent-to-own store.
These stores lease everything from televisions to vacuum cleaners on a weekly or monthly basis to customers -- without the need for credit checks and with the promise of eventual ownership.
Although installment payments are low -- usually less than $20 a week -- the charges at these outlets are far higher than the interest rates charged by banks or credit-card companies, often running as much as 200 percent.
As a result, products end up costing three or four times their retail price.


Islamic Art Collection Is Offered to Britain; Some Say 'Refuse'
Nasser D. Khalili wants to donate his vast collection of Islamic art, which he values at nearly $1.5 billion, to Britain.
But there are strings attached, and his gesture has provoked suspicion, much of it vituperative and furtively expressed.
Mr.
Khalili is Jewish and was born in Isfahan, 47 years ago (his middle initial stands for David, the name by which his friends know him).
He left Iran in 1967 and obtained a B.A. from Queens College.
He began his career of collecting and dealing -- the relation between the two is one source of controversy -- in New York in the early 1970's, building, he says, on several generations of Khalili family collectors.


Rural Home, a City Job and a Modem; Technology Gives Professionals Best of 2 Worlds: Fast Track and a Woodstock Address
When the sleek purple, white and orange overnight delivery truck first pulled up to Shaun Johnston's quiet country lane, it looked to him like a spacecraft, so outlandish did it seem in that rustic setting.
But such courier trucks -- and modern wonders like fax machines and computer modems -- have made it possible for a graphic designer like Mr.
Johnston and a growing number of other professionals from New York City to live a simple life in the country.


Day to Miss 4-6 Weeks
The Milwaukee Bucks' rookie guard TODD DAY, who dislocated his left elbow Saturday night, is expected to be out for four to six weeks, a team physician, Dr.
DAVID HASKELL, said yesterday.
Day was injured with 11 minutes 18 seconds left in the 117-115 victory over the Pacers when he went diving on the floor in a scramble.


Housing Organization Finds Itself in Another Cuomo's Hands
FIVE years ago, as the first 25 homeless families moved into an imaginative prefabricated housing project in Brooklyn, Andrew M. Cuomo pondered a future political career and reflected on his father's.
He said he would be reluctant to run for office from New York while his father was still Governor.
Suppose Mario M. Cuomo happened to be holding office someplace else?


Music Notes; The Loss Of a Studio Musicians Love
The musicians and New York City officials who have been fighting to save the B.M.G.
Recording Studios on West 44th Street all seem to agree that the battle has been lost, and that when the Bertelsmann Music Group moves to its new offices at 1540 Broadway near Times Square at the end of March, the studios will be renovated to accommodate the new offices of the Internal Revenue Service.
No sessions are being booked beyond March 31, 1993.
The studios were modernized in 1989, when Bertelsmann invested $3 million in upgrading their equipment.
The company, which owns RCA and Arista Records, had expected to be able to continue renting the studios.
But Douglas Durst, the vice president of the Durst Organization, said that his company wanted to rent all of the former B.M.G. space to a single tenant and that the Internal Revenue Service had agreed to rent all 10 floors now occupied by the record company.
City Officials' Effort
In December there was an effort by the Rev.
Wendell Foster, a City Council member from the Bronx, and Barry Sullivan, a deputy mayor, to work out an arrangement with both the Durst Organization and the I.R.S., by which the studios, at 110 West 44th Street, could be saved.
But Mr.
Durst said the I.R.S. was not interested in subleasing the studio because it might constitute a security breach.


'Bonehead' Revisited
Is this the ball that Pfiester threw, that Bridwell hit, that Hofman fielded, that McGinnity intercepted, that Evers claimed he retrieved and took to second, which Merkle failed to touch in the "bonehead" play that eventually gave the Cubs the 1908 pennant over the Giants and made Merkle's name mud?
Leland's, the Manhattan auction house, says it is.
It plans to auction off the ball Saturday, no doubt touching off anew the dispute over whether the ball that Giants' coach JOE McGINNITY intercepted and threw into the Polo Grounds stands was the same ball Cubs second baseman JOHNNY EVERS came up with. (AP)


INSIDE
Likely Medicine From Sharks
A team of scientists has found in the tissues of dogfish sharks a compound that is a powerful killer of a variety of bacteria, fungi and parasites, according to a new report.
Page A8.
Questions on Child Care
After two potential Attorneys General were ruled out because of the household help they hired, the nation is facing many unanswered questions about child care.
Page A13.
Beating Verdict Supported
The jurors who acquitted four Los Angeles police officers in the beating of Rodney King all stand firmly by their verdict of last April.
Page A8.


WHITE HOUSE HONES ALL-OUT CAMPAIGN TO SELL SACRIFICE
Opening a week that his advisers say could be the most important in shaping his Presidency, Bill Clinton is seeking to sell his economic program with one of the most intensive public relations campaigns ever staged from the White House.
Mr.
Clinton will deliver his first televised address from the Oval Office at 9 Monday night as part of an elaborate buildup intended to set the stage before he presents the package -- with its mix of unpopular spending cuts and tax increases -- to a joint session of Congress on Wednesday.


A Season for Selling Seeds to Sowers
Until his wife phoned with the news that their pickup truck had skidded off icy State Highway 4 into a ditch, Lindsey Larson had been happily reminiscing with Dan and Sue Tronchetti about their high school days.
They had also been chatting about last year's bumper crops of corn and soybeans, and what he planned to plant this spring.
Mr.
Larson's wife was not hurt, but he was anxious to help her get the truck back on the road.
So he set his coffee cup down by the plate of cookies and quickly signed a check for the seed he was buying this year from the Tronchettis.
"You fill in the amount when you get it totaled," he told Mrs.
Tronchetti.


Walt Whitman's Secret
To the Editor:
"Walt Whitman Made No Secret of Being Gay" (letter, Feb. 2) states that Walt Whitman was an "open member" of the gay and lesbian community.
In fact, Whitman went to considerable pains to disguise his homosexuality, as a reading of his poems shows, and readers and critics of the time did not recognize his homosexuality.
It is a tribute to Whitman's art that even the most seemingly outspoken poems are ambiguous.


Dobermans Suffer From a Bad Press
To the Editor:
By referring to Republicans in Congress as "Dobermans" and "attack dogs" in "Hold Off the Republican Dobermans" (editorial, Jan. 30), you deal the Doberman Pinscher breed an injustice through this stereotype metaphor.
This is hype.


Bail Posted For Rabbi In Kidnapping
As a large, angry crowd of Hasidim shouted and chanted outside, a judge in Brooklyn yesterday ordered a Hasidic rabbi held on $250,000 bail on charges of kidnapping a teen-ager in a dispute over the boy's religious upbringing.
And prosecutors for the first time said that a third person had conspired with the rabbi and his wife in the alleged abduction.
At a bail hearing in the case, which has provoked outrage in the insulated Hasidic community in Brooklyn, the judge ordered Rabbi Schlomo Helbrans held but released his wife, Malka, because she is ill and is nursing a newborn child.


CHRONICLE
PAULINE KAEL, the longtime film critic who is now a staff writer at The New Yorker, is on the mend after two major surgeries in the last two months.
Ms.
Kael, 72, is recuperating at her home in Great Barrington, Mass., after undergoing heart surgery in December and the removal of a kidney last month.
MAURIE PERL, a spokeswoman at The New Yorker, said yesterday that Ms.
Kael is expected to be on her feet in about six weeks.


CHRISTOPHER MAPS A LOW-KEY AGENDA FOR MIDEAST VISIT
Warren Christopher will make his first trip as Secretary of State to the Middle East on Wednesday, carrying exceptionally modest "talking papers": he will propose neither a new negotiating framework nor a bold strategy to bridge differences, but he will do what he always does first and says he does best -- meet all parties face-to-face and listen to what they have to say.
Unlike James A. Baker 3d, who as Secretary of State in the Bush Administration initially saw the Middle East as a no-win proposition and let the parties come to him for the first two years, Mr.
Christopher decided that it was crucial to reinvigorate the Middle East peace negotiations and that he should go to the region himself.
His Three Goals
But if he does get the talks going again, he will be building on a foundation Mr.
Baker laid after the Persian Gulf war reshaped the political landscape in the Middle East.


More and More Teen-Agers Crowd Shelters in New York
It had been a busy night at the shelter; a suspected crack dealer and his family were asked to leave, a mentally ill woman announced that she had just miscarried, though she had not been pregnant, and a shelter worker had told a new arrival, just out of jail, that he could not carry a weapon during his stay.
Amid the confusion, two 16-year-olds sat at a table in the shelter discussing music, Red Hot Chili Peppers versus Tracy Chapman.
At first glance, the teen-agers seemed out of place.
But at Joseph's House in Rensselaer County and other shelters around the state, teen-agers, many of whom have been abused, have become an increasing presence.


Nobody's Done It Better Than Kite's 35 Under Par
In a clinical display of golf punctuated by a spectacular sand shot and a closing rush of birdie putts, Tom Kite fired the lowest under-par figure ever seen in a PGA Tour event today to run away with the Bob Hope Chrysler Classic.
With a course-record 10-under-par 62 final round over the Arnold Palmer Course at PGA West that equaled the lowest round he has ever shot in his 22-year professional career, Kite finished with a phenomenal five-round total of 35-under-par 325.
That left him six shots better than Rick Fehr and 10 better than the third-place finisher, Scott Simpson.


OPEC Members Disagree Over Cuts
Small and large oil producers within the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries disagreed today over what constitutes equitable burdens, as the oil ministers of the 12 member nations began talks on reducing oil production.
Virtually all the ministers agreed that OPEC should reduce its output, which currently exceeds 25 million barrels a day.
Saudi Arabia has proposed a cut of one million barrels a day; other members want an even bigger cut to shore up prices immediately.


The Talk of Hollywood; How Orlando Finds Her True Self: Filming a Woolfian Escapade
"Orlando," which opened to rave notices in Italy over Christmas, has subsequently impressed critics in France, Germany and the Netherlands.
At the recent Sundance Film Festival in Utah, it was given several special screenings and instantly emerged as the most discussed film of the festival.
"It has been so . . . unexpected," said Sally Potter, the English writer and director of "Orlando," which will be released in the United States in June by Sony Pictures Classics.
"People have come up to me in tears after the film. It must be connected with some need or desire that people have at this moment."


Dr. Albert D. Anderson, 65, Rehabilitation Expert
Dr.
Albert D. Anderson, who became a doctor to disabled patients and an expert on rehabilitation through his own struggle with a rare disease, died Monday at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 65 and lived in the Bronx.
He had been in a coma since being stricken by pneumonia in July, his family said.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Bob Telson and Little Village S.O.B.'s


Patents
EDWIN E. (BUZZ) ALDRIN JR., who walked on the moon as an astronaut in 1969, last week received a patent for a permanent space station he designed alone in his home office.
Mr.
Aldrin, who went to the moon with Neil Armstrong on the Apollo 11 mission, wants his space station to be the core of a "complete family of spacecraft that support it."
The United States has issued more than five million patents since 1790, but space stations joined the ranks only in 1964.
About two dozen such patents have been issued, most for stations that must be launched in pieces and assembled in space or that are small enough to be carried aloft inside the space shuttle.


Eleazar Lipsky, 81, a Prosecutor, Lawyer, Novelist and Playwright
Eleazar Lipsky, a novelist and lawyer who was prominent in Jewish affairs, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 81 and lived on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
His son Michael said the cause was leukemia.


Rangers Still Better on Paper Than Ice
Mark Messier will argue that the New York Rangers have shown signs of possessing all the pieces necessary to be the Stanley-Cup caliber hockey team, as they have so insistently been billed.
And he will be convincing.
The Rangers have had tremendous offensive nights.
They have had flashes of great goaltending.
They have played decent, if not spectacular, defense on occasion this year.


Washington's Birthday
NEW YORK
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal, state, and city closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Option to close.
PARKINGAlternate-side rules suspended.
SANITATION No pickups, street cleanings, or recycling.
SCHOOLS Closed.  FINANCIAL MARKETS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Buses, subways, Long Island Rail Road and Metro-North on holiday schedules  NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal and state closed, local option to close.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Option to close.
SCHOOLS Option to close.
TRANSPORTATION Some N.J. Transit lines will be on holiday schedules.  CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal and state closed, local option to close.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION New Haven Line on holiday schedule.


Foodmaker Halts Expansion Plans
The parent company of the Jack in the Box fast-food chain, Foodmaker Inc., has canceled plans to open 85 restaurants this year.
The decision, announced on Friday at Foodmaker's annual shareholder meeting in San Diego, came a month after an outbreak of food poisoning from hamburgers sold at Jack in the Box outlets in the West left one child dead and hundreds of patrons ill.


No Headline
They probably just didn't want to leave any witnesses.
JOSE LUIS RIVERA, whose brother was one of six people slain in a Bronx apartment.  [ A1:3. ]


Essay; For Whom the Bell Tolls
You can make a case that war in the Balkans poses no threat to America's vital strategic interests; Bosnia produces nothing we cannot do without, and Serbia is not about to develop a nuclear bomb or otherwise menace the rest of Europe.
You can also justify nonintervention by deriding the domino theory: if murder-by-ethnicity spreads, the Turks and Greeks may or may not be drawn in, and nowhere is it written that the Hungarians, Romanians and Bulgarians are certain to then plunge in to rearrange boundaries, leading to a rerun of World War I.


Corporations Attack Plan To Lift Taxes
Even before President Clinton introduces his economic package, American corporations have mounted an offensive, attacking his plan to increase the corporate income tax by asserting that it collides with his goal of stimulating investment and jobs.
Lobbyists' letters are pouring into the White House to protest such an increase, which Administration officials hint will raise the corporate income tax to 36 percent from 34 percent now.


The Trauma of Managed Mental Health Care; Low Canada-Bashing
To the Editor:
Contrary to what the National Center for Policy Analysis would have readers believe in its advertisement on the Jan. 27 Op-Ed page, Canada's health care system is not going to the dogs.
To suggest that under our system "dogs have more rights than humans" is to carry Canada-bashing to a new low.


6 Are Killed in Bronx Building Known for Drug Sales
Three adults and three teen-agers, all residents of a building notorious for drug sales and gunfire, were lined up face down on the living-room floor of an apartment in the Bronx early yesterday and shot to death, execution style, with one bullet to the head of each victim.
The killers escaped, the police said.
The motive was unclear, but the police found $4,400 in the flat and ruled out robbery.
And neighbors said one victim may have been a small-time drug dealer and perhaps was the intended target, while the others were apparently innocent bystanders caught in the wrong place at the wrong time.


Minority Caucus Adding Political Power in Albany
When New York State Assembly leaders began talking recently about raising income tax rates for the state's wealthiest residents, few thought much would come of the idea.
But for members of the Legislature's black and Puerto Rican caucus, the mere existence of a debate over the question has offered a sense of vindication.
For five years, they have championed tax increases to avoid budget cuts.
For five years, they have fought almost alone.


Marjorie Schorr, Joseph Gurvets
Marjorie Jane Schorr, a vice president in the bank-card division of Citibank, and Joseph Gurvets, a vice president in charge of telecommunications software at the Bank of New York, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Avi Winokur performed the ceremony at the Mark Hotel in New York.
The bride, who is keeping her name, graduated magna cum laude from Amherst College and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a daughter of Thelma and Norman Schorr of New York.
Her father is the president of Schorr, Howard &amp; Megill, a New York public-relations firm.
Her mother, a nurse, retired as the president and publisher of The American Journal of Nursing in New York.


Stopping the Next Nuclear Renegade
The International Atomic Energy Agency has come under attack for its failure to detect Iraq's nuclear weapons program before the Persian Gulf war -- and its problems ever since in insuring that no nuclear installations remain hidden in Iraq.
There are legitimate fears that the agency can't be relied on to block the spread of nuclear weapons to outlaw states.
The I.A.E.A. clearly needs to be strengthened.
In particular, it must become more aggressive in undertaking special inspections -- as it is now trying to do in North Korea.


Iraqi Leader Appeals to Clinton for New Relations
In his first personal appeal to the President Clinton, President Saddam Hussein has urged him to open a new chapter in American relations with Iraq.
"I believe that the President of the biggest country in the world, with the most destructive potential, needs to try wisdom and not weapons," the official Iraqi news agency quoted the Iraqi leader as saying, in a reference to Iraq's crushing defeat in the Persian Gulf war.
In a good-will gesture on Jan. 19, Mr.
Hussein said his forces would respect the ban on flights over northern and southern Iraq that the United States and its allies have imposed to enforce the cease-fire terms that followed the gulf war.


Feeling Vindicated, G.M. Plans No Publicity Drive
The General Motors Corporation says it has no plans to mount an advertising campaign, or a public relations effort, addressing either the apology made to it by NBC News for broadcasting a rigged crash test of G.M. pickup trucks, or a broader dispute about the safety of its vehicles.
The automotive giant has joined a growing list of companies selling to consumers that now find their communications strategies questioned in the wake of television news coverage of problems or crises involving their products and services.


Jarrett (and, Yes, the Real Joe Gibbs) Pull Off a Fast One at Daytona
On a day when Redskins Coach Joe Gibbs credited a man named Jimmy Johnson with helping his team win the biggest event of the year and a 21-year-old rookie kept his head better than a lot of veterans, there was at least one constant in the Daytona 500 today.
Dale Earnhardt came into the race strong and went out a loser.


Encouraged but Still Wary, Union Leaders Gather
Gerry and Jack, Rich and Al, and Lane, Morty and Moe, all stalwarts of the once-mighty House of Labor, have every reason to gloat after 12 years of Republican administrations that these men, some past 70, found the most hostile they have ever known.
Suddenly, there's no one to hate.
"Look at what happened!" Gerald W. McEntee, president of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, cheered to hundreds of union officers on the eve of their annual winter gathering.
That only three of the 32 A.F.L.-C.I.O. union presidents, Mr.
McEntee among them, endorsed Bill Clinton in the primaries a year ago has been lost in the pro-labor hints and pronouncements from the new Administration.


Hope Undimmed, Voters See Jobs as True Test for Clinton


Haunted Still, Jurors in Beating Trial Give Warning to Possible Successors
Kevin Siminski has started waking up again at night, still haunted by the aftermath of the verdict he rendered nearly 10 months ago -- by the riots that tore this city, by the condemnation and threats he and his fellow jurors have received.
"For months after the verdicts I would lie there in the middle of the night, just thinking," said Mr.
Siminski, a 39-year-old computer programmer from Ventura County who voted last April 29 to acquit four Los Angeles police officers of assault charges in the beating of Rodney G. King.


'People Smugglers' Send New Tide of Refugees Onto Nordic Shores
A new kind of "boat people" are landing on the shores of the Nordic countries, especially Sweden, whose liberal asylum policies have made it a prime destination.
They are the product of a traffic in people by which smugglers are making large profits from the refugees' desire to reach safer and more prosperous shores.
The new refugees, mainly Iraqis but also families fleeing the fighting in the former Yugoslavia or the devastation of Somalia, take a circuitous route by road, rail, air and sea and pay large amounts of money to be delivered to Sweden or other Nordic countries by "people smugglers," whose trade is centered in Moscow.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Seles Beats Navratilova


Here's a Great Tax
At his inauguration as President of Czechoslovakia, Vaclav Havel declared, "We have been lying to one other for 40 years . . . saying one thing and believing another." President Clinton echoed a similar sentiment in his own inaugural, challenging us to "break the bad habit of expecting something for nothing." We Americans have been lying to one other for 12 years, saying one thing and believing another.
The mother of all lies in the Reagan-Bush era was the claim that there
is
a free lunch -- that deficits don't matter or that they can be eliminated painlessly, strictly by cutting spending.


Dance in Review
'Square Dance'  New York City Ballet New York State Theater


An Undercard Winner Becomes Main Attraction
He was not in the main event here Saturday night, but the next time Roy Jones Jr. steps into the ring, it will probably be the fight he has waited for.
"We're ready for a title fight right now," Alton Merkerson, Jones's trainer, said at the end of the evening at Caesars Palace.


How to Force Saddam Hussein Out
To the Editor:
"Now, What About Iraq?" (editorial Jan. 21) misses the only effective means to the "removal" of Saddam Hussein.
He is incapable of obeying United Nations resolutions.
To obey any is to reduce his hope of regaining control of oil sales, the source of his existence.
Despite what he stole from the Iraqi treasury and retained by theft in Kuwait, his oil revenues for 30 months approach zero, with expenses averaging $1 billion a month.


Leslie E. Singer, Craig L. Slater
Leslie Ellen Singer, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph A. Singer of Williams Island, Fla., was married yesterday to Craig Lloyd Slater, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David B. Slater of Needham, Mass.
Rabbis Max Lipschitz and Simcha Freedman performed the ceremony at Turnberry Isle Country Club in North Miami Beach, Fla.
Mrs.
Slater, 29, is an associate at the New York law firm of Shea &amp; Gould.
She graduated from Tulane University and received a law degree from the University of Chicago.
Her father is an ophthalmologist in Miami.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Diedre Murray  Cellist Dance Theater Workshop


Mary-Jane Oltarzewski, Craig Gartner
Mary-Jane Oltarzewski, the daughter of Irene Oltarzewski of Oakhurst, N.J., and the late Edward Oltarzewski, was married yesterday to Craig Lyle Gartner, a son of Theodore F. and Patricia C. Gartner of Parsippany, N.J.
The Rev.
Eugene Kasper performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Anselm in Wayside, N.J.
Ms.
Oltarzewski, 32, is keeping her name.
She is a lawyer in the claims department at the Ohio Casualty Insurance Company, in Toms River, N.J.
She graduated from Rutgers University and received a law degree from New York Law School.


Words Got The Best of Cal Coach
Lou Campanelli's post-game tirades, for mature audiences only, were ultimately what got him dismissed here last week from his job as the University of California's head basketball coach.
His words were perhaps no coarser than Coach Bob Knight's at Indiana.
But the Cal athletic director, Robert Bockrath, inadvertently listened in on Campanelli one night recently, and that made the difference.


BUSINESS DIGEST
MONDAY, FEBRUARY 15, 1993  The Economy


Cutbacks at Kodak Lab in Japan Create Unease
When the Eastman Kodak Company opened its laboratory in Yokohama in 1988, it was in the vanguard of a movement by American companies to expand research and development in Japan.
The research center was viewed as such a model of how an American company should operate in Japan that President George Bush planned to make a speech there on his trip to Japan last year, only to cancel when he fell ill at a state dinner.
But now, in a move directed by Kodak headquarters in Rochester, the company is sharply cutting back its research activities in Japan.
The Yokohama laboratory is seeking voluntary resignations from 70 of the 110 researchers.
And, in a move that is virtually unheard of in Japan, Kodak has told eight college students it agreed to hire that it will not have jobs for them.


'Bronx Zoo' No Longer Describes Today's World Wildlife Role
To the Editor:
"A Zoo by Any Other Name . . ." (editorial, Feb. 5) has some fun with the name changes at the New York Zoological Society.
But it hardly does justice to the subject.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  YOUTHS, TOO, ARE SHELTER RESIDENTS
Across New York, people who run homeless shelters say they are being slowly overwhelmed by the growing number of young people seeking shelter.
Far needier than the classic rebellious runaways seeking adventure, these young people have put new and special burdens on a system that can barely handle the more common problems of homeless families and the mentally ill.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Why Would Anybody Want To Be Owner of The Post?
For sale: Newspaper losing $300,000 a week with poor niche in highly competitive market.
Unique opportunity.
Previous owners have lost tens of millions of dollars.
Such an ad never appeared in The New York Post, but a candid description of the business challenges facing anyone buying New York City's most troubled tabloid newspaper would describe it that way.


Nancy Kestenbaum, David Klafter
Nancy Lynn Kestenbaum, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred K. Kestenbaum of Leonia, N.J., was married yesterday to David Steven Klafter, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Horace Klafter of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Beth H. Klafter, the bridegroom's sister, performed the ceremony at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Ms.
Kestenbaum, who is 29, is keeping her last name.
She is an associate at the New York law firm of Howard, Darby &amp; Levin.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from Yale University.


Sherry A. Chase, Benjamin J. Fitt
Sherry Ann Chase, the general counsel to the Dental Society of the State of New York, and Benjamin Jones Fitt, an assistant attorney general, both in Albany, were married there yesterday.
Justice Howard Levine of the Appellate Division of New York State Supreme Court in Schenectady officiated at the Steuben Club.
Ms.
Chase, who is keeping her name, graduated from the University of Chicago and received a law degree from Northeastern University.
She is a daughter of Leonard and Carol Chase of North Palm Beach, Fla.


Easy Now 11th at Gulfstream
The promising but puzzling career of Easy Now, the half-sister to the renowned Easy Goer, suffered another setback today when she ran 11th in a field of 13 while the long shot Jeano was winning the Shirley Jones Handicap at Gulfstream Park.
Easy Now, the royally bred 4-year-old daughter of Danzig and grand-daughter of Buckpasser, drew major notices last spring in New York because of her pedigree and performance, and she seemed to be one of the rising stars of the Ogden Mills Phipps stable under Shug McGaughey.
She ran second to Turnback the Alarm in both the Mother Goose and the Coaching Club American Oaks at Belmont Park, and later won the Go For Wand Stakes there.


For Florio, Patience Is a Sign Of Progress
Now that he is no longer under a political death watch, Gov.
Jim Florio is in no hurry to announce for re-election.
"Why should he?" said one of his top political advisers, who agreed to discuss strategy in a recent interview only on the condition of anonymity.


Judge Will Hear Appeal For a New Tyson Trial
ALAN DERSHOWITZ, the lawyer for MIKE TYSON, plans to tell an Indiana appeals court in Indianapolis today that the former heavyweight champion should get a new trial because a judge blocked testimony from witnesses challenging the truthfulness of the woman who accused him of rape.
Tyson, 26 years old, was convicted in February 1992 after a beauty contestant, DESIREE WASHINGTON of Coventry, R.I., told jurors he raped her six months earlier in his Indianapolis hotel room.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Eartha Kitt  Cafe Carlyle Madison Avenue and 76th Street  Through March 27


Walker Left to Defend One U.S.O.C. Policy
Dr.
LeRoy Walker, the first black president of the United States Olympic Committee, today found himself in the uncomfortable position of defending the organization's appointment policies toward minority-group members and women.
As a relatively uneventful U.S.O.C. board of directors meeting neared its close, Dr.
Evie Dennis, superintendant of a Denver school district and an assistant to the U.S.O.C. president, attacked Walker and the board for failing to fill committee chairs and other power positions with blacks or women.


Tiny Zoo on a Vacant Lot in Harlem Runs Afoul of City Health Department
An International Wildlife Conservation Park it is not, just a fenced-in lot on a Harlem street corner where chicks and ducks and geese get to scurry -- to the apparent delight of most, if not all, of the neighborhood's human inhabitants.
Although the New York Zoological Society decided recently that the word zoo had become an urban pejorative -- and that its great gatherings of beasts in four boroughs would henceforth be known as conservation parks -- the people near the corner of Madison Avenue and 109th Street are perfectly proud to call their collection a zoo.
A mini-zoo, a petting zoo or just "our zoo."


Patents
EDWIN E. (BUZZ) ALDRIN JR., who walked on the moon as an astronaut in 1969, last week received a patent for a permanent space station he designed alone in his home office.
Mr.
Aldrin, who went to the moon with Neil Armstrong on the Apollo 11 mission, wants his space station to be the core of a "complete family of spacecraft that support it."
The United States has issued more than five million patents since 1790, but space stations joined the ranks only in 1964.
About two dozen such patents have been issued, most for stations that must be launched in pieces and assembled in space or that are small enough to be carried aloft inside the space shuttle.


Coleman and Mets Renew Their Vows
The hard facts are these: the Mets, numb with embarrassment but not deprived of their senses after the 1992 season, tried to trade Vince Coleman this winter; Coleman, desperate to get back on artificial turf and convinced there was no likely chance to reverse the tide of angry public sentiment that was rolling over him, wanted to be traded.
The hard reality is this: there was no appreciable market for the 31-year-old Coleman, and ownership at Shea Stadium made clear it would refuse to become involved in any deal that required the Mets to pick up a portion of Coleman's $2.98 million annual salary.
According to the Mets, talks never involved more than one or two clubs and never advanced to any serious stage.


Tiny Zoo on a Vacant Lot in Harlem Runs Afoul of City Health Department
An International Wildlife Conservation Park it is not, just a fenced-in lot on a Harlem street corner where chicks and ducks and geese get to scurry -- to the apparent delight of most, if not all, of the neighborhood's human inhabitants.
Although the New York Zoological Society decided recently that the word zoo had become an urban pejorative -- and that its great gatherings of beasts in four boroughs would henceforth be known as conservation parks -- the people near the corner of Madison Avenue and 109th Street are perfectly proud to call their collection a zoo.
A mini-zoo, a petting zoo or just "our zoo."


Pop and Jazz in Review
Stanley Clarke Trio
The Blue Note


Amanda Tepper, Jeffrey D. Kiker
Amanda Tepper, a daughter of Nancy B. Tepper of Newport Beach, Calif., and Dr.
Ronald Tepper of Bel Air, Calif., was married yesterday to Jeffrey David Kiker, a son of Suzanne and Clyde Kiker of Gainesville, Fla.
Wayne Castello, a notary public, performed the civil ceremony at the St.
Petersburg Women's Club on Snell Island in St.
Petersburg, Fla.
Ms.
Tepper, who is 29, is keeping her name.
She is an associate in the retail industries group at Chemical Bank in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brown University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from the University of Pennsylvania.


The Trauma of Managed Mental Health Care
To the Editor:
Discussions of the problems patients and professionals experience with managed care rarely address managed mental health care.
Today we are witnessing the takeover of mental health practice by business interests, with devastating effects on patients, practitioners and the professions.
Because of lack of regulation, this industry is deciding what is good mental health practice, who can have treatment and who can provide it.


Artone Studio Wendy Dickinson, John M. Duryea
Wendy Aldrich Dickinson, a daughter of Helen M. Dickinson of San Diego and Charles P. Dickinson Jr. of Phoenix, was married yesterday to John McCollom Duryea, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alvin E. Duryea Jr. of Boca Raton, Fla.
The Rev.
Tom Ericson performed the ceremony at Valley Presbyterian Church in Paradise Valley, Ariz.


Sports of The Times: College Basketball; Coaches Better Learn New Song: 'Respect'
LAST month in Dallas, Mike Krzyzewski, Duke's head basketball coach, received a chilly reception from delegates to the National Collegiate Athletic Association convention.
The brief interaction underlined a gap in understanding between coaches and educators who find themselves wondering what role, aside from providing entertainment, sports plays in the life of a campus.
Krzyzewski was appealing to the delegates to vote for two measures that would have granted additional men's basketball scholarships and one that would have allowed a team an extra coach.
Both measures were defeated.
But before the vote on coaches was taken, one faculty adviser quipped that because the extra scholarship was voted down, the extra coach wasn't needed either.


World Economies


Accused and Police Given Equal Weight, Poll Finds
When faced with conflicting testimonies, jurors do not necessarily give more weight to the testimony of police officers than they do that of defendants, a national survey of jurors has found.
In a survey of 783 jurors serving on criminal and civil cases, 51 percent of those questioned said they were as likely to believe defendants as they were police officers.
Among black jurors, the poll found, 70 percent said the testimony of police officers would not carry more weight.


Dressing Down by Daly Shakes Nets Up
There is very little in life that professional athletes haven't seen.
Many are from the streets and many have fought their way through all kinds of adversity.
But there are still some things that have shock value, and apparently one of them is a red-faced, screaming Chuck Daly.
A halftime tirade in which Daly said the Nets were playing like "Nets losers of the past" pushed the team out of its sleepwalking and past the Heat in overtime, 117-111, before 16,299 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Big Science, Big Budget Cuts
As the Clinton Administration and Congress search for ways to cut Federal spending, frugal eyes are inevitably turning to the two biggest scientific projects now underway -- the $8.3 billion superconducting supercollider now being built in Texas, and the $30 billion space station.
Billions have already been sunk into each project.
But if the pain is to be spread fairly, these two research behemoths must be cut along with other vital programs.
It is disheartening to hear that the Administration may be yielding to pressure to preserve them.
The easier call is the space station, a costly engineering project that has become, as some critics describe it, "an entitlement program for the aerospace industry." In a perverse inverse relationship, as the costs of the project have risen, the justifications for it have diminished.


Lonrho Names A Joint Chief
Lonrho P.L.C., the British conglomerate whose businesses range from international mining to hotels, has named a German financier, Dieter Bock, its joint chief executive with Roland Rowland.
The move marks the first time in Mr.
Rowland's 31 years of running Lonrho that another executive has assumed such influence.
The 75-year-old Mr.
Rowland is expected to surrender authority to Mr.
Bock, who acquired almost 19 percent of the company through a recent stock issue.


Sharks May Yield a Potent Weapon Against Infection
From the tissues of sharks, a team of scientists has extracted a novel compound that is a powerful killer of a variety of bacteria, fungi and parasites, according to a report being published Monday in a scientific journal.
While it is too early to know just how the compound could be used, the scientists speculate that it could be a strong weapon in the arsenal of antibiotics, not just because it is new but also because it might be effective against infectious diseases as the microbes that cause them become more resistant to existing drugs.


Morris L. Schwalb Is Dead at 82; Judge Was Tough on Prostitution
Justice Morris L. Schwalb, a retired State Supreme Court judge whose complaining about prostitutes in midtown Manhattan drew national attention in 1971 and was followed by a police crackdown on them, died on Saturday at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Yonkers.
He was 82 and lived on the Upper West Side until he moved to the Hebrew Home for the Aged at Riverdale two years ago.
His daughter, Susan Schwalb, said the cause of death was pneumonia.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Larry McCray  Blues guitarist and singer Manny's Car Wash Upper East Side


Countdown to Fat Tuesday


Amy Gadol, Robert Deak
Amy Gadol, a vice president of the Bankers Trust Company, and Robert Frank Deak, an independent investment adviser, both in New York, were married yesterday.
Charles D. Brown, the village justice of Asharoken, L.I., officiated at the Princeton Club in New York.
Mrs.
Deak graduated from Georgetown University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Ellis Gadol of Silver Spring, Md., and the late Selma Gadol.
Her father is a pharmacist in Silver Spring.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


Remember Maclay on Presidents' Day
Creditably, President Clinton wants to make the White House more like a people's palace.
An exclusive executive mess is soon to be a cafeteria, the motor pool fleet is shrinking, and ordinary citizens will be on guest lists for gala events.
Yet official Washington, the permanent Government, tends to dismiss such gestures as either unserious or wrongheaded, the theory being that Americans
prefer
a certain aura of majesty around Presidents and their families.
It is worth remarking on Presidents' Day that history argues the contrary.
Indeed, the degree of deference due to the chief executive was the focus of heated discussion in the first Senate, which convened in New York City in 1789.
And the outcome was a victory for the popular party.


Choice for Justice Dept. Earns Hometown Praise
At the annual Martin Luther King Jr. parade last month in the predominantly black Liberty City section of Miami, Janet Reno, the Dade County State Attorney, was marching as usual, waving to the crowd.
It was notable, recalled a black minister here who was a parade marshal, because she walked alone, without police escorts, a solitary, though commanding figure at 6 feet 1 1/2 inches tall, and was cheered by parade watchers who shouted her name.
Thirteen years before, that same section had erupted in riots as residents had blamed her personally for her office's failure to win the convictions of five white police officers accused in the beating death of a black insurance salesman.
But to the public, she has largely redeemed herself since then in pressing other police-brutality cases and in adopting a broader social agenda.


Corrections
An article on the Media Business page yesterday about the new publisher of Out magazine misidentified the magazine's chief financial supporter.
He is Robert Hardman.


Yes They Do Windows, Over 800 of Them


Amerika Journal; Amerikans Ask Help, but Americans Pay No Heed
After long years of proud success, Amerika is in evident decline.
Years of misrule by short-sighted ideologues have led to economic collapse.
Unemployment is chronic, and many residents fear that worse times lie ahead.
"We may all have to leave," groused Hans Friedrich, a leading specialist in Amerikan history.
"Then we would have an Amerika without Amerikans. How would that look?"


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.  Hrudey and Kings Shut Out Canucks
Kelly Hrudey was at his acrobatic best with 43 saves and Jari Kurri triggered a three-goal third period yesterday as the Los Angeles Kings defeated the Vancouver Canucks, 3-0, in Inglewood, Calif.
Vancouver was blanked for the first time since December 1991.
Hrudey's shutout, his second this season and the 15th of his career, snapped a personal five-game streak without a victory.
The Kings, who had not won in their last seven games, had allowed 29 goals in their last three games.
Kurri snapped the scoreless tie at 4 minutes 42 seconds with his 23d goal, beating Kirk McLean to the glove side from about 30 feet.
With the goal, Kurri tied Bryan Trottier for 14th place on the career goal-scoring list at 520.
Jimmy Carson followed with his 27th goal, a 25-footer through a screen.
Tony Granato's 24th goal finished the scoring with 10:35 left. (AP) TENNIS  Reneberg Upsets Gilbert in Philadelphia
Richey Reneberg used well-placed passing shots to upset seventh-seeded Brad Gilbert, 6-2, 6-2, yesterday in the first round of the U.S.
Indoor championship in Philadelphia.
Reneberg, ranked No. 69 in the world, won eight consecutive games from 2-2 in the first set.
Eighth-seeded Amos Mansdorf rallied past David Wheaton, 4-6, 7-5, 6-3.
Wheaton served for the match at 5-4 of the second set but double-faulted twice while being broken.
In the final set, Mansdorf recovered from an 0-2 deficit.
Jim Courier and Pete Sampras, the defending champion, are top-seeded players at the Spectrum. (AP)


METROPOLITAN COLLEGE REPORT
Columbia
The Lions (12-8 over all and 6-2 in the Ivy League) split games over the weekend on the most feared road trip the league has to offer: at Penn and at Princeton.
On Friday night, the first-place Quakers (7-0) walloped Columbia by 84-63 at the Palestra.
The Lions came back to defeat the Tigers, 71-69, on Saturday.
The Columbia coach, Jack Rohan, was despondent after the Penn game, sounding as if he believed that the Lions' chances of winning the Ivy title had disappeared.


In Tough Times for Business, Videos and Much, Much More
BOB HAINES sold some Lotto tickets, then he weighed and took payment for a U.P.S. package to be shipped, and reminded the man at the copying machine to make sure he picked up his original.
Then he got back to his point, which was, "In the video business, you either grow or go out of business."


Networks Refuse Crash Dummy Ads
The ABC, CBS and NBC networks, as expected, said they would refuse to lift a ban on running public-service television commercials that feature the crash dummy characters, Vince and Larry, promoting the use of safety belts.
The networks had stopped running the spots after Tyco Industries introduced a line of toys called the Incredible Crash Dummies, centering on two similar characters; network executives said they feared the public-service commercials would be perceived by viewers as commercials for the toys.


Samaranch Says Brasilia Is Impressive
The president of the International Olympic Committee said yesterday he was impressed with Brasilia, one of seven cities vying to be host for the 2000 Olympics.
"The city is surprising and splendidly prepared to host an event of this type," JUAN ANTONIO SAMARANCH said after a meeting with President ITAMAR FRANCO of Brazil.


Don't Worry, Be Happy
To the Editor:
It amazes me that a panel of 11 experts from the National Research Council, part of a private organization, has announced that "AIDS was concentrated among homosexuals, drug users, the poor and the undereducated, and called them 'socially marginalized groups' with little economic, political, and social power" (news article, Feb. 5).


Sears Catalogues Are for Remembering
To the Editor:
"Sears Catalogue: To Shop, Perchance to Dream" (The Week in Review, Jan. 31), triggered recall of a Sears catalogue memory of mine.
It was 40 years ago, backstage of the magnificent Paris Opera.
The concierge was escorting me to the second-floor dressing room of Michelin Bardin, the prima ballerina.
I had been invited to help stage a coming concert program in Carnegie Hall.
As I walked up the wide, resin-stained gray steps, trod upon through the years by Pavlova, Nijinsky and thousands of dancers, I looked up the stairwell and on each landing, members of the corps, in full costume for the first ballet on the evening program, were using the bannister as a barre for their warm-up exercises.


Fisticuffs at First and Then Rangers Try Finesse
The Rangers should have sensed trouble when they took the ice for the opening face-off yesterday afternoon and found Basil McRae grinning at them from the other side of the red line.
For those who do not recognize the name, and that should be most folks, McRae is a guy who was acquired a couple of weeks ago by the St.
Louis Blues, along with a rather unspectacular defenseman named Doug Crossman, for little more than a minor leaguer.
His main claim to fame is having accumulated 2,157 penalty minutes -- the 11th highest individual total in the National Hockey League -- in 464 professional games.


Simon R. Bregman, Builder, 94
Simon R. Bregman, a partner from 1945 to 1990 in Bregman &amp; Stolz, a firm that built shopping centers and buildings in the Bronx and Manhattan, died on Friday at Presbyterian Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 94 and lived at the Hebrew Home for the Aged in the Bronx.
The cause of death was pneumonia, said his wife, Ruth.


Slovakian Opposition Helps Select President
The Parliament of Slovakia, which became an independent nation on Jan. 1, elected Michal Kovac today as the republic's first President.
Mr.
Kovac, who ran unopposed, was elected with 106 votes, 16 more than he needed for the required three-fifths majority in the 150-member Slovak Parliament.


Archeologists at Odds on Restoring Statues
IN its time, Tongariki was the glory of Easter Island and its cult of ancestor worship.
Overlooking a gentle bay on the south side of the island, it was the largest religious site in Polynesia.
On its giant ahu, or temple platform, stood 15 immense stone statues, called moai, some weighing up to 70 tons.
Hundreds came here to worship.
They lived near the site and carved elaborate petroglyphs, or stone etchings, of giant tuna, sea turtles and birdmen.


Don't Relax on Caffeine
To the Editor:
A Feb. 3 news article seriously misrepresents a report on the lack of caffeine's effect on spontaneous abortion, intrauterine growth, birth weight and head circumference of babies.
No behavioral or cognitive measures were studied, and the results do not show that caffeine intake during pregnancy is safe.
Caffeine is a potent drug with powerful effects on the central nervous system.
Chronic intrauterine exposure to caffeine may have long-lasting effects on the development of neural systems that are vital to learning, memory, attention and regulation of sleep.


Advertising
WHEN it comes to advertising in unexpected sites, the sky is even less of a limit than it used to be.
The Gannett Company is seeking to acquaint airline passengers, and marketers trying to reach them, with USA Today Sky Radio, a live audio service that began operating in September.
It is now available, via the in-flight audio channels heard through headphones at flyers' seats, in 74 aircraft flown by Delta Air Lines and United Airlines.


Big Change Sought in Auto Insurance
California is considering a new system of car insurance that drivers would pay for through fees at the fuel pump, so the cost would depend more heavily on how much they drive than on traditional factors like what type of car they use or where they live.
Insurance companies and trial lawyers hate the idea, which is intended to ease out-of-control increases in insurance costs and the huge problem of uninsured drivers.


People Are Ready for Sacrifices, Poll Finds, and Expect Fairness
Although Americans are more judgmental about President Clinton's performance than they were about his two predecessors at this early stage, most remain open to the prospect of dramatic changes in taxing, spending and the way the White House is run, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News poll.
While the new President irritated many Americans by giving a lot of attention after his inauguration to the issue of homosexuals in the military, he still has the confidence of most people, who seem ready to make some sacrifices to fix the bedeviling deficit.


Parking Rules
Because of the forecast for snow, street-cleaning regulations are suspended in New York City today.


Tyson Defense Goes to Court For Reversal Of Conviction
One year after Mike Tyson was convicted of rape, he was back in court again, by proxy.
The former heavyweight champion himself could not be in the ornate Indiana Court of Appeals in the State Capitol this afternoon seeking a reversal of his conviction.
He was 18 miles away in the Indiana Youth Center, wearing No. 922335 on his prison garb and serving a six-year sentence.
His defense team, led by the well-known lawyer Alan Dershowitz, argued before three Appellate Court judges that the conviction should be reversed because of mistakes made by Tyson's trial judge.
Matthew Gutwein, an Indiana deputy attorney general, and others from the Attorney General's office, argued for the state.


Brazil Seeks to Revive Its Economic Miracle, Lying in Ruins
Outside a grim municipal building on the west side of this city, scores of men, women and children line up every evening.
Many have vacant stares or fearful faces, many are sick and most appear undernourished.
They come for a bath, a bed and a meal of chicken soup, bread and milk -- and the hope of finding a job.
Most standing in line are migrants who have come from impoverished areas of the northeast with hopes of work and a better future.
But now they want to go home.
For them, Sao Paulo, the epicenter of Brazil's industrial might, has become a nightmare.


For Fall, the Outlook Is Soothing
No, you don't have to make up your mind yet whether you want to go long or short in the next eight months or so.
Yes, designers' enthusiasm for pants continues unabated for day and for night.
Sure, the black evening suits and dresses that everybody has been wearing to black-tie events this winter will continue as important fashion.
These are some of the soothing observations gleaned from the early- fall fashion collections that are occupying designers and store buyers on and off Seventh Avenue at the moment.
Earlier this month, the big, expensive European fashion houses like Armani, Valentino and Chanel showed their collections.
Last week, the more moderately priced clothes were introduced -- styles that will be in the stores starting in June.
By then, fashion enthusiasts will presumably have finished purchasing their summer wardrobes for work and for play and will be ready for the next step.


Buffalo's the Home of the Bills and Proud of It
To the Editor:
As I was about to leave Buffalo for Pasadena, Calif., to watch our Buffalo Bills play in their third consecutive Super Bowl, I was given a copy of "Buffalo Fears a Rendezvous With Agony" (front page, Jan. 28).


Los Angeles Schools: Hobbled and Hurting
Like the city it is supposed to serve, the Los Angeles public school system is a stricken giant, hobbled by financial problems, a threatened teachers' strike and racial and ethnic strife.
Overcrowded classrooms, leaky roofs, outdated textbooks, metal detectors and police officers patrolling schools are common in America's inner-city schools.


CHRONICLE
Journalists may pry into the love lives of her children and their spouses, but whoever dares violate the sanctity of QUEEN ELIZABETH II'S holiday homily pays the price.
For The Sun, that price was a front-page apology to the Queen and a donation to charity of 200,000 pounds, or about $280,000.


Group Led by Saatchi's Chief Acquires Control of Adidas
Robert Louis-Dreyfus, who for the last three years has helped stabilize the giant British advertising company Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C., will put his marketing and financial experience to work restoring another battered company: Adidas A.G.
A group including Mr.
Louis-Dreyfus said today that it had acquired a controlling stake in the troubled German athletic shoe company from Bernard Tapie, a French investor and politician, for $370 million.


Classical Music in Review
New York Chamber Symphony 92d Street Y


Rabbi Is Said to Have Offered Deal for Missing Boy
Video and audio tapes, letters and accounts of threats and bribes are among the major pieces of evidence against a Hasidic rabbi in the disappearance of a Jewish boy in Brooklyn, law-enforcement officials and relatives said yesterday.
Much of that evidence, which was presented to a grand jury recently, was produced more than 10 months ago, shortly after the boy, Shai Fhima, disappeared amid a dispute between his parents and the rabbi over the boy's religious upbringing.


Can St. Jovite Take U.S. Soil by Storm?
Can Europe's champion horse of one year cross the Atlantic and become North America's champion horse the next year?
It has never been done, but Europe's best horse of 1992 is going to try.


Book-Disk Combinations for the Mac
COMPUTER books are often packaged with software disks, making it difficult to decide which is the dog and which is the tail.
There is no doubt with "Big Mac Secrets," by Mark Bilbo and Ken Maki (Que; $39.95).
Even a five-megabyte tail (the amount of software on the disks) would have a hard time wagging a 1,249-page dog.
This heavy volume covers it all: buying, customizing and upgrading hardware and software; troubleshooting; networking, and using the accompanying software.
Two of the programs, Masterjuggler and Diskflash, are versions of commercial offerings.
The six other major programs and a bunch of little ones are shareware; you try them out and, if you like them, you are honor bound to pay a registration fee, usually small.


Police Search For Motive In 6 Slayings
Detectives investigating the execution-style deaths of six people in a Bronx apartment said yesterday that the killers had used at least two types of guns and that 600 rounds of live ammunition had been found hidden in the apartment.
But they said they still had no idea of the killers' identities and motive.
As relatives and friends mourned the three adults and three teen-agers who were each lined up face down on a living room floor and shot in the head Sunday at 645 Prospect Avenue in the South Bronx, the police scoured the drug-infested neighborhood for witnesses and examined the live ammunition, as well as shell casings left by the assailants, $4,400 in cash and other clues found in the apartment.


On Making Good Manners Look Sinister
To the Editor:
I read with no small amazement your Feb. 5 front-page article on the letter Robert E. Rubin, President Clinton's top economic adviser, wrote to his Goldman Sachs &amp; Company clients before taking up his post as head of Mr.
Clinton's new National Economic Council.
My amazement was not that Mr.
Rubin wrote such a letter, but that you found it news.


Police Test For Top Post Stirs Anger In Princeton
With so many institutions of higher learning, scholastic-testing concerns, opinion-poll companies and market-research concerns in the area, tests and questionnaires might be considered as much a part of the Princeton landscape as tree-shaded roads and expensive homes.
But there are a few tests that many township residents now wish had never been given.


Business Digest
The Economy  President Clinton used plain language to appeal directly to the American public to support the tax increases and spending cuts he proposes.
In his first televised address from the Oval Office, Mr.
Clinton seemed to be preparing millions of viewers for the speech he will deliver tomorrow, when he will lay out to a joint session of Congress his often painful remedies for the economy.  [ A1. ]


Markets Closed
All financial and commodity markets in the United States were closed yesterday in observance of Washington's Birthday.
Government offices, most banks and many businesses were also closed.
An article about trading in overseas markets appears on page D9.


Israelis' Home Demolitions Lamented in Gaza
Standing in the rubble of what used to be his house, Hassan Abu Kheir said today that he felt caught in a tightening vise.
On the one hand, he said, there were Palestinian militants roaming the neighborhood who could use the point of a gun to take shelter in a home.
On the other, there were Israeli soldiers who blew up houses during a daylong search for the gunmen.


Sports of The Times; The Rangers Celebrate Kiddies' Day
THERE were so many youngsters being escorted into Madison Square Garden that you half expected them all to be twirling flashlights in the darkness and watching the Flying Gutkowskis or some other daredevil circus act.
But there was no pungent aire de pachyderm wafting through the Garden.
It is not yet springtime.
There was, of all things, a matinee hockey game, to celebrate the day after St.
Valentine's Day, or whatever Feb. 15 is.


Topics of The Times; From Rhodes to Reuter
Bill Clinton is the first former Rhodes Scholar to assume the Presidency.
He joins Washington's other colossi of Rhodes, such as Bill Bradley and Byron "Whizzer" White, and brings others in his train, like Robert Reich and George Stephanopoulos.
No doubt some overexcited wiseacre will remind everyone of Cecil Rhodes's purpose in endowing the two-year Oxford scholarships in 1902.
As the magnate wrote in his will, he hoped to bring about the "ultimate recovery of the United States of America as an integral part of the British Empire."


Successor to Cal Coach Is Cleared by His Peers
The National Association of Basketball Coaches, after a board meeting, announced today that it had found "no impropriety" on the part of the interim coach, Todd Bozeman, in replacing Lou Campanelli as head coach of the University of California.
Campanelli, dismissed suddenly a week ago for what Athletic Director Robert Bockrath considered abusive behavior toward his players, had told several of his peers that Bozeman, his former assistant, had undermined him and turned Cal players against him.


U.S. Can Learn From Cuba's AIDS Program
To the Editor:
Your "AIDS in Latin America" special report (front page, Jan. 25) grossly misrepresents the situation in the only country that has successfully held the virus in check.
You dismiss the successes of Cuba's AIDS control and prevention program with the irrelevant comment that Cuba "is the region's only nation with a totalitarian government."


New York Lottery Reviews Account
The New York State Lottery is beginning a mandatory review of its estimated $25 million to $30 million account, which has been at DDB Needham New York since 1988.
The lottery has sent questionnaires to 65 agencies around the state, including the incumbent, said Anne Doyle, a spokeswoman for the lottery in Schenectady, N.Y.
The returned forms will be culled to compile a list of 10 finalist shops, she said, which will receive requests for proposals to handle the account on a three-year contract.
A decision is not expected until the summer, she said.


Rates Tied To Clinton Deficit Cut
For the bond market, this is the first important week of Bill Clinton's Presidency.
Last night, from the Oval Office, he began a campaign for support of an economic program that he will outline tomorrow in more detail to a joint session of Congress.
So investors, traders and speculators will now be able to begin judging whether the President can really do what he has promised -- cut the record Federal budget deficit.


La Victoria Picks DDB Needham
La Victoria Foods, a maker of Mexican food products in City of Industry, Calif., selected DDB Needham Los Angeles to handle the creative portion of its $5 million account, previously at Latimar Inc. in Santa Clarita, Calif.
The media-buying portion of the account will remain at Western International Media in Los Angeles.
DDB Needham was awarded the account after a review that also had as finalists Hal Riney &amp; Partners in San Francisco and Young &amp; Rubicam San Francisco.


U.N.'S INSPECTORS TO CHALLENGE IRAQ
United Nations arms inspectors plan to challenge Iraq's refusal to let them fly helicopters over Baghdad, setting the scene for a possible confrontation with Iraq just days after President Saddam Hussein said he wanted better relations with Washington, officials here said.
The special commission charged with destroying Iraq's most dangerous weapons is expected to decide this week that it will tell Iraq of its intention to violate the ban against flying over the city by sending a helicopter over Baghdad to photograph an undisclosed site there.


Israelis' Home Demolitions Lamented in Gaza
Standing in the rubble of what used to be his house, Hassan Abu Kheir said today that he felt caught in a tightening vise.
On the one hand, he said, there were Palestinian militants roaming the neighborhood who could use the point of a gun to take shelter in a home.
On the other, there were Israeli soldiers who blew up houses during a daylong search for the gunmen.


Israelis' Home Demolitions Lamented in Gaza
Standing in the rubble of what used to be his house, Hassan Abu Kheir said today that he felt caught in a tightening vise.
On the one hand, he said, there were Palestinian militants roaming the neighborhood who could use the point of a gun to take shelter in a home.
On the other, there were Israeli soldiers who blew up houses during a daylong search for the gunmen.


A Belgrade Banker Makes Big Profits From Trade Sanctions
Ask Dafina Milanovic what she thinks of the United Nations economic sanctions against Yugoslavia and chances are that in a candid moment, after making the standard Belgrade complaint that they are unjust, she will admit that the spottily enforced measures have been very, very good to her.
Zipping around Belgrade in her Mercedes-Benz, gracing magazine covers with stacks of Western cash in hand, Mrs.
Milanovic is just one of a number of Yugoslavs who have clearly managed to strike it rich, for a time at least, despite the economic turmoil and sanctions.


New Technique Reveals The Genetic Strategies Of Infectious Bacteria
IN a finding that has electrified infectious-disease researchers, scientists at Harvard University have discovered a way to learn the genetic strategies that bacteria use to cause disease.
The method, researchers say, could lead to new antibiotics and vaccines that are precisely aimed at disease-causing genes.
It could also allow investigators to discover genes that permit some people to resist illnesses while others succumb.


Health Initiative Tilting Toward Price Regulation
President Clinton's health-care initiative was to have been a delicate balance between Government regulation and free-market competition.
But so far, a rush to monitor and regulate prices has been the policy's most conspicuous new twist, health-care experts say.
Late last week, the President and his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton, criticized drug companies and the prices they charged for vaccines.
Over the weekend, Administration officials like Leon E. Panetta and George Stephanopoulos made clear that the President wanted to impose cost controls on health-care providers as a way to hold down Medicare outlays and as a prelude to sweeping changes in the health-care system.


Rider College Puts Spotlight on Prejudice
Rider College was moving today in two areas to deal with repercussions from a campus fraternity event at which pledges were required to emulate black stereotypes.
The fraternity, Phi Kappa Psi, has already lost its local charter, and the member who organized the event has been suspended from the college for a year.


Say This of Itsali'lknownfact: He's Fourth in Pre-Derby Race
Another Kentucky Derby contender probably bit the dust today when Itsali'lknownfact made his 1993 debut and ran fourth in a weak field in an allowance race here at Gulfstream Park.
The colt won prominence last fall when he ran second to Gilded Time in the Breeders' Cup Juvenile, but won nothing this time even though the stage had been elaborately set.
His jockey, Laffit Pincay Jr., flew in from California for the one race.
His trainer, Cam Gambolati, got permission to saddle him in the open paddock instead of in a stall because the horse gets skittish and kicks.
And his public bet him down to 3-2 as the favorite in the field of seven.


I.B.M. to Offer New Minicomputers
I.B.M. will introduce today a series of more powerful minicomputers and software products in an effort to rejuvenate its midrange computer business.
The AS-400 family of minicomputers has been one of the International Business Machines Corporation's bright spots in the last couple of years, posting strong growth and profits.
But its minicomputer sales slipped alarmingly late last year, especially in Europe, where I.B.M. gets about half its minicomputer revenues, analysts estimated.


Classical Music in Review
Guitar Trek Merkin Concert Hall


CHRONICLE
MIKE McALARY, the hard-nosed columnist for The Daily News, is not unique.
His lawyer said so.
The New York Post, which enjoyed Mr.
McAlary's services until he defected to the archrival Daily News at the beginning of February, is suing to get him back.
In a bid to show that his departure will do grievous harm to their newspaper, a parade of Post officials took the witness stand in State Supreme Court in Manhattan last week to extoll the virtues of a columnist who now writes for the competition.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  THREATS TO NICARAGUA'S PEACE  Three years after Violeta Barrios de Chamorro defeated the Sandinistas in elections, Nicaragua has fallen into a tangle of crises that are spreading fear of an upsurge in violence.
The nation's troubles include dissension, violence, charges of corruption and economic woes.
A1  FOR U.S.
TROOPS, SOMALI HAZARDS  For many of the American troops in Somalia, the disarming of the country has come to resemble nothing so much as inner-city police work with a handicap.
Marines search houses for weapons, but have no clear rules for confiscating them and sometimes find themselves in the middle of sub-clan battles.
A1


Mediation Works Well In Divorce Cases
To the Editor:
As a mediator, I was glad to read "Divorce Fee-for-All" (Topics of The Times, Jan. 28), on a New York State blue-ribbon committee to propose reforms of lawyer abuses in matrimonial cases.
For the unfortunate people who are divorcing it would be better if as much attention were given to mediation as to litigation.


George A. Stephen, 71; Invented Famous Grill
George A. Stephen, who invented the Weber Kettle, a domed grill that came to be widely used by American barbecue-lovers, died Thursday at his home in Kildeer, Ill.
He was 71.
The cause of death was cancer, said Lori Sitta, an employee of the Weber-Stephen Product Company, which manufactures the grills.


Box-Office Poison, 'Brother's Keeper,' Turns Out to Be a Hit
Under the normal rules of the American film industry, "Brother's Keeper" should have sunk without a trace.
The low-budget documentary opened at the Film Forum in Manhattan in September and stayed in the city for 10 weeks, winning positive reviews.
But the subject, a murder trial involving three elderly dairy farmers in central New York, the Ward brothers, promised to be box-office poison.
Instead, the film has become a surprise hit.
"Brother's Keeper" will probably take in $1.5 million to $2 million at the box office, making it one of the top-grossing documentary films ever made, in the company of such breakthrough films as "The Thin Blue Line" and "Paris Is Burning."


Amid 'Hatfields and McCoys,' Marines Disarm the Somalis
The marines surrounded the house with the precision of a SWAT team.
In a moment, they had entered the compound, poking into sacks and searching under stairwells for hidden weapons.
After half an hour spent getting the owners to open locked doors and back rooms, the marines found nothing.


Legislature in Texas Sends School-Aid Plan to Voters
Facing a court threat to shut the state's public schools this spring, the Texas Legislature overcame 25 years of partisan rancor today and approved an amendment to the state Constitution that would force wealthy school districts to transfer money to poor ones.
The issue of how to insure fairer spending on the public schools has tormented states in every part of the nation, but nowhere has the battle run longer or been more divisive than in Texas.
Here, it ultimately stems from a lawsuit filed in 1968, when a sheet metal worker named Demetrio Rodriguez became the lead plaintiff for parents in a poor school district in San Antonio.


By Design; Wrap It Up
Take a length of chiffon, wrap it around your head with the ends trailing down your back, and what do you have?
A whiff of the casbah, an exotic touch.
To top off the floaty Moroccan-inspired clothes they showed for spring, Giorgio Armani, Ralph Lauren and Calvin Klein, among others, covered their models' hair with long chiffon scarfs.
It's one way to interpret the 70's hippie look for the 90's -- and a good way to tame unruly tresses or to cover a tired hairdo.
But the scarf trick works only with the right clothes.
No blazers, please.
Just loose blouses and gypsy skirts, or filmy tunics and billowing pants in soft silks and chiffons.


More Legal Problems Are Seen For Man Who Wants to Buy Post
The financial empire run by Steven Hoffenberg, the potential buyer of The New York Post, may be facing new legal problems.
People familiar with the financial operations of Mr.
Hoffenberg's flagship company, the Towers Financial Corporation, said yesterday that the bank trustee for $200 million in Towers bonds was preparing to go to court, if necessary, to force Towers to account for its use of bondholders' money.
Such a move would increase the financial pressures on the company as its owner prepares to acquire The Post.


Social Castes Found to Be Not So Rare In Nature
FOR years, an exclusive club made up of ants, bees, wasps and termites has ruled as the social elite of the animal world.
The insects' well-run colonies of sterile workers devoted to serving their fat, fertile queens so impressed biologists as to acquire the scientific classification of social or "eusocial," a distinction even humans cannot claim.
But new studies indicate that many more species besides these well-known examples may be living eusocial lives, giving up their own chances of reproduction to help foster the offspring of others.


Gantner's Career Seems Over
Infielder JIM GANTNER, who has been with the Milwaukee Brewers for 15 years, moved toward retirement yesterday when the team announced he would go to spring training as a coach.
Gantner, 39, had off-season surgery to repair a right rotator cuff injury, and will report to spring training in Chandler, Ariz., when he is able to throw.


Q &amp; A
Don't Eat the Pits!
Q.
I have been feeding apple seeds to my bird for years.
Is there really cyanide in them?
What about apricots and other fruit seeds?


Strong Hand, Sharp Eye In Justice Dept. Nominee
Among the lawyers and investigators who have worked for her, State Attorney Janet Reno of Dade County has always inspired a certain dread with a little black book she keeps.
In it, President Clinton's Attorney General-designate maintains a detailed record of the progress -- or lack thereof -- in every case that interests her.
"Everybody hated that little black book," said Wayne Black, one of Ms.
Reno's former investigators.
"She would ask you to brief her, and then two or three weeks later she'd call you in and refer to the black book and what you had told her you would be doing. She was very big into checking up."


Gifted Russian Youths, Sign Up Here
Pro Sports of Moscow, a fledgling talent agency loosely modeled after high-powered companies in the United States, recently began signing contracts with the parents of Russian children.
For providing coaches and training facilities to these potential stars, Pro Sports will receive 35 percent of what the athletes between the ages of 18 and 28 earn, plus an additional 5 percent for coaches assigned to the program.


Classical Music in Review
Juilliard Symphony Alice Tully Hall


Classical Music in Review
Garrick Ohlsson Pianist
Town Hall


CLINTON TELLS MIDDLE CLASS IT NOW FACES A TAX INCREASE BECAUSE DEFICIT HAS GROWN
For the first time, President Clinton told middle-income Americans tonight that it was necessary to raise their taxes to help cut the deficit and put the nation on the path to prosperity.
Setting aside economic intricacies, Mr.
Clinton used plain language in his first televised address from the Oval Office to prepare millions of viewers for the speech he will deliver Wednesday night, when he will lay out his often-painful remedies for the economy to a joint session of Congress.


INSIDE
Strict Ban on Abortion Is Signed by Walesa
One of Europe's strictest anti-abortion laws was signed in Poland by President Lech Walesa, long an opponent of abortion.
Years of pressure from the Roman Catholic Church thus virtually ended what had been a common medical practice.
Page A6.
Serbs Block Bosnia Convoy  A standoff blocking a relief convoy at the Serbia-Bosnia border has become a crucial test of the United Nations aid operation.
Page A3.
Texas Moves on School Aid
The Texas Legislature approved an amendment that would force some wealthy school districts to transfer money to poor districts.
Page A12.
Giving Birth to a Grandchild
A 53-year-old New York woman went back a decade in biological time to act as a surrogate mother for her son and his wife.
Page B1.


Sacrifice Tossed To the Winds
In his Inaugural Address, President Clinton proclaimed, "It will require sacrifice" to renew America.
But he apparently concluded that "sacrifice" had too unpleasant a connotation.
"We just have to face the fact that to make the changes our country needs more Americans must contribute today so that all Americans can do better tomorrow," the President said tonight.


Review/Television; For Children, a Drama With a Lesson on Abuse
Especially in the early hours of prime time, much of the television schedule is aimed at children.
That, more than anything else, explains the success of CBS's juvenile "Dr. Quinn: Medicine Woman." But occasionally, television takes advantage of this fact to spike its entertainment with a sobering message.
Don't knock the do-good impulse.
Tonight at 8 on ABC, for instance, "Full House" slips the subject of child abuse into its familiar mix of adorable tots, telegenic teen-agers and ageless dads.
As usual, the half-hour show, now in its seventh season, skips along breezily, exploiting the well-worn notion that children say the darndest things and, no matter how miffed, parents just can't suppress a warm smile.
Not for the ages, certainly, but 22 minutes are usually harmless enough.


Contractors Critical of Plan to Minimize Construction Delays
The sight abounds in every borough: street construction that leaves the pavement ripped open for weeks or even months, while all work seems to cease.
The delays often occur when a contractor on a city job encounters a power line; if the line must be moved, the utility company that owns it must pay the cost, and negotiations over the price can take months.
Hoping to minimize these delays, New York City officials recently introduced a new bidding procedure that combines construction and utility-related work in a single contract.
But the new procedure has angered many contractors, and one of them has filed a legal challenge to block it.


Review/Music; Taking Opera as Something to Build On
One of Paul Hindemith's early recollections of the United States was a trip to the Grand Canyon.
As the German composer stood gazing out over the spectacular prospect, a loudspeaker attached to a pole next to him issued "Tristan und Isolde." The idea made perfect sense to those who thought it up.
Take a feast for the eyes; increase it with a feast for the ears.
More art adds to one's enlightenment just as more money adds to one's bank account.
This grand old American tradition of power through increase has evidently traveled far.
The Bochum Symphony and its theatrical partner in this venture, the Dusseldorf Schauspielhaus, brought it with them in three performances of Schoenberg's "Jacob's Ladder" and Bernd Alois Zimmermann's "Turning, I Saw Great Injustice" at the Long Beach Opera this weekend.
The double-bill, largely supported by the German Government, was augmented by local choristers and musicians.


FEUDS AND KILLINGS IN NICARAGUA MAR DEMOCRATIC RULE
Three years after President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro defeated the Sandinistas in elections, Nicaragua has fallen into a tangle of crises that are spreading fear of an upsurge in violence.
Despite Government efforts to pacify the countryside, unsolved killings with political overtones occur almost daily in the explosive northwest, scene of most of the fighting during the civil war.
There, a dozen or more armed bands, mostly disgruntled former anti-Sandinista rebels or their families, are hunted alternately by the Army, which is still under Sandinista control, and by Government negotiators.


Patterns
Gigli, Barneys and Others
Amid the shimmering Venetian glass of his Madison Avenue showroom and boutique, Romeo Gigli talked happily last week about his agreement with Barneys New York, which is to open a new store seven blocks away on Labor Day with about 1,000 square feet devoted to Mr.
Gi gli's collections.


Japan's Companies Seek A Digital VCR Standard
Japan's consumer electronics companies have started to discuss setting standards for a new generation of videocassette recorders that would use digital technology, industry officials said today.
The development of a digital VCR would be a big step toward moving video technology into the computer age, much as audio is making the transition from storing information as analog waves to storing signals in the one's and zero's of computer code.


Transcript of President's Address on the Economy
Following is President Clinton's address on the economy last night, as transcribed by The New York Times:
Good evening.
I have chosen this day on which we honor two great Presidents to talk with you about the serious problems and the great promise of our country, and the absolute necessity for change if we're to secure a better future for ourselves and for our children.


An 'Unloved' Grass May Turn Hero In the Struggle Against Soil Erosion
VETIVER, a tall grass whose long, fragrant roots are commonly used in perfumes and soaps, could serve as an inexpensive and effective barrier against soil erosion, a panel of experts says.
Considered a leading threat to the environment, soil erosion results when nutrient-rich top soil is washed away by water or swept up by wind.
Vetiver, when planted in rows across steep slopes, keeps soil and water from flowing past.


Lane M. Adams, 77, Cancer Society Official
Lane W. Adams, the former executive vice president of the American Cancer Society, died yesterday at New York Hospital.
He was 77 and lived on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
The cause of death was a cerebral hemorrhage that he suffered earlier this month at the hospital, said Michael F. Heron, the society's senior vice president for communications.


Market Place; For PC Giants, Low Prices May Cost a Lot
Even the front-runners in the personal computer industry can't impress Wall Street these days.
Profits are surging at the Dell Computer Corporation, one ofthe nation's fastest-growing companies, and at the Compaq Computer Corporation, which has engineered one of the most adept turnarounds in corporate America.
And analysts say the prospects are for more of the same.


A Park in Peril
Just over 100 years ago, New York State's Legislature created one of America's outdoor treasures: a six-million-acre patchwork of state forests, timber tracts and private lands called the Adirondack State Park.
Now in its centennial year plus one, the park faces threats from developers, from the changing economics of the timber business and from legislators who are not as prescient as their forerunners.
The Adirondacks are nowhere near as stressed as the national parks, which absorbed an astounding 250 million visitors last year.
The Adirondacks, though larger than the Everglades, Glacier, Grand Canyon and Yellowstone National Parks combined, welcomed nine million.
Albany does not therefore confront a salvage operation.
Elected officials have only to muster the sense to preserve New York's jewel for future generations.


Bridge
Players who lead a trump usually do so either because they hope to cut down ruffing chances in the dummy or because other leads look risky.
But occasionally they find that they have hit the the bull's-eye for a totally unexpected reason.
A case in point is the diagramed deal from a social game, reported by Jack Mahoney of Jersey City.
He held the South hand, and climbed to six diamonds after a takeout double by West had marked him with all the missing high-card strength.
West led a trump thinking that it would do no harm, and this proved highly irritating to the declarer: His apparent 12 tricks had shrunk to 11 because the crucial trump entry to the dummy had been removed before the spades could be unblocked, but he now had an opportunity for brilliant play.


The Xerox Health-Care Model
Marie T. Lyons, a 28-year-old computer operations trouble-shooter at the Xerox Corporation, joined a health maintenance organization for the first time in late 1991, largely because the price seemed right.
As a single person, she pays $6.33 in monthly premiums, while her employer contributes the balance of the $183.43 a month that her H.M.O. charges.
The big office machine manufacturer provides the subsidy to encourage workers to join H.M.O.'s that have met Xerox's standards for quality of care and service and, even more important, have held down costs.


Topics of The Times; J. P. Morgan's Maestro
Richard Westerfield surprised almost everyone with his recent appearance at the podium at a New York Philharmonic concert.
A banker by trade but a musician by passion, he'd been attending rehearsals as backup for a guest conductor, Erich Leinsdorf, and took over when Mr.
Leinsdorf's ailing back forced him to cancel at the last minute.
He did so well that he was asked to conduct two more concerts.
Mr.
Westerfield, 35, has academic degrees in both business and music.
He went to work for J. P. Morgan &amp; Company because, as he says, "music is a very difficult way to earn a living."


Accounts
*
American Express Co., New York, to Warren Kremer CMP Advertising Inc., New York, to handle advertising, marketing and direct response for its Corporate Gift Cheques account, previously at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct New York.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Johnson Controls Inc., Milwaukee, to Cramer-Krasselt, Milwaukee, to handle the account of the marketer of products like automotive seating systems and plastic packaging, previously in-house.
Cramer-Krasselt was awarded the account, with billings estimated at $1.5 million to $2 million, after a review that also included Bender Browning Dolby &amp; Sanderson, Milwaukee, and Carmichael Lynch, Minneapolis.


Tarkanian to Undergo Heart Procedure
JERRY TARKANIAN is scheduled for an angioplasty next week to clear a heart artery that is 70 percent blocked.
"It's no big deal," Tarkanian said yesterday in Las Vegas, Nev.
"They tell me I'll be in one day and out the next."


Corrections
The calendar of cultural events in the New Jersey Weekly on Sunday misstated the time and place of a free lecture, "The Timelessness of the Novels of Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn," at Fairleigh Dickinson University in Madison, N.J.
The lecture will be at noon tomorrow at the Hartman Lounge in the Mansion on the campus.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a small zoo on a vacant lot in Harlem misattributed a portion of a quotation.
It was the man who opened the zoo, Manuel Colon, who said, "I think of this as therapy for the neighborhood."


Swords to Plowshares: The Bureaucratic Snags
At first glance, it seemed like the perfect collaboration between Government and industry -- just what President Clinton championed, in fact, during his campaign.
With great fanfare, James D. Watkins, then the Secretary of Energy, announced plans in October for a $70 million venture among two major national weapons laboratories and Cray Research Inc. to develop a new generation of supercomputers.
The project would advance technology, improve American competitiveness and benefit the environment with programs to map climate change.


Politics Complicates Formulas for Aid to Schools
In 1986, budget talks in the New York State Assembly hit a glitch: according to computer-generated calculations from a school aid formula, New York City would receive more money than legislative leaders had agreed on.
But no new negotiations were needed to solve this problem, just a few strokes of a computer keyboard.
By changing a number in the city's equation by .125, a legislative aide made the city appear wealthier.
And with that, the city's aid dropped by more than $40 million, aligning itself neatly with the leaders' agreement.


Books of The Times; Growing Up Abused: A Painful Then, a Painful Now
Exposure By Kathryn Harrison 219 pages. Random House. $20.


Big Bucks For Small Offices
In the last Congress, campaign finance reform, as always, was a major issue.
Congress, as always, adjourned without enacting legislation.
Common Cause and the press, as always, bemoaned the lack of action and the enormous cost of the big national contests.
Will this Congress finally act?
Perhaps.
But just as distressing as the problem in Washington is a strain of the campaign-spending virus that even Congress can't do anything about.


Reliever Signs For $11 Million
Jeff Montgomery of the Kansas City Royals, who has had 72 saves the last two seasons, joined the financial elite among relief pitchers yesterday, agreeing to a three-year, $11 million contract.
The annual average of $3,666,667 matches the fifth highest among relievers, the contract Randy Myers signed with the Chicago Cubs as a free agent two months ago.
The only relievers ahead of them financially are Tom Henke of Texas, John Franco of the Mets, Dennis Eckersley of Oakland and Bryan Harvey of Florida.


Traveling High-Tech Agents Help Update Small Factories
High technology arrived here one recent morning in a silver Volkswagen van with 107,000 miles on the odometer and James Bodnar at the wheel.
Mr.
Bodnar, an engineer, and his partner, Zane Patalive, a computer specialist, turned up at Keim's Machine and Tool Company to tinker with Dave Keim's computer-operated lathe and one of Bill Clinton's industrial policy goals.


With Daly as Boss, Nets Are on the Move and on Time
A few hours before the Nets beat the Miami Heat in overtime on Sunday, several New Jersey players showed up late for a pre-game meeting.
Maybe they were late because they're used to 7:30 games and not ones at 5 P.M.
Whatever the reason, Coach Chuck Daly fined them and issued this proclamation: From now on, any player who is late for a meeting or a practice will not only be fined, but the fine will be doubled.
Give the Coaches Credit
So we come to today, the day after.
Guard Kenny Anderson strolls into a 55-minute practice at the team's training center here about 50 minutes late.
He catches a little heat from his teammates, who joke he should have brought his checkbook.
"I'm embarrassed," said Anderson.
And maybe $500 poorer.
A double fine to go, please.


Convoy Halted by Serbs Looms as Test Case in Bosnia
Serbs blocked a convoy of 10 United Nations relief trucks for a second day today at the Drina River border between Serbia and Bosnia, and the obstacles the convoy faced in crossing the Serbian nationalist lines to reach besieged Muslims seemed likely to bring a turning point in the troubled relief operation here.
The convoy of 65 tons of food and medicine is bound for a Muslim enclave in eastern Bosnia that has been cut off from outside aid for 10 months.
By nightfall today, it had become a symbol of overriding importance for the United Nations and the Bosnian Government.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Agreed to terms with Jeff Montgomery, pitcher, on a three-year contract.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Agreed to terms with Brian Bohanon and Barry Manuel, pitchers, on one-year contracts.


For Children of Cocaine, Fresh Reasons for Hope
One of the infants in the sterile hospital room wailed disconsolately, frantically flailing its tiny arms and legs as children born to crack-using mothers often do.
Next to her, at the Bellevue Hospital Center in Manhattan, another child slept peacefully, her face sculpted in an angelic expression.
The contrast seemed to confirm what everyone knows about cocaine-exposed babies.
But contrary to such assumptions, hospital officials said it was the peaceful child, not the cranky one, whose mother had been using the potent drug.


When in America, Do Like George Washington Does


Review/Pop; A Jazz Valentine of (What Else?) Love Songs
Melodies were pampered, caressed, gently teased and glorified at "Prelude to a Kiss: Jazz for Valentines," the concert on Sunday night at Alice Tully Hall.
It was a rare Jazz at Lincoln Center event based more on pleasure than pedagogy.
The concept was simple: love songs played and sung by worthy musicians, for an audience full of well-dressed couples.
Of course, "My Funny Valentine" started the show, sung by Milt Grayson with stentorian reverence.
Betty Carter, the headliner, sang ballads with her magnificent timing and suspense.
Performing obscure pop songs, Ms.
Carter improvises in ways that sidestep the reassuring recurrences of verses and choruses.
Instead, she concentrates with microscopic obsessiveness on each word, each phrase, each line, lingering over a crucial image, swooping ahead to the next idea, gliding with timeless languor over a trace of lovers' rapture or pausing to let a melancholy moment sink in.


No Headline
"We own two small hardware stores and times are tough. I don't know if Clinton will cut the deficit or turn around the economy, but I'm optimistic that he's trying. He's not just in there to push a bunch of buttons and play at being powerful." -- NANCY BOWALD of Eureka, Ill.  [ A15:1. ]


A Local Title Defense for Patterson
TRACY HARRIS PATTERSON will fight at home for the first time in two years when he defends his World Boxing Council super bantamweight title March 13 against JESSE BENAVIDES in Poughkeepskie, N.Y.
Patterson, the adopted son of the former heavyweight champion, FLOYD PATTERSON, will fight Benavides at Marist College's McCann Recreation Center.


Through Ups and Downs, Harazin Stays Solid as a Rock
Al Harazin's favorite piece of personal apparel is a dinosaur lapel pin.
The pin, given to him as a gift by the Mets, is meant to symbolize Harazin's status as one of a disappearing breed in baseball, namely that of monolithic executive.
Harazin, the club's general manager, is also its chief operating officer, responsible for everything from contract negotiations to trades to stadium operations to marketing to broadcasting.


Classical Music in Review
Grieg Trio Weill Recital Hall


Protective Ice Flow in Antarctica Linked to Warmth of Volcanoes
NOT least among the possible catastrophes that could result from a warming of the earth's climate, some scientists say, is a collapse of the vast West Antarctic Ice Sheet, an event that would cause the global sea level to rise by some 20 feet.
Now investigators have found evidence of a wholly different factor in the ice sheet's stability that could be as important as climate: volcanism.
Huge rivers of ice flowing toward the sea from a main ice reservoir in the continent's interior keep the ocean from coming into direct contact with the domed reservoir, scientists from several institutions say in the current issue of the British journal Nature.
If the relatively warm ocean waters were to lap at the interior reservoir, the ice sheet, which rests on bedrock that is below sea level, would begin to disintegrate and would eventually collapse, releasing great amounts of pent-up water to the ocean.


Scheme to Split School District Is Revived
Labor problems and financial distress in the Los Angeles Unified School District have given new life to an old idea: divide the sprawling school system into smaller parts so it is easier to manage and more responsive to local needs.
The idea, discussed here from time to time, is now emanating from the San Fernando Valley, where middle-class families want to separate themselves from the misery of the inner city and take control of their own schools.


METRO DIGEST
HOPEFUL SIGNS FOR CRACK BABIES
Eight years after crack hit New York and other cities around the country, and concern about a generation of "crack babies" began spreading, medical experts say their worst fears are not being realized.
While up to a third of the babies appear to have been seriously damaged, 20 to 40 percent seem unscathed.
Most encouragingly, the experts say, those who have been harmed by cocaine need not be written off as a lost generation, but can be greatly improved with special attention.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Violent World of Corals Is Facing New Dangers
DENSELY abloom with a wealth of life unsurpassed for bizarre beauty, coral reefs seem to exist in a state of dreamy tranquillity.
Not so.
The reef is in truth a realm of violent struggle and constant disruption.
Coral colonies wage unrelenting chemical warfare on each other, their polyps stinging, dissolving and poisoning each other.
Bigger reef creatures savage large chunks of colonies and fill the water with toxins.
Sooner or later, an irresistible force like a hurricane or a change in sea level lays waste the whole teeming ecosystem and the corals must rebuild.


Nixon Weds Sugar Ray Leonard's Ex-Wife
Atlanta Braves outfielder OTIS NIXON kept it a secret for almost two months, but he's finally revealed that he married JUANITA LEONARD, the former wife of SUGAR RAY LEONARD, in December.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected during the week that began yesterday:  Argosy Gaming Co., Alton, Ill., 5 million common shares.
Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.


A New Thoreau Book, About Natural History
After existing in hundreds of scattered pages, some scrawled in his barely decipherable hand on the backs of letters and broadsides to save paper, Henry David Thoreau's last important research and writing project will be published on April 20.
It is his first new book to appear in 125 years.
Thoreau scholars consider the newly titled "Faith in a Seed," which combines his "Dispersion of Seeds" with other late natural history writings, a major contribution to American literature and a reason to revise traditional thinking about his life.
Because of its trail-blazing scientific material, they say, it adds a whole new chapter to the understanding the author of "Walden," "A Week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers," "The Maine Woods" and "Cape Cod."


On My Mind; Clinton's Bosnia Choice
In its first real test, the new Clinton foreign policy team shows itself strong and flexible enough to pull back from a war that never could have been won politically, emotionally or historically.
For this, the team is being denounced by much of the American foreign-commentary trade.
But it deserves praise, not epithet.


An Event Made to Order As Coghlan Eyes a Record
In the 104 years of the national indoor track and field championships, no athlete had asked meet officials to add an event just for him.
But someone did that last week, and yesterday he got his wish.
It helps when that someone is 40-year-old Eamonn Coghlan, the Villanova graduate from Ireland who became the fastest and most successful indoor miler in history.
It also helps when the athlete promises to run history's first sub-four-minute mile, indoors or outdoors, by a master.
And it also helps when he is so popular that hundreds, even thousands, of people will buy tickets just to watch him.


Corrections
A chart on Thursday about the New York City school system included incorrect totals for the number of teachers.
The correct totals are: in 1988, 64,707; 1989, 65,884; 1990, 66,010, and 1991, 64,990.


Yeltsin Leaves on Vacation on Eve of Talks With Political Rival
President Boris N. Yeltsin suddenly left Moscow today for what was described as an unexpected 12-day vacation in the countryside.
His departure was announced a day before he was scheduled to meet with his outspoken political rival, Ruslan I. Khasbulatov, the parliamentary Speaker, to discuss whether a constitutional referendum scheduled for April 11 was going to be held.
Mr.
Khasbulatov, who opposes the referendum he originally agreed to in December, has been caustic about Mr.
Yeltsin in recent days, questioning his fitness for office.


Mackey Is Dismissed From C.B.A. Post
Coach KEVIN MACKEY has been fired by the Capital Region Pontiacs of the Continental Basketball Association.
Mackey, 46, will be replaced by assistant coach JIM PRICE but will remain as the team's director of player personnel for the rest of this season.
Mackey, a former coach at Cleveland State, was 19-19 during his first year with the team.
Capital Region, formerly the Albany Patroons, is in second place in the Eastern Division behind Grand Rapids. (AP)


Corrections
An article on Sunday about a sales-tax battle in the Legislature of Erie County, N.Y., described the tax incorrectly.
County residents pay an 8 percent sales tax; of that total, 4 percent is the state sales tax, 3 percent is divided between the county and municipalities and an additional 1 percent goes only to the county.


Coca-Cola Denies Larger C.A.A. Role
As excited as the Coca-Cola Company is about the results of its unprecedented collaboration with a Hollywood talent agency in the creation of its advertising, a top executive says the assignment involves just the company's flagship Coca-Cola/Coca-Cola Classic brand.
"Right now, their total focus is Coca-Cola," said Peter S. Sealey, Coca-Cola's senior vice president and director of global marketing.
His reference was to the Creative Artists Agency in Beverly Hills, Calif., which has assumed an extraordinarily comprehensive role in Coca-Cola advertising, much to the discomfort of the brand's longtime agency, McCann-Erickson Worldwide in New York.


After Valentine
Valentine's Day, a browser in the Encyclopedia Britannica discovered recently, has peculiar roots.
Though it appears to have been named after two saints named Valentine, both martyred, its role as a lovers' festival may actually derive from the Roman Feast of Lupercalia -- in which girls put love messages into an urn and boys drew them out.
But if thoughts of martyrdom and sacrifice thus seem inappropriate to most celebrants on Valentine's Day itself, they are curiously apposite on the days that follow.
Because this is the week of the letdown that follows the big buildup.


Iran's Indecent Proposal
The prize for effrontery goes to Ali Akbar Velayati, Foreign Minister of Iran.
Speaking on Sunday, the fourth anniversary of his Government's death edict against Salman Rushdie for writing an allegedly blasphemous book, the Minister complained that Western countries were "wrong" to link normalizing relations with Iran "to the destiny of this person." In short, he implied, money matters more than principle, and Western states should betray their values in a greedy rush for trade and lucre.
This from a theocratic state!
Fortunately, Mr.
Rushdie lives in Britain, where freedom of speech is not viewed as a disposable trifle.
Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd, an author himself, has warned that Iran cannot expect normal relations with Britain until the death threat is retracted.
Germany has abrogated a cultural agreement and warned that it will hold Iran legally accountable should anything happen to Mr.
Rushdie on German soil.


Chess
Seizing the initiative was Judit Polgar's main weapon against Boris Spassky in her victory in their 10-game exhibition match, which concludes today in Budapest.
The brilliant 16-year-old grandmaster holds a 5 1/2-3 1/2 lead, which cannot be overtaken by the former world champion.
But as is often the case in exhibition contests, the players are obliged to complete the schedule.
Polgar repeatedly relied on adventurous pawn sacrifices to deny Spassky the chance for the initiative when she had Black.
Her adherence to "the best defense is a good offense" school worked well for her; Spassky could not quash her dynamic, aggressive maneuvering and was pretty much hamstrung with White.


O'Connor Says Catholic Groups May Shun St. Patrick's Parade
John Cardinal O'Connor has warned that Catholic institutions and organizations will shun the St.
Patrick's Day parade if a homosexual group is permitted to march.
The Cardinal's statement, voiced before a pastoral group Feb. 7 and reported in the current issue of the New York Archdiocese's weekly newspaper, Catholic New York, follows statements by various groups that they will boycott the parade if the homosexual group, the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization, is allowed to march under its banner.


Treasury to Sell Only Bills
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to the regular weekly auction of new three-month and six-month bills.
The auction, usually held on Mondays, will be held today because financial markets were closed yesterday in observance of Washington's Birthday.
Market traders said that by late Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was at 2.92 percent and the rate on the six-month bill was at 3.08 percent.


Car Bomb Explosions Kill 4 and Wound 100 in Bogota


Sign of Mayoral Race: Stein's Emerging Bid
By this time four years ago, Ronald S. Lauder had already declared his candidacy for Mayor.
David N. Dinkins formally began his campaign that year on Valentine's Day, though he later said he regretted that he had declared before he was ready.
The first evidence that another race is under way is not due this year until March, when City Council President Andrew J. Stein is expected to dispel as premature reports that his mayoral candidacy died aborning.


When 'Mom' and 'Grandma' Are One and the Same; Fairy Tale Comes True When Orchard Park Woman Gives Birth to Her Grandchild
Mark Wesolowski popped the question -- will you have my baby? -- to a woman old enough to be his mother in the parking lot of a supermarket.
"I thought it was impossible," recalled the 53-year-old woman.
"I thought, 'I'm too old. I've gone through menopause.' I wanted to help. But in the back of my mind, I kept thinking it won't work."


Riley Senses Presence Of Concentration Gap
Pat Riley was still exasperated today, and not just because the Knicks' seven-game winning streak was ended on Sunday.
It was the way the Knicks lost the triple-overtime thriller in Orlando that irked Riley.
They missed free throws, they did not pass to open teammates at times, and they lost their composure down the stretch.
So after today's practice, Riley calmly but candidly reflected on the 102-100 defeat, a game that displayed some characteristics of the Knicks that Riley did not appreciate.


School Board Bill Languishes in Albany
To the Editor:
On Jan. 25 the New York State Assembly passed legislation, which I sponsored, that simplifies the petition requirements for candidates for community school board elections.
The bill's purpose is to encourage more people to run for the school board and thus improve participation in local community school district issues.


Sports of The Times; Counseling Is Needed on A Daily Basis
TWICE in five months, Chuck Daly has taken his New Jersey Nets on the road to play the Detroit Pistons, and done more intense coaching of one of his former players than his current ones.
Back in October, halftime of a preseason game in Ann Arbor, Mich., was extended a good 20 minutes as Daly huddled with Dennis Rodman, who was refusing to put on his basketball suit.


Theft Toll Could Reach $38 Million
As much as $38 million may be missing from the deposits at the armored car company in Bohemia, L.I., whose owners have been charged with theft, an investigation revealed today.
A count of the deposits stored in the vaults and offices of the company, Revere Armored Inc., was completed on Sunday, as Brink's armored trucks carried 17 loads of coins totaling $7 million to a new storage site that Brink's operates in Brooklyn.


New York School Fight Shifts To Elections for Local Boards
The fight over the future of Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez is over, but the citywide war over the controversial social agenda he backed is simply moving to a new battlefield, the elections for the city's 32 community school boards.
Many candidates for local school boards, including both opponents and supporters of Mr.
Fernandez, have already focused their campaigns around issues the Chancellor came to symbolize, like the distribution of condoms in schools and the teaching of tolerance for gay people.


Corrections
A headline on Monday about the marriage of Geoffrey Milton referred to the bride incorrectly.
She is Joan Marie Tormey.


Israel Says That a Prisoner's Tale Links Arabs in U.S. to Terrorism
Israeli officials say an Arab-American arrested in Israel last month has provided unusually detailed information suggesting that Hamas, the Palestinian group that has attacked Israelis and Palestinians, has drawn critical financial support and political and military guidance from agents in the United States.
Security officials directly involved in the interrogation of the man, Mohammed Abdel-Hamid Salah, say he also told them that he had been sent by senior Hamas figures in London and Springfield, Va., to help rebuild Hamas, which was hobbled by Israel's deportation of more than 400 Palestinians in December.


CHRONICLE
RANDY SHILTS, the author of the best-selling book about AIDS "And the Band Played On," announced yesterday that he has the disease.
Mr.
Shilts, who is 41, divulged his condition in an interview conducted late last week and printed yesterday in The San Francisco Chronicle.
A national correspondent for the newspaper, Mr.
Shilts explained that he learned in 1985, "on the day that I pulled the last sheet from the typewriter of 'And the Band Played On,' " that he was infected with the virus.
The book traced, in chilling detail, the evolution of AIDS from an obscure and mainly ignored condition to a nationwide epidemic.


A White Blanket Covers Much of Midwest and Northeast


The Art of the Novel as Cookbook
HALFWAY through Nora Ephron's best-selling 1983 novel "Heartburn," chronicling the dissolution of a marriage, the narrator, Rachel Samstat, a cookbook writer, issues an apology.
"I see that I haven't managed to work in any recipes for a while," she says.
"It's hard to work in recipes when you're moving plot forward."


Esiason Seeks Trade; Jets Are Making a Bid
Boomer Esiason, the Cincinnati Bengals' dissatisfied veteran quarterback, is looking for greener pastures and his search could land him in the green-and-white uniform of the New York Jets.
The Jets are reportedly one of five teams that have called the Bengals to express serious interest in a trade for Esiason, an East Islip, L.I., native.
The Tampa Bay Buccaneers have also expressed interest in Esiason.
Being traded to the Jets, who are coached by Bruce Coslet, a former Bengal offensive coordinator, or to the Buccaneers, who are coached by Sam Wyche, a former Bengal head coach, would reunite Esiason with men who were instrumental in the quarterback's development and success with Cincinnati.


New Leader at Stanford Fosters a Calm (Mostly)
When the time came to pick the one person who had the greatest impact on Stanford University in the first year of its second century, the student editors of The Stanford Daily ignored Gerhard Casper, the new president, and named Bill Walsh, the head coach who last season led Stanford's football team to its most victories in 50 years.
"Bill Walsh has had more of an invigorating effect on campus than the president," said June E. Cohen, editor of the Stanford Daily.
"Casper hasn't come out with anything that's gotten people real riled up or real excited."


Personal Health
GIVEN the evidence for the ill effects of cigarette smoking on health and appearance and a social climate that all but ostracizes smokers, it is difficult for nonsmokers to understand why anyone continues to smoke.
But cigarettes still have a stranglehold on about 46 million Americans, many of whom think they cannot quit or have no desire to try.
For many smokers, tobacco is more than a pleasure and more than a drug addiction.
It is an antidepressant that helps people concentrate, remember and think more quickly, and for such immediate benefits they are willing to put their health, even their lives, on the line.


Intel Moves Into Mobile Computing
The Intel Corporation said today that it had entered agreements with the BellSouth Corporation, RAM Mobile Data and Ericsson G.E. to provide new products and services for mobile computing.
The agreements are Intel's bid to play a greater role in wireless computing and communications.
Later this year, Intel will offer wireless products made by its personal computer enhancements division, coupled with mobile communication services from RAM and Bell South subsidiaries, through the more than 6,200 retail outlets that sell Intel products.


Heads of Big-City Schools Need Political Skill to Last
The Philadelphia Schools Superintendent, Constance Clayton, has run the country's sixth-largest school system for a decade, no small accomplishment at a time when urban superintendents are ejected after an average of two years on the job.
That Ms.
Clayton has managed to stay so long is a testament not only to her skills but also increasingly to her political wits.
When the district approved a condom-distribution plan two years ago, it was the school board that proposed the idea, not the Superintendent.


Jacobs Goes on His Own, With Help
MARC JACOBS, known for his exuberant young designs, is forming his own company with his longtime partner, Robert Duffy.
The initial financing is coming from his former employer, Perry Ellis International, which is going out of the manufacturing business to concentrate on the merchandising, marketing and design of its licensed products.
Mr.
Jacobs's first collection, for next spring, will be shown in November.
He plans no fall collection.


Bridge
The diagramed deal has a long history.
It appeared, in slightly different layouts, in bridge columns around the world, and featured a brilliant play by Giorgio Belladonna.
He was in four spades and had to find a winning play after winning the opening lead of a diamond with the ace.
East retained his diamond queen.
If South can avoid a spade loser he has 10 tricks, so he should assume that this is not the case.
He needs either to build a heart trick or maneuver a heart ruff.
The routine play is to lead a heart to the king, but this may fail and does.
East wins and leads a trump, putting the defense in control.
West will have a chance to remove dummy's last trump, sooner or later, and South will lose three heart tricks and a spade.


Holyfield-Bowe?
Don't call your cable operator just yet or reserve your flight to Las Vegas, but former heavyweight champion EVANDER HOLYFIELD is the latest trial balloon testing the winds as the next challenger for RIDDICK BOWE.
Holyfield, who lost the title to Bowe last November, has emerged as the Bowe camp's challenger of choice after a series of embarrassments in the division.
These included Bowe's first-round knockout of an overmatched opponent, MICHAEL DOKES, earlier this month; the nearly simultaneous defeat of Bowe's prospective second pushover, RAY MERCER, and last week's shrill abortive negotiations with a far too serious contender, LENNOX LEWIS, the man who inherited Bowe's discarded World Boxing Council title.


Averting Cutbacks, Erie County Legislators Decide to Keep Higher Sales Tax
Public employees, cultural officials and business leaders expressed relief today after Erie County lawmakers settled a tax dispute that had already closed the Buffalo Zoo and threatened to become a fiscal crisis.
The agreement calls for the sales tax to remain at 8 percent in the county, rather than falling to 7 percent on March 1.
Without the extra percentage point, which provides $88 million of the $970 million budget that took effect in January, the county was expected to lay off hundreds of workers, reduce sheriffs' patrols and other services and eliminate financing for cultural institutions.


White Wine Also Aids the Heart
WHITE wine, too, benefits the heart when consumed in moderation, researchers report.
Those who wish to drink to their heart's health may do so with a toast of wine, red or white, according to new findings.
While earlier studies found that a glass or two of red wine each day reduces the risk of a heart attack, the new research indicates for the first time that white wine may be just as beneficial.


Racing Up the Stairway to Heaven? No, Just to the 86th Floor


2 Seminoles Suspended
The Florida State coach, PAT KENNEDY, suspended his top two scorers and rebounders for the ninth-ranked Seminoles' game tonight at North Carolina State.
BOBBY SURA and DOUGLAS EDWARDS each received a one-game suspension for "missing an excess number of classes." (AP)


Agency for Coca-Cola once more finds itself without a creative leader for the huge account.
HELP WANTED: Dynamic creative executive to develop breakthrough work for world's best-known product.
Must be willing to share responsibilities, on unprecedented basis, with novice drawing rave reviews for initial work.
High turnover in post; predecessor had five-year contract but left early -- very early.
Six-figure annual salary would buy gallons of Coca-Cola syrup to soothe upset stomach.
Contact McCann-Erickson Worldwide, New York.
THOUGH McCann-Erickson is unlikely to place such a classified ad, the vacancy described is, in Coca-Cola parlance, the real thing.
The agency is again searching for someone to handle the creative duties on its crucial soft-drink account after dismissing Gordon Bowen.


I.B.M. Sees Growth for Unit
I.B.M. expects its lucrative minicomputer business to grow by 3 or 4 percent this year, in contrast to a revenue decline of 2 percent in 1992, a company executive said yesterday.
Despite the decline in revenue last year, the International Business Machines Corporation's minicomputer business was able to improve its profitability by trimming costs, achieving a return on assets of more than 17 percent, said William Stuek, an assistant general manager for I.B.M.'s Application Business Systems unit.


A Tax on Gasoline? Better Get Used to It
To the Editor:
"A Timid Stimulus Package" (editorial, Jan. 30) argues that President Clinton's plan of $15 billion to $20 billion in additional Federal spending is not sufficient to stimulate the economy and reverse "huge layoffs at I.B.M., Boeing, Sears and other corporate giants."


C.I.A. Isn't Lone Wolf of Foreign Policy
To the Editor:
"The C.I.A.: Time for an Overhaul" (editorial, Feb. 1) is inaccurate and contains four major distortions:


New Venture Stirs Mexico Trade Issue
In a development that has inflamed opposition to the North American Free Trade Agreement, entrepreneurs in New York and Mexico have established an investment fund whose announced purpose is to buy small American manufacturing companies and move them to Mexico to take advantage of lower wages there.
The Mexican Government's largest industrial development bank is a "significant investor" in the venture, according to a prospectus distributed today by Richard A. Gephardt, the House Majority leader, a leading opponent of the trade pact.


Bank Money Accounts
Annual effective yields, in percent, on money market accounts, three-month certificates of deposit and six-month C.D.'s expected at selected institutions on Wednesday, Feb. 17,1993.
Some C.D. yields assume reinvestment after maturity.
Yields are based on the method of compounding and the rate stated for the lowest minimum to open an account, but minimum vary.
Higher yields may be offered for larger deposits.
C.D. figures are for fixed rates only.
New York Area
Money
3-mo.
6-mo.
Mkt.
C.D.
C.D.
COMMERCIAL BANKS
Banco Popular
2.78 2.84 3.25
Bank of N.Y.
2.48 2.69 2.79
Bank of Tokyo Trust
2.28 2.25 2.34
Chase Manhattan
2.53 2.63 2.69
Chemical
2.12 2.65 2.70
Citibank
2.02 2.40 2.55
EAB
2.38 2.69 2.79
First Fidelity (N.J.)
2.70 2.75 2.90
Fleet Bank (Conn)
2.55 2.83 2.99
Key Bank of N.Y.
2.53 2.48 2.84
Marine Midland
2.38 2.48 2.58
Midlantic Bank (N.J.)
2.90 2.75 3.00
Nat'l Westminster
2.632.53 2.58
Republic Nat'l
2.58 2.79 2.94
Shawmut Bank (Conn)
2.53 2.84 2.99
SAVINGS BANKS
Anchor Savings
2.65
2.89
3.60
Apple Bank Savings
2.58
2.58
2.86
Astoria Fed Savings
2.94
2.84
2.89
Carteret Savings (N.J.)
2.94
3.00
3.25
Crossland Savings
2.65
2.85
3.05
Dime Savings Bank
2.85
2.85
3.06
Emigrant Savings
2.80
2.80
3.05
First Fed (Rochester)
3.05
2.95
3.05
First Nationwide
2.17
2.55
2.70
Greater NY Savings
2.75
2.80
3.00
Green Point Savings
3.00
N.O.
3.25
Home Savings Amer
2.68
2.79
3.05
Hudson City SB (N.J.)
3.05
3.50
3.60
People's Bank (Conn.)
2.73
2.84
2.99
River Bank America
3.00
2.85
3.10
Major Banks Outside N.Y.
Money
Wkly.
6 Mo.
Wkly.
Mkt.
Chg.
C.D.
Chg.
Bank One Texas
(Dallas)
2.58
0.00
3.00
0.00
Bank of Boston
2.84
0.00
3.04
0.00
Citibank, S.D.
2.86
-0.11
3.62
-0.10
Comerica
(Detroit)
2.78
0.00
2.89
0.00
Fidelity Bank
(Philadelphia)
2.70
0.00
2.90
-0.10
First Bank
(Minnesota)
2.32
0.00
2.80
0.00
First Interstate
(L.A.)
2.55
0.00
2.58
0.00
First National
(Chicago)
2.58
0.00
2.89
0.00
First Union
(Charlotte, N.C.)
2.70
0.00
3.00
0.00
Fleet Bank
(Boston)
2.78
0.00
3.05
0.00
Maryland Natl
2.85
0.00
3.50
0.00
Mellon
(Pittsburgh)
2.63
-0.05
2.75
0.00
Meridian Bank
(Reading Pa)
2.39
0.00
3.05
0.00
National Bank
(Detroit)
2.78
0.00
2.85
0.00
NationsBank
(Tampa)
2.35
0.00
3.10
0.00
Seafirst (Seattle)
2.50
0.00
3.00
0.00
Shawmut Bank
(Boston)
2.74
0.00
3.00
0.00
Texas
Commerce
(Houston)
2.27
0.00
2.94
+0.05
Union Bank
(S.F.)
2.63
0.00
2.74
0.00
Wachovia
(Winston Salem,
N.C.)
2.70
0.00
2.95
0.00
N.A. Rate not available N.O. Not offered
Source: Bank Rate Monitor
N. Palm Beach 33408


Pretzels, Soda, and No Hint of a 'Meat Market'
In the 13 years that Ronald S. Pavluvcik has been a member of the Westport Unitarian Singles Group, he figures he has dated more than 100 women.
The last time Helen Burns was out on a date was 25 years ago with her former husband, when she was 19.


McMillan Blasts Jets With Good Riddance
A Jets teammate said he saw Erik McMillan kick the ball.
He said McMillan was losing it, yelling: "That is in the past!" and "Those days are over!" at Referee Larry Nemmers, whom McMillan accused of hurling a racial slur at him in the Jets' last game of the season against the New Orleans Saints at Giants Stadium.
McMillan the villain?


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY AFTER SCHOOLS FIGHT, FOCUS ON BOARDS
The fight over the future of Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez is over, but the citywide war over the controversial social agenda he backed is simply moving to a new battlefield, the elections for the city's 32 community school boards.
"These elections will be a showdown between those who are in favor of teaching homosexuality, and those who believe that this would be a gross violation of traditional family values," said the head of the Family Defense Council, a group based in Queens.
"If this doesn't get the voters out, what will?" A1.


Brazilian Sequel: A Jailbreak, a Bitter Widow
With the killers of Francisco (Chico) Mendes apparently on the run in Bolivia, the widow of Brazil's slain Amazon defender asserted today that the authorities had ignored repeated warnings that security was dangerously lax at the Amazon jail.
"The authorities knew about the conditions, but they didn't take any measures," the widow, Ilzamar Gadelha Mendes, said in a telephone interview from Xapuri, an Amazon town 2,500 miles northwest of here.


College Hockey Report
Boston University  During his 27 years as a player and a coach for Boston University, college hockey has known either Jackie Parker, the hot-tempered challenger or Jack Parker, the suave diplomat.
They are the same and last weekend there were glimpses of both as the Terriers took on Merrimack in a home-and-away series.
Parker coached his team to a 6-2 victory on Friday night in the Walter Brown Arena and had strong opinions about the officiating.
He expressed those opinions in the runway behind the Boston Univeristy bench as the three officials, Referees Bob Fowkes and John Gravellese and linesman Jeff Bunyon, came off the ice after the game.


Jury Selection Begins in Los Angeles Beating Case
Jury selection in the Federal trial of four police officers charged with violating the civil rights of Rodney G. King got off to a slow start today, as lawyers sought a panel unswayed by publicity and rioting after the officers' acquittal on most state charges last year.
Of an initial pool of 73 potential jurors considered today, 9 were black, 12 were Hispanic and about a quarter were women, said three reporters who were permitted to watch the proceedings.
Over all, more than 280 prospective jurors who filled out detailed questionnaires could be questioned in the next few days before a panel is chosen.


Questions on Davis Cup
It takes only two to four players, but once again the United States is having trouble fielding a Davis Cup tennis team.
Who is going to defend the Davis Cup championship when the first round of 1993 competition gets under way next month on grass in Australia?
Andre Agassi isn't sure, but he probably won't be taking part.
The Davis Cup captain, Tom Gorman, has already received a cancellation notice from John McEnroe, who was partners with Pete Sampras in last year's doubles, and has yet to receive a commitment from Agassi, Sampras, or No. 1-ranked Jim Courier.


Mets Casting Their Eyes On Dominican Sandlot
Morning had broken noisily in the Dominican Republic and traffic had snarled in Santo Domingo one day last December.
Spread out smack in the center of the entrepreneurial madness and automoble exhaust is a humble baseball diamond, one full of holes and hopes, and on this day, a dozen or so of the country's unemployed leaned on a fence and watched as a makeshift instructional league game went on.
"It's a public park," Eddie Toledo, the top Dominican scout for the Mets and the man in charge of the organization's developmental program in the country, said.
"It's tough to keep up. You fix something, and who knows who is going to break it."


'Hello, My Name Is . . .' Seems to Be Working in Westport


Immigrants, In Gratitude, Aid Neediest
When Lynn Chen was growing up in China, her image of America was shaped by the state-controlled media, which spoke darkly of a troubled land blighted by rampant crime, racial strife, homelessness and oppressive work conditions.
But since she came to the United States seven years ago to attend graduate school, she has developed a more balanced view.
She has grown to love American democracy and feels grateful that she was allowed to stay here after the crackdown on democracy protesters in Tiananmen Square in 1989.


Wine Talk
It was one of those lunches wine people have to endure every now and then: cold pasta salad with smoked turkey and quail, boned loin of lamb, cheese and dessert.
And 26 wines, all prize winners and all in considerable quantity.
It was the lunch to honor the trophy winners at the Royal Agricultural Society of New South Wales Wine Show.
The 26 wines were survivors of more than 1,500 Australian wines submitted to the annual judging.
They had been tasted by nine judges, including this writer, a week earlier.


Voters Skeptical on Clinton Plan, Lawmakers Say
On the eve of President Clinton's economic address to Congress, lawmakers returning to the Capitol reported today that many of their constituents were voicing skepticism and fear about what the President had in mind for them.
While polls indicate that the public is open to Mr.
Clinton's economic ideas, many lawmakers who toured their states during a weeklong recess concluded that his support might be thin and tentative.


Memorial Service Is Held for Chronicler of Black Theater


Bond Prices Are Mostly Higher
Prices of government securities remained firm yesterday despite the turmoil in the equity market, as bond traders reacted favorably to President Clinton's economic talk of Monday night.
The benchmark 30-year bond made gains in early trading, and at one point the yield fell as low as 7.07 percent -- its lowest level since the Treasury began selling the long bond in 1977.
But the bond gave back its gains later on some profit taking, and late in the day, the long bond was offered at a price of 99 25/32 , down 9/32 , to yield 7.14 percent.


NBO Stores Moves $3 Million Account
NBO Stores Inc. in Fair Lawn, N.J., said yesterday that it had selected Public Sector Solutions in New York to handle its account, with billings estimated at more than $3 million.
The account was previously handled by Deutsch/Dworin Inc. in New York.


Gruber Out 8 Weeks
Third baseman KELLY GRUBER, acquired by the California Angels in an off-season trade with Toronto, will miss at least the next eight weeks after undergoing surgery yesterday on his left shoulder for an injury he apparently suffered during the World Series.
The Angels' physician, Dr.
LEWIS YOCUM, performed the arthroscopic surgery and found a partial tear of the rotator cuff and a small tear in the labrum of Gruber's non-throwing shoulder, the team said.


90's May Be a Decade of Growth
The nation may be poised for faster economic growth during the 1990's than people have previously believed, according to economic heavyweights like the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, Alan Greenspan.
Just as the Clinton Administration is starting to concentrate on the economy's long-term troubles, some economists are focusing on tantalizing signs that America's economic engine packs more horsepower than it used to: last year's productivity growth was the fastest in 20 years, profits are rebounding despite weak sales growth and business has gone on a high-tech spending spree.
Job growth may finally be picking up, too.


Campus Journal; A Test of Racism Produces an Uproar
Five days before the start of Black History Month, three racial slurs against blacks written on pieces of notebook paper were found posted to the door of the Black Student Union's building on the Williams College campus.
The messages were condemned by a multitude of campus voices.
But the incident soon became something else: three days later, on Jan. 30, Gilbert Moore Jr., a black student, told administrators that he had posted the messages.
The administration then suspended him for a semester.


The Pop Life
Trying to Be Seen
Along with the exploding popularity of country music has come a deluge of new artists eager to join country's constellation of stars.
With so much competition, record labels increasingly must find ways to make their fledgling acts stand out from the pack.
Mercury Nashville has come up with its own solution.


Saatchi's New Chief Taking Over April 1
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C. in London said yesterday that Charles Scott, chief operating officer, would succeed Robert Louis-Dreyfus as chief executive on April 1.
The agency company had said earlier that Mr.
Scott, 44, would take over sometime this spring.
Mr.
Louis-Dreyfus, 46, who guided Saatchi through turbulent financial times, will remain on the board as a nonexecutive director.
He is leaving Saatchi to become president at Adidas A.G., which was acquired this week by an investment group led by Mr.
Louis-Dreyfus.


Book Notes
Forward With Roth
In 1990, when Philip Roth published his last novel, "Deception" (Simon &amp; Schuster), the story of an adulterous affair whose cover showed the naked torsos of a man and a woman in bed, the book was excerpted in Esquire magazine.


Going to Court, Cabbies Hail This Man
THERE is a seedy Times Square waiting room that is taxi driver hell, a place where all those cab-driving tormentors of New Yorkers huddle in their black and brown leather jackets, their moods sullen as they wait to be called to account before the Taxi and Limousine Commission's taxi court.
But the gloom changes subtly with the entrance of Tony Falese, the cabdriver's friend, a guy with the stocky build of a cop, a silver bracelet, a beeper on his belt, and eyes that don't flinch when he talks of the cabby who hit a passenger in the face with a tow-chain.


Islanders Send Their Fans Home Early and Happy
Maybe the Islanders are more than mediocre.
Perhaps, gradually and quietly, they are getting good.
Such a theory could be worth considering tonight in light of their 7-2 victory over the Edmonton Oilers before 9,166 fans at Nassau Coliseum.
The Islanders jumped on top of the Oilers in the first minute of play and overwhelmed them the rest of the way with foot speed and puck skill during a 40-shot bombardment against two unfortunate goalies.


Welcome or No, Foreigners Do Spain's Dirty Work
Thanks to drip-feed irrigation and plastic-covered greenhouses, the arid coastal plain of Almeria has been turned into a farming El Dorado that supplies northern Europe with winter fruit and vegetables and earns $500 million a year in the process.
Yet the true secret of the region's bonanza is less visible.
Hidden beneath a shining sea of plastic are some 4,000 immigrant workers, most of them from Morocco, who spend their days in suffocating heat picking eggplant, peppers, melons and the like for sale in Paris, London and Frankfurt.


Interior Secretary Is Pushing A New Way to Save Species
To head off conflict over endangered species, Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt is preparing a major policy shift in the Interior Department's focus on wildlife protection.
He hopes to avert what he calls "national train wrecks" in disputes like the one over the spotted owl in the Pacific Northwest by avoiding having to impose emergency measures to protect suddenly endangered species.
Instead, he seeks a policy based on preventive measures to insure long-term protection of whole ecosystems and all their inhabitants.


CHRONICLE
RAPHAEL FARBER, Israel's Tourism Commissioner for North America, was watching Oprah Winfrey's interview with Michael Jackson on ABC on Wednesday night, when he was struck with an idea.
Why not invite the performer to the Dead Sea region for treatment of the condition that he said on the program was responsible for changes in the shade of his skin?
So yesterday, Mr.
Farber faxed an invitation to Mr.
Jackson via his publicist in Beverly Hills, Calif., inviting him to visit Israel and the Dead Sea region.
"Many skin diseases that have failed to respond to conventional treatment elsewhere have been either cured, improved or arrested at one of the many facilities in the Dead Sea that specialize in the treatment of such disorders," the letter said.
"Since ancient times, people have benefited from treatment there."


Charting a Course at the Pentagon, Aspin Uses His Congressional Map
You can take Les Aspin out of the Congress, but you apparently cannot take the Congress out of Les Aspin.
In his first three weeks as Defense Secretary, the former 11-term Representative from Wisconsin has drawn on his Congressional past.
He has imported a dozen House staff members as top aides, ordered an overhaul of the department's foreign and domestic policy arms to focus on specific issues the way Congressional subcommittees do, and increased Pentagon planners' sensitivity to budget cuts that Congress might oppose.


In Final Game of Match, Polgar Loses to Spassky
On the final day of their exhibition chess match, in a game that had no more than symbolic meaning, Boris Spassky defeated Judit Polgar today after seven and a half hours and 73 moves.
Polgar, who at 16 is the world's youngest grandmaster, had clinched a victory in the 10-game match on Sunday by brilliantly achieving a draw in what many players saw as a lost position.
Today's outcome, with Polgar playing the white pieces in a Ruy Lopez Defense, made the final score of the match 5 1/2-4 1/2.


National Recovery Fattening Tax Revenue in Many States
Evidence is continuing to build that the nation's economic expansion that took hold in the second half of 1992 is having a positive effect on battered state finances.
Tax collections, not including legislated tax increases, rose nearly 6 percent in the fourth quarter compared with a year earlier, according to a survey of state tax officials by the Center for the Study of States, a research concern in Albany.
That is the biggest increase since the beginning of the recent recession and five times last year's rise.


Corrections
A report on Monday about the wedding of Marisa Viravaidya and Douglas Clayton referred incorrectly to the ceremony.
It was a civil ceremony.


2 Dozen New Taxes Weighed To Pay for Health Care Plans
The White House said today that it would cost $30 billion to $90 billion a year to carry out President Clinton's campaign promise of guaranteeing health care for all Americans, and Administration officials said they were considering two dozen new taxes as possible sources of revenue.
The taxes being considered are in addition to those the President will propose Wednesday to Congress to stimulate the economy and to help reduce the Federal budget deficit, Administration officials said.
Mrs.
Clinton Visits Congress
The White House made the disclosure as Hillary Rodham Clinton, chairwoman of the President's Task Force on National Health Care Reform, visited the House of Representatives to lobby lawmakers of both parties on the issue.


From Beach Bum to Grand Champion
When Akebono first arrived in Japan five years ago, the giant Hawaiian who recently became the first non-Japanese sumo wrestler to be recognized as yokozuna, or grand champion, was not exactly brimming with confidence.
He knew nothing about Japan and did not speak enough Japanese to say "good morning" to the older wrestlers who ran his life.
Akebono lived twenty-four hours a day in the jammed sumo stable, stuck with the tasks of mopping up after more experienced wrestlers and cooking the rice.


OPEC Sets Output Cuts Amid Dissent
The 12 members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries agreed today to cut output by more than 1.5 million barrels a day, to 23.5 million daily, beginning March 1.
But Kuwait, Iraq and Algeria took exception to the accord, largely emptying it of its intended message to oil markets that the organization was capable of lifting sagging prices, which have fallen by more than 15 percent over the last few months.


Clinton's Plan Leaves Gloom at Goldman
At age 54, Robert E. Rubin, who in December resigned as co-chairman of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company to become President Clinton's economic czar, may be too young to remember Kate Smith's late 1940's hit song "Please Don't Talk About Me When I'm Gone."
But yesterday he might have appreciated the sentiment.


FOOD NOTES
100 Piedmontese Wines
Friday from 6:30 to 9 P.M. there will be an opportunity to taste more than 100 wines from the Piedmont region of Italy at the Essex House, 160 Central Park South (near Seventh Avenue).
The informal stand-up tasting, sponsored by the International Wine Center, a wine school in Manhattan, will be accompanied by foods from the region.


Snow or Rain? How About a Little of Both?


Coaches' Organization Criticizes Dismissals
Appalled over the dismissal of three Division I head coaches this season, the National Association of Basketball Coaches warned today that intercollegiate sports were mirroring professional sports.
"These colleges are looking like major league baseball franchises," said Jim Haney, the association's executive director, citing the dismissal since November of Tom Miller of Army, Kohn Smith of Utah State and Lou Campanelli of the University of California.


Inquiry Sought on Archivist Who Made Deal With Bush
Three Democratic Senators asked the Justice Department and ethics officials today to investigate the Archivist of the United States, who relinquished control of White House computer files to President George Bush three weeks before announcing that he would be resigning to run Mr.
Bush's Presidential library.
The Archivist, Don W. Wilson, said last Friday that he would leave the National Archives on March 31 to become the executive director of the George Bush Center at Texas A&amp;M University.


A.T.&amp; T. to Take a Charge Of $7 Billion for New Rules
A.T.&amp; T. said yesterday that its charge against earnings for new accounting rules for retiree health benefits would total about $7 billion in the current quarter.
In December 1991, A.T.&amp; T. had said the after-tax charge could range from $5.5 billion to $7.5 billion.
While virtually insuring a large paper loss for the full 1993 year, the charge does not hurt cash flow or dividends for the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, whose stock is owned by more people than that of any other American company.


ABC Considering a Joint Bid With Turner Network
A joint network-cable bid by ABC and the Turner Broadcasting System for the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta is the only way ABC currently expects to enter the coming negotiations, the president of ABC Sports said yesterday.
The ABC official, Dennis Swanson, confirmed a report in The Wall Street Journal that ABC and Turner have held serious discussions over several months aimed at bidding together for the Olympic TV rights and placing events on ABC and ESPN, which is 80 percent owned by ABC, and on Turner's cable networks, TNT and TBS.


Rabbi Pleads Not Guilty in Kidnapping
The father of a boy who disappeared 10 months ago collapsed in grief yesterday after a Hasidic rabbi, his wife and an associate entered not-guilty pleas to charges that they kidnapped the teen-ager.
The rabbi, Shlomo Helbrans, and his wife, Malka, rocked back and forth as they stood before the judge's bench in the Brooklyn courtroom, seemingly lost in their silent prayers.
They and the third defendant, Mordechai Weisz, were arraigned in a case representing a bitter clash over the care and religious upbringing of a Jewish boy, Shai Fhima (pronounced shy FEE-ma).


Review/Television; Pros Old and Young In Broadway Blues
There is indeed packaging as art.
That can be found tonight at 10, after the President's address, on the "Great Performances" presentation of the stage revue "Black and Blue," as directed for television by Robert Altman.
And then there is packaging as flimflam craft.
Witness, also at 10, the efforts of a producer, Anthony Eaton, to give modest talent a superstar veneer in ABC's "Billy Ray Cyrus Special: Dreams Come True."
"Black and Blue" opened on Broadway in January 1989 and ran for over 500 performances.
The show, created and directed by Claudio Segovia and Hector Orezzoli, the Argentines who had earlier devised "Tango Argentino," features a company of outstanding black singers and dancers.


Belushi Is No Stranger To a Bar Owner's Role Despite the Movie Image
The actor who took over for Judd Hirsch last week in "Conversations With My Father" hardly has a Broadway stage-actor's reputation.
He is, in fact, best known for Hollywood buddy movies opposite partners who have ranged from Arnold Schwarzenegger to a chili-loving German shepherd named Jerry Lee Lewis.
But James Belushi has paid some stage dues.
On March 5, 1982, many in the audience wondered whether he would go on as the Pirate King in "The Pirates of Penzance" at the Shubert Theater in Chicago after news reached him that his older brother John had died.
"I don't know about the show-must-go-on stuff," he recalled.
"But I did go on. To be honest with you, I didn't know what the hell else to do. It was a very public death."


ARMY IN LEBANON OCCUPIES 3 SITES
United Nations peacekeeping forces withdrew from three villages in southern Lebanon today and handed their positions over to the regular Lebanese Army as tension grew in the area between Muslim fundamentalist guerrillas and Israeli troops.
The United Nations flag was taken down as the Ghanaian battalion of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon pulled out from the villages of Maarakeh, Janata and Yanouh.
Four hundred Lebanese soldiers backed by armored personnel carriers moved into the three villages and hoisted the Lebanese flag.


For the Lowly Radio, New Tricks Are in Store
The radio industry has a long history of confounding skeptics, from those who thought the advent of car radios in the 1920's posed an unacceptable driver distraction, to the gloom mongers of the early 1950's who saw television silencing radio forever.
And when the first palm-sized transistor radio went on sale in 1953?
Naysayers dismissed it as a mere novelty.
Now comes broadcasting's latest challenge: persuading listeners to interact more with their radios by embracing a new radio data system, which prints messages on a small display screen, among other features.
Known as R.D.S., it is radio's first significant innovation since stereo sound was added to the FM signal in 1961.


Clinton Makes Lobbyists a Target In Opening Battle Over Tax Rise
President Clinton has landed a street-fighter's punch in his opening battle to push tax increases and budget cuts through Congress: He charged that his opponents "have already lined the corridors of power with high-priced lobbyists."
"Special interests," he called his foes in his televised speech on Monday night.
"Defenders of decline," he labeled their hired lobbying guns.


Two Diesel Giants Set Alliance
The Cummins Engine Company, the world's leading independent maker of heavy-duty diesel engines, and Komatsu Ltd., Japan's top construction equipment manufacturer, today joined the list of huge multinationals pooling their resources to manufacture existing products and develop new ones.
"Capital-goods companies all over the world are caught up in intense competition for what is essentially a mature market," said Henry B. Schacht, chairman and chief executive of Cummins, which is based in Columbus, Ind.
"Everyone is looking for an edge." 'We All Learned'
The partnership was formed less than a decade after Komatsu led a charge of Japanese engine makers at the United States market.
That effort ultimately failed at great cost.
Cummins had slashed prices to keep Komatsu, Mitsubishi, Nissan and other Japanese companies from gaining a foothold, but the American company had to make painful cuts in its operations to control costs.
"We all learned something from that," Mr.
Schacht said.


C.I.A. Isn't Lone Wolf of Foreign Policy; Archives Need Airing
To the Editor:
"The C.I.A.: Time for an Overhaul" (editorial, Feb. 1) asserts that opening the Central Intelligence Agency to public inspection "begins with the budget." A new openness permitting public and Congressional assessment of the agency's proper role in foreign policy must also begin in its archives.


Japan May File Complaint
A senior Government official said here today that Japan would file a complaint with the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade if the United States sharply raises tariffs on imported Japanese mini-vans and sport-utility vehicles.
"In essence, we will have to go to the GATT," Noboru Hatakeyama, vice minister for international affairs of the Ministry of International Trade and Industry, said at a briefing for foreign reporters.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.62
2.95
5.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.91
2.92
3.83
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.07
3.08
3.93
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.94
5.96
7.06
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.14
7.12
7.97
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.35
8.30
9.05
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.16
6.18
6.79
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


C.I.A. Isn't Lone Wolf of Foreign Policy; A Diminished Role?
To the Editor:
Re "The C.I.A.: Time for an Overhaul" (editorial, Feb. 1):


Redmen Set to Meet Pirates
St.
John's and Seton Hall come to Madison Square Garden tonight at 9 o'clock from different places.
The Redmen are exulting from their unexpected success and the Pirates are coping with continuing expectations.
This will be the first of two Big East regular-season matches for the teams.
St.
John's (9-3 in the conference and 14-6 over all) is in first place in the Big East, and Seton Hall (8-5 and 18-5) is a game behind.
Adelphi will meet Pace in the opening game of the doubleheader at 6:30 P.M.


1 Dead and 2 Hurt In Inwood Shootings
Two brothers were wounded and a third man was fatally shot in an apartment house last night in the Inwood section of Manhattan, the police said.
The brothers, identified by police as Victor and Felipe Polanco, were wounded about 7 P.M. in an apartment house at 624 West 207th Street near Broadway.


Changes on Horizon For Major Leagues
Dramatic changes are coming to major league baseball; the only question is how soon.
Although some club owners have talked in recent months about the desire to make changes, an official in position to know acknowledged for the first time tonight that such developments are on the horizon.


60-Minute Gourmet
TURKEY entered my culinary repertory rather late in life, for when I was a young cook in France, it was rarely seen in kitchens.
Turkey was introduced in Europe as early as the 16th century, but it took a long time to catch on.
In recent years I have experimented with lean turkey meat to make low-fat versions of dishes that I once made with veal or beef.
This substitution is easy, since supermarkets now carry turkey steaks and turkey parts, which are convenient for quick family cooking.
The only caveat in cooking turkey is that extra care must be taken to keep it moist.


Speech to Congress Will Be Shown on TV
President Clinton's economic address to a joint session of Congress will be televised live starting at 9 o'clock tonight on CBS (Channel 2 in New York), NBC (Channel 4), ABC (Channel 7), C-Span, CNN and PBS (Channel 13), followed by the Republican response.
The speech will also be broadcast live on National Public Radio.


Books of The Times; Leaving Dalgliesh Behind to Enter an Orwell Mode
The Children of Men  By P. D. James 241 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $22.


Hopes for a New Boston Garden Dim With Political Quarreling
For years the Boston Garden has been a special symbol to Bostonians.
Part shrine, as the home of their beloved basketball Celtics and hockey Bruins, it has also been a frustrating reminder of the petty politics and lack of civic leadership that have blocked repeated efforts to replace the grimy old Garden with a more modern arena that would have air-conditioning and seats with good views.
Last spring, when Boston's three largest banks agreed to lend $120 million to build a new Garden, salvation finally seemed at hand.
The steel had been ordered and 700 construction workers, out of jobs for several years with New England's recession, were set to start work on March 1.


U.N. Arms Inspectors Expect Iraq To Accept Surveillance by Copter
A United Nations official said today that the special commission monitoring the elimination of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction expected no resistance from the Iraqi authorities against helicopter surveillance missions.
"If we determine that we need to carry out a flight, we would anticipate a cooperative response from the Iraqis," said Pierce Corden, deputy executive chairman of the commission.


Review/Television; One Tragic Encounter, Many Points of View
The "Fatal Encounter" of tonight's episode of "48 Hours" took place last year on a quiet middle-class street in Jacksonville, Fla., between a joy-riding 15-year-old, Danny Adams, and a father of four, Adrian Crump.
When Mr.
Crump was awakened by something that sounded like a gunshot and that broke a window in his house, he grabbed his pistol, rushed outside, approached a car and killed the driver.
Differing accounts of precisely what happened during those moments emerge at the trial.
It is covered tonight by the "48 Hours" reporter Bernard Goldberg, who also inquires into the feelings of the family of the dead boy and of the man who killed him.
The scene, so familiar these days, is of a city shaken by random shootings.
A big question for the lawyers at the trial's outset is whether the jury will identify with Mr.
Crump as a man trying to protect his family or see him as someone too quick on the trigger.
Mr.
Goldberg asks, "Was Adrian Crump a vigilante or was he a victim?"


Flower District Fights Move to South Bronx
Faced with the loss of four major flower wholesalers who plan to move to the South Bronx, the rest of New York City's flower industry is fighting to remain in Manhattan, where it has been rooted for more than 100 years.
Despite traffic congestion, lack of space and prospects of rezoning, many flower wholesalers and retailers have banded together in an effort to find a way to stay in the present Flower District or relocate to some other site in Manhattan.


Market Place; Bought Wilt Chamberlain's? Relax, You're Off the Hook
Never mind.
That was the message yesterday from Wilt Chamberlain's Restaurants Inc. regarding its disastrous initial public offering last week.
The company sold 1.4 million shares at $7 each on Thursday, but the price cracked on the first day of trading and ended the week at $4.625 a share.


Phnom Penh Journal; For the Cambodian Vote, a Fourth of July Flavor
Kim Kethavy speaks with the confidence of a self-made man, and the 51-year-old businessman is certain that the lessons he learned while making his fortune as a gasoline-station owner in Long Beach, Calif., will serve him well if he somehow manages to become the first freely elected President of Cambodia.
When Mr.
Kethavy returned to his war-ravaged homeland last year, he opened his campaign headquarters above a storefront on one of the busiest street corners in Phnom Penh, across from the central market.


Arthur Ashe Made a Gift to Inner-City Health
To the Editor:
As one who had the privilege of getting to know Arthur Ashe in the last few months of his life, I found it gratifying to read the many richly deserved tributes to this renowned athlete and human rights and health care advocate (news article, Feb. 8).


Banks Show Drop in Yields
Yields of bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit for the seven-day period that ended yesterday continued to edge downward.
In the New York market, average six-month certificate yields were lower than at 20 major banks across the country, while money market yields were about the same.


You Can't Remake Washington in a Week; Let's Pitch In
To the Editor:
Re "Reading Mr. Clinton's Lips" (editorial, Jan. 28): the President is trying to initiate what the public that elected him seemed to want -- an open attitude, change and progress.
It isn't going to happen in a week, won't be perfect and won't please everyone.


Secretary Sees a Vital Role For Labor in U.S. Growth
Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich told the leaders of organized labor today that unions were vital to the new Administration's hopes for economic growth and that he intended to help them regain the power they have been losing for decades.
In a discussion covering nearly three hours at the annual winter meeting of the executive council of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., Mr.
Reich, who has emerged as the Government's most influential Labor Secretary in economic policy in at least a generation, told unions that management has gained an unfair advantage in resolving conflicts with unions.


Public &amp; Private; Church And State
It was not much of a surprise Sunday morning when John Cardinal O'Connor used the pulpit at St.
Patrick's Cathedral to congratulate members of the New York City Board of Education who had voted to ditch Schools Chancellor Joseph Fernandez.
The Cardinal's pronouncements on matters civic that he defines as matters moral have become so commonplace that his sermons are often bona fide news events.
The Cardinal had long been critical of the Chancellor, who lost his job because he believed that it was never too early to teach kids tolerance and never too late to offer sexually active kids condoms.


Ward, Henneman Sign
The Toronto Blue Jays and the Detroit Tigers avoided arbitration with right-handed relief pitchers yesterday.
The Blue Jays signed DUANE WARD to a three-year contract worth $12 million and the Tigers signed MIKE HENNEMAN to a one-year deal for $3,437,500, a raise of $1 million.


Insight; Bad Days
Nasdaq investors lost more money yesterday than at any time since the 1987 crash, as the Nasdaq market's broadest index dropped more than 25 points.
With Nasdaq stocks at such high levels, however, yesterday's loss equaled 3.6 percent -- not as bad as a 4.6 percent plunge in November 1991.
For the year to date, the Nasdaq average is off 1.7 percent.


BellSouth to Spend More on Service
The BellSouth Corporation, the largest of the regional Bell companies, said yesterday that it planned to spend nearly $9 billion to modernize its local telephone service by 1995.
The amount is an increase from the $8.5 billion allotted in its previous three-year budget.


Dow Off 82.94 As Most Stocks Take a Beating
Traders and investors sold stocks with greater fury yesterday than on any day since November 1991, apparently registering apprehension about President Clinton's economic plans.
Selling was concentrated on the technology stocks that have led the market higher since investors began drawing confidence last October from the likelihood of Mr.
Clinton's election.
Just two weeks ago, most market averages stood at record levels.


Royal Indiscretions
In Britain, the odds offered by bookmakers seven weeks ago against doing away with the monarchy by the year 2000 were 100 to 1.
Incredibly, they have since fallen to 8 to 1.
According to a recent Gallup Poll, only one person in three believes Britain gets good value from the cost of the royal family, and four in five say too many of the royals lead an idle, jet-set life.
This dramatic collapse in public esteem owes much to telephonic garrulity.
It would seem half of Britain has read or listened to apparently authentic recordings of Princess Diana tittering her secrets to a male pal who calls her "Squidgy" while her husband, Prince Charles, swaps off-color snickers with Camilla Parker-Bowles, wife of a courtier.
And who eavesdropped?
Most likely, some royal-watchers say, Government snoopers at the supersecret signals interception facility at Cheltenham, who may have leaked the tapes, with or without approval of superiors.


Lester Wilson, 51, Arranger of Dances For Stage and Films
Lester Wilson, a choreographer, director and dancer, died on Sunday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 51.
His family said the cause was a heart attack.
Mr.
Wilson is best known for his choreography for "Saturday Night Fever," the 1977 film starring John Travolta.
He also won praise for his arrangement of the special dance sequences in "Me and Bessie," the 1975 Broadway musical with Linda Hopkins.


Wanted: Democratic Leadership
Who says there's never any good news in the papers?
Just yesterday The Wall Street Journal quoted Robert Byrd, the pork-barreling Senator from West Virginia, as saying: "It is not the Senate I once knew. It has lost its soul."
If Mr.
Byrd is right, President Clinton's economic plan, his deficit-reduction goals and his promise of health-care reform may have a chance.
That, in turn, means that the desire for change expressed by two-thirds of voters in 1992 -- the combined total of the Clinton and Perot votes -- could come to pass.
But these things can only happen if the Democratic leadership in Congress decides to earn its keep and help the President pass his basic programs in an orderly fashion.


Federal Judge Finds Nynex Guilty of Criminal Contempt
A Federal judge convicted the Nynex Corporation of criminal contempt today and fined it $1 million for willfully selling an electronic information service in violation of the antitrust decree that broke up the Bell System in 1984.
Nynex, the parent company of both New York Telephone and New England Telephone, said it had done nothing wrong and would appeal the verdict.


Preparing to Commit Crime Can Be a Crime, Court Rules
New York State's highest court ruled today that a man could be convicted of attempting to possess drugs even after refusing to buy cocaine that he believed to be of poor quality.
The 4-2 ruling by the Court of Appeals addresses a question routinely considered by prosecutors, defense lawyers and law students: When does a person cross the line from merely preparing to commit a crime to actually committing it?


In the Kitchen With -- Judy Collins; Clinton's Troubadour: Still Another Side
JUDY COLLINS advanced on her visitor, long, gleaming knife in hand.
She was wearing a tawny velvet dress and, over it, an apron.
"Do you like garlic?" she asked.
"Wonderful!" She began to chop with a double-time wrist action that bespoke long experience at the cutting board.
"Garlic is a very good thing to have under all conditions," she said, moving on to onions.
"I always imagined that garlic doesn't smell on me. I like to keep to that illusion."


U.S. Inquiry of Post's Suitor May Widen
Several people who have been questioned by the Securities and Exchange Commission in connection with its civil suit against Towers Financial Corporation and its chairman, Steven Hoffenberg, say they have also been questioned recently by Federal law-enforcement officials.
It is not clear whether the inquiries about Mr.
Hoffenberg, whose bid to purchase The New York Post is scheduled to be completed this week, are merely informational or part of a new investigation into possible criminal violations.
But the questioning of S.E.C. witnesses by Federal agents, which is unusual in a civil case, suggests that the Government's scrutiny of Mr.
Hoffenberg may have entered a new phase.


Review/Theater; A Gloomy Voyage To the Apocalypse
It is a Civil War between Nameless Factions at an Unspecified Time in a Nameless Place.
The weather is so foggy the End of the World may be nigh.
A Man Named Angel declares: "If I was God, I'd change some things in the Bible." But Angel, who is crucified in Act II, is not God, and neither, apparently, is Jesus, who arrives bearing a cello just in time to delight us with some Bach.
Such is the rocky metaphysical terrain in "On the Open Road," a new play by Steve Tesich that bears nothing less than the fate of mankind on its broad shoulders, with occasional pauses for apocalyptic noises off.
Although the sincerity of Mr.
Tesich's concern for humanity in general is not in question, that concern is not always extended to the specific humans who have come to see his play at the Joseph Papp Public Theater.
Trying to pump up some conventional ideas into grandiose theatrical metaphors -- much as he did in his previous futuristic doomsday fable, "Square One" -- Mr.
Tesich has written an inflated parable in which self-importance must pass for importance.
What Woody Allen's "Shadows and Fog" was to Kafka and Fellini, "On the Open Road" is to Kafka and Beckett.


Knicks Win, but Riley Would Rather Talk of All-Stars
There was more news off the court than on it last night at Madison Square Garden.
After the Knicks had finished drubbing the Dallas Mavericks, 117-87, Pat Riley proclaimed that Patrick Ewing, not Shaquille O'Neal, deserved to be the starting Eastern Conference center in Sunday's All-Star Game.
Meanwhile, Rolando Blackman, who missed his second consecutive game with a sprained right knee and ankle, said he expected to be out the next three weeks, not just one week as originally hoped.


President's New Pitch: Redefining Patriotism as a Banner for Peace, Not War
In telling Americans that it is their patriotic duty to support his economic program, President Clinton is trying to redefine "patriotism" from pulling together to face a mortal threat abroad to paying higher taxes to face an economic threat at home.
This is both a high-risk political strategy and an experiment in the politics of mobilizing mass opinion in the wake of the cold war.
The biggest risk is that Mr.
Clinton will discover what Jimmy Carter did when he declared that his energy conservation plan was "the moral equivalent of war" -- that most Americans found the notion so overstated that they scoffed at it, undermining his whole initiative.


INSIDE
Bosnia Aid Standoff Persists
For the third day, a United Nations convoy was prevented by Serbian forces from reaching a besieged Muslim community in Bosnia.
Page A8.
Anger at Mexico Trade Move
Top Washington officials are angered by an investment fund formed to buy small American companies and move them to Mexico.
Page D1.
Cancer Risk in Vasectomies
Two large new studies add to earlier evidence that a vasectomy may increase the risk of developing prostate cancer.
Health, page C12.
Inquiry Urged on Archivist
Three Democrats asked for an investigation of the nation's Archivist, who gave President George Bush control of White House files.
Page A10.


Corrections
An obituary on Nov. 18 about Capt.
Gerald P. O'Driscoll, who was president, chief executive and part owner of the Circle Line-Statue of Liberty Ferry Inc. and who died on Nov. 14, misstated his relationship to the original ferry line.
He was the second-to-last surviving founder of the line, the Circle Line Sightseeing Yachts; a brother, Jeremiah, of New York City, is the last surviving founder.
This correction was delayed through an editing lapse.


FEW TO PAY MORE IN INCOME TAXES, PRESIDENT INSISTS
Wary of early negative reaction to his plan to cut the budget deficit and stimulate the economy, President Clinton sought today to assure the public that most middle-income Americans would not be hurt.
The White House said income taxes would rise only for families earning more than $180,000 a year.
The White House also said that to protect households earning less than $30,000 a year it would suggest tax breaks to offset a proposed tax on energy and any other new levies in the program he will announce Wednesday night.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about New York State's formulas for aid to school districts misstated the location of North Shore High School.
It is in Glen Head, L.I., not Glen Cove.


Review/Opera; A Racial Wrong Portrayed In Blues
"Ghosts: Live From Galilee," a new production at La Mama E.T.C., tackles a challenging and powerful subject: the 1931 trial of the Scottsboro Boys, a group of poor black men who were taken off a freight train in Scottsboro, Ala., and arrested on false charges of raping two white women.
The case simmered throughout the 1930's, and its underlying tensions are still very much with us.
Edgar Nkosi White, a playwright, and Genji Ito, a composer, have built a stylized blues opera from the basic facts of the case.
The plot focuses on Clarence Norris, "last of the Scottsboro boys," who lived to be pardoned by Gov.
George C. Wallace of Alabama in 1976.
He is represented as a naive, wayward soul who leaves his mother and girlfriend to find work.
Thrown summarily into prison, he finds himself the victim of racial hatred.
He is about to be lynched when Samuel Leibowitz, constantly referred to as "a lawyer from New York City," arrives on the scene.
Leibowitz's defense fails, and Norris breaks out of prison rather than face a death sentence.
He finds his girlfriend, Donna Lee, shows up at Leibowitz's apartment in New York and is directed to a hiding place in Harlem.
The police recapture him and return him to Alabama.
In a vibrant gospel epilogue, he is shown being pardoned by the villainous sheriff, who is seated in Wallace's wheelchair.


Woman in Abuse Case Had Choice, Lawyer Says
The defense renewed its assertion today that the mildly retarded young woman in the Glen Ridge sex-assault case was able to make choices and judgments about sexual activities.
She "could say no," Thomas Ford, a defense attorney, told the jury as he continued his closing argument.
She "could say yes." She "could say maybe."


COMPANY NEWS
BANC ONE CORP., Columbus, Ohio, said its unit, Banc One Colorado Corp., would acquire Colorado Western Bancorp.
Terms were not disclosed.
BIRTCHER MEDICAL SYSTEMS INC., El Monte, Calif., has agreed to acquire Beacon Laboratories, Broomfield, Colo., a manufacturer of electrosurgery products.


Narrower Loss Seen By Revlon
The Revlon Consumer Products Corporation said yesterday that it expected to report a net loss of approximately $231 million for 1992, a big improvement from the $414 million it lost in 1991.
Revlon timed the release of its preliminary sales and operating results to coincide with an offering of $550 million worth of new senior subordinated debt securities, which are being sold in a private placement through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.


You Can't Remake Washington in a Week
To the Editor:
"Reading Mr. Clinton's Lips" (editorial, Jan. 28), starting with the headline, is unfairly harsh criticism of President Clinton after one week in office for steps not taken but feared.


Resorts; In San Antonio, Hyatt Defies U.S. Trend
A Japanese-American group will open a 500-room Hyatt hotel here despite a depressed and overbuilt national hotel market in which new construction is at a near standstill.
The $100 million 200-acre Hyatt Regency Hill Country Resort is one of only a handful of major new hotels completed in the United States in the last 12 months and is the first to be built in Texas in five years.
The opening is scheduled for Wednesday, Feb. 24.


Dinkins Promises Aid for Small Businesses
Easing fines on grocery stores, publishing reference guides that decipher city regulations and introducing courses to teach city employees to be courteous were among the newest initiatives to ease the plight of small businesses that the Dinkins administration unveiled yesterday.
They received mixed reviews from business owners who noted that the city has a long history of mayoral promises to small businesses that never amounted to much.
Still, several owners said this was the most comprehensive effort they could remember and hoped the outcome would be different this time.


You Can't Remake Washington in a Week; Abigail's Travails
To the Editor:
Addendum to "The President's Other Running Mate," Karl E. Meyer's Jan. 27 Editorial Notebook:


Critic's Notebook; Clinton Borrows Freely From Capra to Tap Middle-Class Ideals
You may catch a whiff of Ronald Reagan in President Clinton's direct approach to the television audience or a touch of Ross Perot in the President's display of colorfully doleful charts, but his public introduction of the Administration's economic prescriptions owes even more to the spirit of Frank Capra.
In the radio talks, the video "town hall" meeting and the brief television address that have led up to tonight's message to Congress, he took the role, familiar from so many Capra movies, of the young, idealistic outsider calling for the support of solid middle-class Americans in his challenge to high-priced lobbyists (who ever heard of a low-priced one?), special interests (or an unspecial one?), status-quo pols and other "defenders of decline."


Hospitality to Acquire Super 8 Motels
Hospitality Franchise Systems Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to pay $125 million for Super 8 Motels Inc., which operates 949 budget-priced motels in North America.
The move rounds out Hospitality Franchise's lineup of hotels and motels, which includes the higher-priced chains Ramada in the United States and Howard Johnson and Days Inn worldwide.


New Bidder for The Post Emerges as Field Grows
A new bidder for The New York Post surfaced yesterday amid indications that a bankruptcy judge is encouraging other prospective buyers to compete with Steven Hoffenberg for ownership of the newspaper.
The bidder is the W.T.W.
Oil Company, a privately owned Irving, Tex., company, and its president, William Martin Waggoner, a lawyer for the company said last night.


Forsaking More, a Restaurant Design Team Adapts to Era of Less
WHEN it comes to restaurant design, David Rockwell and Jay Haverson are hot.
Their fans rave about their creative use of materials, their devotion to clients, their theatrical lighting.
But there is something else that may be even more important, something that says a lot about the state of restaurant design in the 1990's.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
I was on a solo shopping trip and had just emerged from my car in a Hartsdale, N.Y., parking lot.
In the adjacent space, a pre-school boy waited patiently while his mother unstrapped his baby sister from an infant seat.
The boy peered into my car, frowned darkly and demanded, "Where's your child?"


LEFT IN DENMARK SHIFTS ON EUROPE
When Danish voters narrowly rejected the treaty on European union last June, sending shock waves across the continent, one of the catchier campaign slogans wielded here by those opposing the treaty involved Holger K. Nielsen, the leader of the left-wing Socialist People's Party.
"Holger and his wife will give the European union the knife," party leaders chanted back then, urging voters to join Mr.
Nielsen, a treaty opponent, and kill the proposed plan for closer economic and political cooperation among the 12 member states of the European Community.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  DETROIT TIGERS -- Agreed to terms with Mike Henneman and Mark Leiter, pitchers, on one-year contracts.


Odd Bedfellows in Tokyo Join to Save Relic of War
Forty-five years ago Gen.
Hideki Tojo stood defiantly in the cavernous main hall of the Imperial Army Headquarters, sunlight glinting off his bald head, as he and six others were sentenced to hang for war crimes.
In 1970, the novelist Yukio Mishima stood on the main balcony of the building, urging jeering troops to revolt and restore Japan's military honor.
Stepping inside, he committed seppuku, disemboweling himself with a samurai sword.


Rohan Lifts Columbia Back to Its Better Days
Jack Rohan walked away from coaching Columbia University basketball in 1974 because his wife, Barbara, was ill with cancer.
He returned three years ago on her advice, and if this season's team is any indication, Rohan has brought the Lions' program back with him.
In his first stint, Rohan had coached at Columbia for 13 years and accumulated a 154-161 record.


U.N. Aid Convoy in Bosnia Blocked by Serbs for 3d Day
For the third straight day, a United Nations relief convoy was prevented today by Serbian nationalist forces from reaching one of the besieged Muslim communities in eastern Bosnia where cold, hunger and disease have endangered an estimated 200,000 people.
United Nations officials here clustered around a high-frequency radio throughout the day for bulletins from the convoy leader, who eventually abandoned his efforts to persuade Serbian commanders to let the relief vehicles pass.
For a third night, the vehicles pulled back from the Serbian roadblock at Mali Zvornik, on the Serbian side of the border between Serbia and Bosnia, and bivouacked for the night.


Review/Architecture; Masterful Lighting Sets the Stage for Discovery at Vong
A long, wooden trestle table stands at the entrance to the dining room at Vong, its rough, bare planks covered with trays of spices.
Ginger, turmeric, several kinds of dried peppers, bay leaves, star anise, a sprig of rosemary stuck into a crock filled with rock salt: it's a visual appetizer for Vong's spicy, French-Asian cuisine; a raw display of the ingredients that will arrive cooked at the stylish tables with blue slate tops that dot the room beyond.
But the table is more than a visual feast.
It's also an altar to the origins of cross-cultural discovery that produced the kind of culinary hybrid that comes out of Vong's kitchen.
For the assembled spices are the lures that led Europeans to build ships and set sail for the East.
They weren't looking for taste thrills, exactly.
In fact, they were trying to avoid them, searching for palatable ways to disguise the strong flavor of foods past their edible prime.
The quest opened up worlds and made possible delicacies like Vong's sauteed foie gras with ginger and mango.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  ISRAEL CITES ARAB LINK IN U.S.
Israeli officials say that an Arab-American arrested in Israel last month has provided unusually detailed information suggesting that Hamas, the militant Palestinian group that has attacked Israelis and Palestinians, has drawn critical financial support and political and military guidance from agents based in the United States.
A1  U.N.
TROOPS LEAVE LEBANON AREA  United Nations peacekeeping forces withdrew from three villages in southern Lebanon and handed their positions over to the regular Lebanese Army as tension grew in the area between militant Muslim guerrillas and Israeli troops.
A7


Corrections
The About New York column on Saturday, about workers who lost their jobs when Stroehmann's closed its Taystee Bread bakery and then decided to open a bakery of their own, misidentified one worker in some editions.
He is Edouard Archange.


Review/Film; Emotions So Strong You Can Taste Them
Food and passion create a sublime alchemy in "Like Water for Chocolate," a Mexican film whose characters experience life so intensely that they sometimes literally smolder.
The kitchen becomes a source of such witchcraft that a fervently prepared meal can fill diners with lust or grief or nausea, depending upon the cook's prevailing mood.


No Headline
"Patriotism and economics form strange bedfellows. One can make a national interest case for sacrifice, one can make a common sense case for sacrifice, but patriotism is when you risk your life, not when you risk your wallet. " REPRESENTATIVE JIM LEACH, Republican of Iowa.  [ A14:2. ]


Corrections
A front-page article on Feb. 9 about computers that are controlled by brain signals omitted the name of the co-developer of the thought-activated typing system created at the University of Illinois.
Dr.
Lawrence A. Farwell, director and chief scientist at Human Brain Research Laboratory Inc. in Potomac, Md., and a former graduate student at the University of Illinois, developed some of the central ideas for the system and wrote much of the necessary computer software.


Results Plus
TENNIS  Seles Wins in Straight Sets Monica Seles needed just 55 minutes to breeze past Claudia Porwik of Germany, 6-1, 6-2, yesterday in the first round of the Paris Women's Open.
Seles is on track to overtake Chris Evert as the career leader in winnning percentage and could do it in this tournament.
Evert retired having won 89.96 percent of her matches, with a record of 1,309-146.
Although nowhere near the number of Evert's victories, Seles needs to win this tournament, which would mean winning four more matches, to bring her record to 252-28, which would be exactly 90 percent.
Seles's next opponent will be an Austrian, Judith Wiesner, who defeated a qualifier, Kirsten Freye of Germany, 2-6, 6-4, 6-0.
The only other seeded player who competed yesterday, No. 3 Conchita Martinez of Spain, sailed into the second round with a 6-2, 6-1 victory over Petra Thoren of Finland. (AP)


Bosnian Due in Washington On Way to Talks at the U.N.
President Alija Izetbegovic of Bosnia will pay an official visit to Washington at the end of the week as the guest of Vice President Al Gore on his way to the Balkan peace talks at the United Nations, diplomats and officials said today.
Mr.
Izetbegovic, who had refused to attend the negotiations while the Clinton Administration was reviewing its Balkan policy, insists that he will not lead his Government's delegation at the United Nations, but intends only to look in briefly at the talks, which ended in a stalemate at Geneva and will reopen in New York next week.


Business Digest
The Economy  President Clinton sought to reassure the public that most middle-income Americans would not be hurt by his plan to stimulate the economy.
The White House said income taxes would rise only for families earning more than $180,000 a year.  [ Page A1. ]


Petrovic Likely To Miss Shootout
Nets guard Drazen Petrovic, considered by many to be the best outside shooter in the league, said tonight he is "99 percent certain" he won't participate in the 3-point shooting contest that will be held at the All-Star Game this weekend.
Petrovic was supposed to fly to Salt Lake City on Friday to shoot in the contest Saturday afternoon.
But Petrovic said he reinjured his right ankle tonight during the Nets' 100-88 victory over the Milwaukee Bucks.
Coming into this game, Petrovic was tied for second in 3-point shooting.


Richard Salant, 78, Who Headed CBS News in Expansion, Is Dead
Richard S. Salant, who led CBS News for most of the 1960's and 70's during the tumultuous Vietnam and Watergate eras, died yesterday while speaking to a group in Southport, Conn.
He was 78 and lived in New Canaan, Conn.
CBS said he suffered heart failure while giving a talk on news coverage to an organization of elderly people at the Country Club of Fairfield in Southport.


2 New Studies Link Vasectomy To Higher Prostate Cancer Risk
Two large new studies being reported on Wednesday add to earlier evidence that a vasectomy may increase a man's risk of developing prostate cancer.
The findings are not definitive, but experts not directly involved in the studies call the studies scientifically well designed, adding that they underscore the need for further research to assess the possible hazards of one of the most effective and widely used methods of contraception.


Daly Gets the Exit, Then Nets Close Out Bucks
In a performance as tedious to watch as a Congressional debate on C-Span, the Nets were going nowhere.
But then the team got a spark from an unusual source: Chuck Daly being tossed out of the contest.
The result?
Milwaukee being tossed into the fire.
The Bucks were dominating the Nets tonight in a game that, up until that point, provided few highlights.
Missed layups, missed easy jump shots, horrible officiating, this one had it all.
But a funny thing happened on the way to what appeared to be a Nets loss: When Derrick Coleman was whistled for a technical after arguing that he had been fouled, Daly went into orbit, and his team, angered by the call and Daly's subsequent ejection, set out to win the game for him.


Level the Mayoral Playing Field
It may still be unrealistic to expect New York State's Republican-dominated Senate to support an overhaul of the state's flawed election system.
But the senators at least might get out of New York City's way as it tries to clean up local elections.
Once again, the Democratic-run Assembly has passed sweeping legislation that would simplify hopelessly complex ballot access rules and establish a healthy system of public campaign financing for statewide and legislative races.


L.I. Mammograms Faulted And 200 Recipients Sought
More than 200 women who received mammograms that Nassau County charges were faulty have yet to be notified by health officials more than 17 months after the situation was discovered.
The doctor who performed the mammograms, Padma Ram, was charged in September 1991 with providing substandard breast X-rays in her internal medicine practice in Floral Park.
An Anonymous Tip
The County Health Department held a hearing last month to consider its findings of 386 violations of state procedures.
County officials are expected to decide next month whether to fine Dr.
Ram.
The fine could be as much as $193,000, which would be the largest fine since the state instituted mammogram regulations in 1987.


Hasidic Rabbi and His Wife Plead Not Guilty to Kidnapping a Teen-Ager


NBC, Hiding Behind the Lawyers
Most of the country now knows that NBC faked a fiery collision during a prime-time "expose" of exploding gas tanks on General Motors pickup trucks.
Yet network officials cannot bring themselves to admit that "Dateline NBC's" gaffe was a poisonous professional mistake.
They also seem reluctant to investigate the episode, hiring two outside lawyers to do the job for them.
Michael Gartner, president of NBC News, defended the show until it became clear that General Motors had the goods.
At which point he wheeled out the show's anchors, Jane Pauley and Stone Phillips, to deliver, by way of fervent apology, a dry recitation of how NBC had rigged the trucks with tiny rockets.
Then Mr.
Gartner announced he had hired the two lawyers to investigate.


Reds' Roberts Awarded $3.9 Million Contract
BIP ROBERTS, a second baseman who started games at three other positions for Cincinnati last season while batting .323, was a winner in arbitration yesterday.
After a hearing on Monday in Chicago, an arbitrator ruled that the Reds should pay Roberts the $3.9 million he sought for the 1993 season, rather than the $2.7 million Cincinnati offered.
Roberts earned $1.55 million last season, his first with the Reds after being obtained in a trade with San Diego.
With Cincinnati, Roberts started games in left field and center field, and at second base and third base, and committed only seven errors.
He made the National League All-Star team for the first time in his career.


Report Warns of Scheme Directed at Low-Income Minority Homeowners
Eutha M. King, a 68-year-old woman living on Social Security payments, has never stopped regretting the day a door-to-door home-improvement contractor appeared at her threshold.
He talked her into getting a loan for $25,000 worth of repairs for new electrical wiring and kitchen remodeling for her home in Crown Heights, Brooklyn.
Since that day three years ago, Ms.
King said, her life has become a roller-coaster ride, shifting from coping with poor and incomplete construction work to teetering on the brink of foreclosure on the house she has owned for more than 25 years.


Even Mother Nature Wouldn't Cooperate


Cincinnati Milacron reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Raoul Hague, Sculptor, 88, Dies; Abstract Expressionist in Wood
Raoul Hague, an American sculptor whose massive carved wood sculptures often resembled abstract versions of the tree trunks they once were, died yesterday at his home in Woodstock, N.Y.
He was 88.
The cause was heart failure, said Jill Weinberg of Lennon, Weinberg Inc., the Manhattan gallery that represents the artist.


Foreign Affairs; Fearing Voters . . .
Candidate Clinton tried to teach Americans a critical lesson -- that domestic policy is foreign policy is domestic policy.
But President Clinton seems to be running away from world affairs, fearful of displeasing voters who might think him overly engaged abroad and insufficiently attentive to America.
And through his tentativeness, he could be inadvertently encouraging the very isolationist impulses he warned against during the campaign -- and jeopardizing his mantle of leadership.
So far, Mr.
Clinton has kept international issues at arm's length, at least publicly.
And last night, in the space usually reserved for the State of the Union address, he offered an economic speech, serving to shield his deliberate scanting of the outside world.


Home Video
Bills in Many States
Measured by the number of anti-obscenity bills pending in state legislatures, a more liberal Administration in Washington seems to be rallying a conservative response at the video store.
"A lot of people thought if Bill Clinton got elected, censorship would be over with," said Rick Karpel, the director of legal affairs of the national Video Software Dealers Association.
"But at the state level we're seeing more."


Pirates Share First As Dehere Scores 41
Perhaps one day about a month from now, the Seton Hall Pirates will be able to look back upon what happened last night at Madison Square Garden as the time they rediscovered the resolve and togetherness that allowed them to start meeting their high expectations.
Propelled by Terry Dehere's 41-point night, the finest of his Seton Hall career, the Pirates overcame a 14-point second-half deficit to defeat St.
John's in overtime, 95-85, and tie the surprising Redmen for first place in the Big East.


Yeltsin and Rival at Least Agree to Keep Talking
The main contenders in Russia's paralyzing political struggle, President Boris N. Yeltsin and the head of the legislature, Ruslan I. Khasbulatov, have agreed to try to work out a power-sharing agreement over the next 10 days, an aide to Mr.
Yeltsin said today.
The aide, Deputy Prime Minister Sergei Shakhrai, said at a news conference that Mr.
Yeltsin and Mr.
Khasbulatov held a 20-minute meeting on Tuesday and agreed to set up a commission to work out a compromise that would allow them to postpone a national referendum on a new constitution.
The vote is scheduled for April 11.


Michael Anthony Jewelers reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


When Shapely Exotics Move In
MOVE too fast through the narrow streets of SoHo and you may miss a cache of some of the most outlandish houseplants this side of the tropics.
"When I find something interestingly shaped it makes me happy," said Larry Nathanson, the owner of the Grass Roots Garden, neatly summarizing the reason for the many peculiar green outlines in his shop at 131 Spring Street.


Events: Walking Tour Of St. John the Divine
Tour and Teen-Age Fair
92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue; (212) 996-1100
.
A walking tour at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, which was designed by Heins and LaFarge in 1892, will take place on Sunday from 1 to 3:30 P.M.
Fee, $18.
Advance registration is required.


Most Relief Operations in Bosnia Are Halted by U.N. Aid Agency
The United Nations relief agency suspended most of its operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina today until opposing political leaders honor commitments to allow convoys of urgently needed food and medicine to pass.
The move meant an immediate halt to most of the missions being undertaken in what has become one of the most complex and dangerous relief operations in the history of the United Nations.
It appeared to carry potentially grave consequences for some of the 1.6 million people here who are estimated by United Nations relief officials to be at risk from hunger, disease and exposure to the bitter Balkan winter.


Madison Gas &amp; Electric (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sleepless Children, Worn-Out Parents
NIGHT falls, the chaos of the day evaporates under a blanket of stars, and peaceful slumber envelops the house.
That's the way it works for some lucky families.
But for those with sleep-resistant children, nightime is anything but peaceful.
In those households, sundown signals yet another round of the Great Sleep Battle, in which otherwise sweet-natured children manage to torture parents unmercifully with the cruelest weapon of all: sleep deprivation.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Lisa Ono The Ballroom
Lisa Ono, the fourth performer in the Ballroom's winter series of Brazilian concerts, is an unusual cross-cultural hybrid.
Of Japanese ancestry, she was born and brought up in Sao Paulo and now divides her time between Japan, where she is a jazz-fusion star, and Brazil, where she is not as well known.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  NEEDLE EXCHANGES ATTRACT ADDICTS
Six months after New York City began an ambitious research effort to measure whether needle exchange programs can slow the spread of AIDS among intravenous drug users, evaluators say the new programs have attracted about 5,000 addicts, many of whom report they are sharing needles less often.
A1.
RELEASE OF HOMELESS MAN FOUGHT


Dinkins's Word to Tokyo: Don't Leave New York
In an effort to maintain Japanese investment while steering more business to New York City, Mayor David N. Dinkins leaves tomorrow for an eight-day visit to Japan in a trip that will test the Mayor's salesmanship in meetings with business executives and public officials.
In the last year, the Mayor has been increasingly urged by business leaders and his deputies, particularly Barry F. Sullivan, Deputy Mayor for Economic Development, to appeal directly to foreign business leaders.
Last June, the Mayor took a weeklong trip to Britain, France and Germany.


Doesn't Anyone Care About Iraqi Suffering?
To the Editor:
"Now, What About Iraq?" (editorial, Jan. 21) gives President Clinton reasons for continuing economic and military sanctions against Iraq.
It seems that in making your calculations you have intentionally disregarded the suffering people of Iraq.
It should have been obvious that in this latest showdown between Washington and Baghdad the only victims are the Iraqi people.


No Headline
"My political views have never changed in the past and will not change in the future. I hope that someday I will be able to make more contributions. I don't regret a thing." -- WANG DAN, a Chinese dissident released after more than three years in prison.  [ A6:1. ]


Richard Colabella, 56, Health Executive, Dies
Richard Colabella, a leader in developing mental health services in the Roman Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn, died on Monday at Mercy Hospital in Rockville Centre, L.I.
He was 56 and lived in Franklin Square, L.I.
He had cancer, said Thomas A. DeStefano, executive director of Catholic Charities in Brooklyn and Queens.


America's Better Self Got Lost in Aliens Law; Senator and the Survey
To the Editor:
"Congress and Its Household Help," a Feb. 9 graphic, gives a misimpression about me.
My name is listed under the section headed "4 Senate offices refused to answer the questions." I would like to set the record straight: I have never hired an illegal alien, and I have always paid all taxes and Social Security on my household employees.


Liz Claiborne reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Clinton Plan
President Clinton proposed a comprehensive program of tax increases and spending cuts designed to trim the Federal deficit over the next four years by $500 billion, or 38 percent, and to revitalize the nation's economy.  [ Page A1. ]
Corporations would no longer be able to claim tax deductions for high executive salaries and club dues, deductions for meals and entertainment would be trimmed, and paying lobbyists would no longer be tax deductible.  [ D1. ]


Armco Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


CLINTON'S ECONOMIC PLAN: The Spending Cuts; A Wide Swath, on Earth and in the Sky
President Clinton's economic plan proposes making $253 billion in spending cuts over four years by eliminating some programs and cutting back others, including a plan to scale back the $30 billion space station to eliminate cost overruns.
The plan he presented to Congress would also cut benefits for retirees, veterans and the poor by $91 billion over four years and impose or raise fees on many Government services.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Signed Gene Nelson, pitcher, to a minor-league contract.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Acquired Kevin Belcher, outfielder, from the Texas Rangers for Ever Magellanes, infielder.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Agreed to terms with Steve Shifflett, Doug Harris, Ed Pierce and Billy Brewer, pitchers; Lance Jennings, catcher; Bob Hamelin and Phil Hiatt, infielders, and Kevin Koslofski, outfielder, on one-year contracts.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Agreed to terms with Randy Johnson, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Agreed to terms with Tim Belcher, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Agree to terms with Todd Pratt, catched, on a one-year contract.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  CHICAGO BULLS -- Signed Darrell Walker, guard, for the remainder of the season.
United States Basketball League  LONG ISLAND SURF -- Named Laverne Tart assistant general manager for youth and community relations, and Allen Rosenblatt director of finance.
Football  National Football League  LOS ANGELES RAIDERS -- Named Jim Haslett linebackers coach.
MINNESOTA VIKINGS -- Named Chris Foerster, assistant offensive line coach.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Signed Dean Caliguire, offensive lineman.
Hockey  National Hockey League  LOS ANGELES KINGS -- Assigned Jim Thompson, right wing, to Phoenix of International Hockey League.
WASHINGTON CAPITALS -- Agreed to terms with Stefan Ustorf, center, on a two-year contract.
Olympics
USA BASKETBALL -- Named Tara VanDerveer, Stanford women's basketball coach, coach for the 1993 USA women's national team.
US NATIONAL JUNIOR SWIMMING TEAMS -- Named Susan Petersen Lubow, Kings Point athletic director, assistant manager of the US national junior men's and women's swim teams.
College
LOUISVILLE -- Named James Bell defensive backfield coach.
VIRGINIA TECH -- Suspended Thomas Elliott, forward, and Jimmy Carruth, center, from the basketball team for one game for violating team rules.


An Artist Proudly Shows Mom


Diagnostic Products reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Ply Gem Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Saberhagen and Mets Go to Bat Over Pact
The scene will unfold like clockwork.
Bret Saberhagen will walk up one of the practice mounds here Friday at 10 A.M.
The right-hander for the Mets will kick briefly at the dirt, spin the baseball into position and fire a fastball 60 feet 6 inches.
There will follow a loud bang.
It will sound like a gunshot, which is about right.
For the detonation behind the plate will not only open spring training for the Mets, it will officially begin the race for a contract for Saberhagen.
It's a contest over finances that cannot be good for the Mets to lose.


CLINTON'S ECONOMIC PLAN: The Speech; Text of the President's Address to a Joint Session of Congress
Following is a transcript of President Clinton's economic address to a joint session of Congress last night, as recorded by The New York Times:
Mr.
President, Mr.
Speaker, members of the House and the Senate, distinguished Americans here as visitors in this chamber -- as am I -- it is nice to have a fresh excuse for giving a long speech.


RHI Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ex-Chief Judge Pleads Not Guilty to Extortion
Sol Wachtler, the former Chief Judge of New York's highest court, pleaded not guilty to extortion charges in Federal court today.
His lawyers filed notice that he would maintain he was insane at the time of the offenses.
Judge Wachtler, thin and pale, said nothing at the defense table as he was arraigned before Federal District Judge Anne E. Thompson.
His wife, Joan, kissed him on the cheek just before she took her seat in the courtroom with their daughters Lauren, Marjorie and Alison and their son, Philip.


Employees Also Suspected In Thefts at Cash Courier
Federal authorities said today that employees were among those involved in the systematic theft of large amounts of money from a Long Island armored car company where up to $40 million is believed missing.
Lawyers for the company's clients gathered in Federal District Court here in hopes of recovering some of the millions of dollars seized by the government from Revere Armored Inc. in Bohemia.
The company's owners, Susanna and Robert Scaretta, were arrested last Thursday on Federal bank-theft charges.


Fischer &amp; Porter Co.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Illinois Tool Works reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Albany Ordered to Keep Custody of Aliens
Placing further strains on New York State's overburdened prison system, a judge has ruled that the Federal Government has no obligation to take custody of more than 3,000 undocumented aliens in the state's prisons who have served their minimum sentences.
The decision means that New York State will have to continue spending more than $65 million a year to house and supervise the prisoners, said Thomas A. Coughlin 3d, Commissioner of the State Correctional Services Department.
Mr.
Coughlin said the state planned to appeal.


Oregon Metallurgical (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Two Children Killed in Fire At Queens Site
Two small boys died yesterday after a flash fire raced through a private house in Queens that neighbors and parents said doubled as a neighborhood day-care center.
Fire investigators said the boys, ages 7 and 4, were found in the cellar of the house in St.
Albans, one on a bunk bed, the other huddled in a corner near a bathroom.
Six other children who were in the house were unharmed.


CLINTON'S ECONOMIC PLAN: The Details; Clinton's Plan: Austerity and Change
The wide array of budget cuts and tax changes President Clinton proposed last night would fundamentally alter the way the Government raises and spends money.
He said the aim of the program was to spread the burden of reducing the deficit and improving the economy's long-term prospects.
The tax provisions were spelled out in greater detail than many of the spending goals.
All figures are for fiscal years in billions of dollars.
NEW TAXES Individual taxes
Higher income taxes: The top tax rate would be raised to 36% rate for for people filing joint returns who have a taxable income over 140,000, or signle filers with a taxable income above $115,000.
In addition, the plan proposes a 10% surtax on taxable income over $250,000, excluding capital gains; would increase the alternative minimum tax rates for people with many deductions, and extend the limits on itemized deductions.
The capital gains tax rate would remain unchanged at 28%.
Revenue in billions 1994: $27.7 1997: $26.3 1993-98: $126.3
Health insurance: Income above $135,000 would be made subject to Medicare payroll tax.
Revenue in billions 1994: 2.8 1997: 6.8 1993-98: 29.2
Energy: Fuels would be taxed according to their energy content; a gasoline tax scheduled to expire on 9/30/95 would be extended.
Revenue in billions 1994: 1.5 1997: 24.9 1993-98: 79.3
Club dues: Club membership expenses could no longer be deducted either as an individual or business expense.
Revenue in billions 1994: 0.1 1997: 0.3 1993-98: 1.2
Moving expenses: The plan would disallow deductions for meals and real estate expenses during moves.
Revenue in billions 1994: 0.1 1997: 0.4 1993-98: 1.7
Social Security Taxes: Taxes would rise on Social Security benefits for people with adjusted gross incomes exceeding $25,000 (individuals) or $32,000 (couples).
Revenue in billions 1994: 2.7 1997: 6.9 1993-98: 21.4 BUSINESS TAXES
Executive pay: Businesses would not be able to claim payments to a single individual of more than $1 million as a deductible expense.
Revenue in billions 1994: 0.1 1997: 0.2 1993-98: 0.6
Business meals and entertainment: Only 50 percent of such costs could be deducted; down from 80 percent.
Revenue in billions 1994: 1.8 1997: 3.7 1993-98: 16.1
Corporate tax rate: The rate would be increased to 36 percent, from 34 percent, for taxable income above $10 million.
Revenue in billions 1994: 7.7 1997: 5.7 1993-98: 30.6
Securities dealers: Would be required to price their holdings at market value.
Revenue in billions 1994: 0.5 1997: 1.1 1993-98: 4.4
Puerto Rico: Tax incentives for corporate investment there would be limited.
Revenue in billions 1994: 0.2 1997: 2.1 1993-98: 7.0
Lobbying: Lobbying expenses would no longer be deductible.
Revenue in billions 1994: 0.1 1997: 0.2 1993-98: 1.0
International Business: Miscellaneous increases.
Revenue in billions 1994: 0.8 1997: 2.1 1993-98: 8.6 TAX BREAKS: Individual taxes
Earned Income Tax Credit: Clinton wants to expand this credit aimed at low-income families with children.
Revenue in billions 1994: 0.5 1997: 6.7 1993-98: 26.8 Business taxes:
Investment tax credits: The credits would be temporary for large businesses and permanent for small businesses.
Revenue in billions 1994: 9.2 1997: 2.3 1993-98: 28.9
Research and experimentation credit: The plan would make it permanent.
Revenue in billions 1994: 1.2 1997: 2.0 1993-98: 9.6
Real Estate: The plan would extend low-income housing credits and mortgage revenue bonds and change certain investment rules.
Revenue in billions 1994: 0.6 1997: 1.3 1993-98: 5.5
Training and education: The Administration would make permanent a credit for employer-provided education assistance, and would provide credits for certain jobs and youth apprenticeships.
Revenue in billions 1994: 0.6 1997: 1.0 1993-98: 5.0
Enterprise Zones: President Clinton wants to provide tax credits for businesses in needy areas.
Revenue in billions 1994: 0.1 1997: 1.2 1993-98: 4.1
Capital gains: The capital gains tax would be cut only for new investments in small businesses.
Revenue in billions 1994: 0 1997: 0.4 1993-98: 0.7 SPENDING CUTS
Defense Department: The department would reduce new weapons purchases, troop levels, training and maintenance.
It would also freeze pay in 1994 and give smaller-than-forecast salary increases in the future.
Revenue in billions 1994: 11.8 1997: 36.2 1993-98: 126.9
Environmental Protection Agency: The agency would not renew certain wastewater treatment grants, except near the Mexican border.
Revenue in billions 1994: 0.1 1997: 1.9 1993-98: 6.3
Staff Reductions: President Clinton plans to eliminate 100,000 Federal staff positions through attrition over four years.
Revenue in billions 1994: 0.9 1997: 2.5 1993-98: 10.5
Administrative Efficiencies: Miscellaneous savings would be achieved across all Federal agencies other than the Defense Department, for which savings are counted separately.
Revenue in billions 1994: 0.7 1997: 3.5 1993-98: 11.2
Streamlining Government: President Clinton would take various measures to streamline all Federal agencies, not counting the Defense Department Revenue in billions 1994: 0.6 1997: 3.3 1993-98: 12.1
Pay for Federal employees: They would receive no raise in calendar 1994, and certain rules for calculating their pay would change in 1995.
Revenue in billions 1994: 1.4 1997: 2.7 1993-98: 11.3
Interest on national debt: The Administration would shorten the maturity of Treasury securities.
Revenue in billions 1994: 1.6 1997: 3.9 1993-98: 16.4  Controlling health care costs: President Clinton plans a very long list of specific limits on Federal health care spending.
Revenue in billions 1994: 3.1 1997: 17.2 1993-98: 60.3 SPENDING INCREASES
Short-term economic: A package of highway construction, wastewater cleanup projects and summer jobs for youths would be put in effect this year.
Revenue in billions 1997: 0 1994-98: 30.0
Energy: The Federal Government would spend more money on nuclear fusion research and on the developing renewable energy sources and more energy-efficient Federal buildings.
Revenue in billions 1997: 1.3 1994-98: 3.0
Environment: Research would be done in forestry management and the development of new environmental technologies, while more money would be spent on clean water and the protection of natural resource.
Revenue in billions 1997: 3.5 1994-98: 8.0
Education: President Clinton would create a national service program to allow students to pay off their loans through civil service.
He would also spend more on worker training, Head Start educational programs for young children and other educational programs.
Revenue in billions 1997: 15.7 1994-98: 37.8
Housing and community development: The Federal Government would provide more community development grants, give tax incentives for businesses to move into needy areas and would extend the low-income housing tax credit.
Revenue in billions 1997: 3.1 1994-98: 9.6.
Technology: Led by the Commerce Department, the Federal Government would partly or entirely pay for the development of a national, high-speed computer data network and of commercial applications for inventions developed in Federal laboratories.
Revenue in billions 1997: 6.1 1994-98: 17.0
Transportation: The Federal Government would spend more money on mass transit and high-speed rail systems, airport improvements and highways.
Revenue in billions 1997: 3.0 1994-98: $8.4


Howe and Yankees Hoping 7 Proves to Be the Charm
General Manager Gene Michael of the Yankees, in an ongoing rehabilitation of thought on drugs and addictions, said today that he no longer knows how many chances are enough for a player who bumps up against baseball's drug policy.
Steve Howe, the once and future left-handed closer for the Yankees, no longer offers for public consumption just what his opinions are on the subject.
He is just happy to be embarking on a renewed career, thanks to an unprecedented seventh reprieve.


Interpublic Group of Companies reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Economic Scene; Does raising the minimum wage in fact mean fewer jobs?
ROBERT B. REICH, the new Secretary of Labor, says he will use his considerable muscle to lever an increase in the $4.25-an-hour minimum wage.
And to organized labor's friends celebrating the Democratic victory at the polls, the declaration was a welcome call to arms: "The idea of anything less than $5 makes no sense," declared Representative William D. Ford, chairman of the House Education and Labor Committee.
"I don't know of any part of this country where anybody could subsist on less."
But to many economists, including many liberal ones, the minimum wage is one can of worms they would just as soon not crack.
For while all agree that $4.25 an hour does not buy a piece of the American dream, there is no longer a consensus on the likely impact of a higher minimum on either jobs or poverty.


A Guide to the Coverage
PROMOTING THE PROGRAM THE OVERVIEW President Clinton's plan to cut the budget by $500 billion, or 38 percent, over four years.
A1  THE PRESIDENT'S DAY Fussing over his speech word by word, President Clinton took time out to brief the network news anchors.
A16


Musicians Ratify Contract But One Group Still Balks
The freelance musicians who struck nine orchestras last month have ratified a contract negotiated by Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians and the Orchestra Managers of New York.
But one ensemble, the American Composers Orchestra, has not agreed on side issues that are being negotiated separately.
Joseph Bongiorno, the chairman of the players' committee, said on Tuesday night that the musicians had rejected management's latest offer.
Mr.
Bongiorno said the composers' orchestra was still on strike, and both he and the orchestra's executive director, Jesse Rosen, raised questions about whether its next concert would take place as scheduled on March 21.
The orchestra's last concert and a planned recording session were casualties of the strike.
Mr.
Rosen has told the players by letter that unless they guarantee him "on or around Feb. 22" that they will perform, he will cancel the concert.


Farrar, Straus Getting Ex-Knopf Editor
Elisabeth Sifton, who resigned in April 1992 as executive vice president of Alfred A. Knopf amid speculation about conflict between her and Knopf's publisher, Sonny Mehta, plans to join Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux in September, it was announced yesterday by Roger W. Straus, the president and chief executive officer of the publishing house.
Ms.
Sifton, an editor for 30 years, will have dual roles, as a senior vice president of Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux and as the publisher of its Hill &amp; Wang division.


Teaching the Hard Sell of Soap to Eastern Europe
Since Unilever N.V. purchased a laundry detergent factory in Poland for $20 million a year and a half ago, the plant's Pollena 2000 detergent has become a surprisingly strong seller for the British-Dutch consumer products company.
Riding the popularity of an advertising campaign developed months earlier by the plant's Polish managers, Pollena 2000 quickly made Unilever the market share leader in detergents here.
Built around a bit of clever wordplay among characters from Polish popular literature, the campaign has become more ubiquitous in the popular culture than "Where's the beef?" ever was in the United States.
Easy Victories the Exception
The brand's success shows the potential for rapidly increasing sales of consumer goods in the formerly Communist nations of Central and Eastern Europe.
But such quick and easy victories are the exception for Unilever and the other Western companies that have invested hundreds of millions of dollars in the last two years in Poland, Hungary, the Czech republic and Slovakia, and that are edging into the poorer nations of the region including the former Soviet republics.


CLINTON'S ECONOMIC PLAN: In the Nation; A Split Congress Sits Back and Listens, and Waits
Democratic lawmakers broadly supported President Clinton's economic proposals tonight but said the plans would have to be modified to win majority support in Congress.
Republicans heaped scorn on the whole package, saying it would unfairly sock the middle class with new taxes.
But Ross Perot, who still seems to informally represent a bloc of swing votes Mr.
Clinton will need to get his programs passed, said he thought it was "a good speech." The President was so eager for the support of Mr.
Perot, who got 19 million votes as an independent candidate for President in the last election, that he briefed him on his economic proposals by telephone before delivering them to Congress.


There They Go Again
Less than one month ago, our nation showed the world the strength of our democratic system with the peaceful transfer of Presidential power from one elected citizen to another and, incidentally, from one political party to another.
While it is no secret that I would have preferred a different scenario that day, I have great respect for our constitutional system and would like to support our new President.
I had every intention of holding back any comments on the new Administration until it was well in place and its policies became clear.
Unfortunately, the policies are already becoming alarmingly clear.
With campaign promises dropping like autumn leaves, I can't refrain any longer.


Barnwell Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


North Coast Energy (ECM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Music; Vienna's Tradition Of Being A Society
Usually an orchestra is only metaphorically a society.
But for the Vienna Philharmonic, which played the first of its three concerts here on Tuesday night in Carnegie Hall, the metaphor can be taken literally.
It is a democracy with aristocratic ideals.
Its traditions go back 150 years.
Each generation of citizens helps train the next; each citizen is voted in by his compatriots.
The Vienna's instruments -- its horns with longer tubing, its oboes with special reeds, its drums covered with goatskin -- are, like its distinctive performing style, part of a common patrimony.
And during an era when musical institutions have increased dependence on a class of professional administrators, the Vienna shows how strong a link can be made between musical and civic goals by handling its administration through a democratically elected committee of players.


Sands Regent (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


America's Better Self Got Lost in Aliens Law
To the Editor:
We share A. M. Rosenthal's sense of solidarity with immigrants in "Aliens: Let Them Work" (column, Feb. 9).
A nation of immigrants, the United States has at various stages of history turned its back on its best self and let its fearful face show.
Xenophobia and racism -- both strong currents in American life -- often combine in the making of immigration policy.


Hewlett Net Surpasses Forecasts
The Hewlett-Packard Company surprised Wall Street today by reporting profits, revenues and orders all in excess of analysts' estimates.
The news lifted Hewlett-Packard shares, which closed at $72.25, up $4.675, today on the New York Stock Exchange.


Campbell Soup Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


R. G. Simmons, 55, Expert on Emotions Of Organ Donation
Dr.
Roberta G. Simmons, a sociologist who conducted groundbreaking research into the emotional effects of organ transplants, died Monday at Presbyterian University Hospital in Pittsburgh.
She was 55 and lived in Pittsburgh.
She had breast cancer for 15 years, said Gabriella Stern, a family friend.


Jets' Coslet Fires Back and Signs Off on Disgruntled McMillan
A day after cornerback Erik McMillan expressed unhappiness with his role as a backup for the Jets and said he didn't expect to return to the team, the man he accused of trying to ruin his career, Coach Bruce Coslet, said that was fine with him.
"We're done with him," Coslet said.
"When he's publicly said, 'I can't respect the coaches or the organization,' it's a two-way street. We can't respect him now, either."


CLINTON'S ECONOMIC PLAN: The Campaign; Gambling That a Tax-Cut Promise Was Not Taken Seriously
In selling his economic plan, President Clinton is gambling that voters never took seriously his campaign promise to lower the tax burden of the middle class and will respond favorably to an aggressive pitch based on equal measures of hope, fear and class revenge.
After months of polling and research, Mr.
Clinton's top political advisers say they are convinced that middle-class voters will support higher taxes.
The advisers say the voters will see the new taxes as the price of great improvements in Government service and as inflicting a just punishment on the rich who profited during the Reagan and Bush Administrations.


Patricia S. Vaill, 74, A Jewelry Designer
Patricia Schepps Vaill, a jewelry designer, died on Sunday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 74.
Her daughter, Amanda Vaill Stewart, said the cause was complications of a stroke.


Furukawa Journal; Rice Farmers Dig In: To Them, the Land Is Sacred
When he plants his rice crop each year, Kan-ichi Sugawara pours a bottle of sake onto the field as an offering to the god of the paddy.
Such a ritual might seem out of place in modern Japan, but it attests to the deep tradition of rice farming in Japan.
And that tradition, Mr.
Sugawara says, lies behind the ferocity with which Japan's farmers are opposing the opening of the nation's rice market to imports, a move that the Government might be forced to make in the coming months.


Contel Cellular (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dr. Anna Goldfeder Dies at 95; Pioneer in Growing Cancer Cells
Anna Goldfeder, a leader in cancer and radiobiology science who conducted research for 66 years, died on Monday at Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 95.
Dr.
Goldfeder, whose career spanned generations of cancer researchers, made important contributions in her field until her retirement in 1988, when she was 91.


Irving W. Kramer, Physician, 82
Dr.
Irving W. Kramer, a retired physician and hospital administrator, died on Sunday at his winter home in Bermuda Dunes, Calif.
He was 82 and also lived in Floral Park, Queens.
The cause of death was a stroke, his family said.


CLINTON'S ECONOMIC PLAN: Impact on Individuals; Middle Class and Wealthy To Bear Brunt of New Taxes
President Clinton's new tax plan reaches into the pockets of a broad swath of Americans, increasing income taxes on the rich, hitting the middle class with a new energy tax and raising taxes on Social Security benefits of the affluent.
For average Americans, the most visible change brought by the new plan will be higher prices for gasoline, electricity and heating fuel.
Administration officials say the annual energy bill for a family with a taxable income of $60,000, currently around $3,000, will rise by $133.


Loblaw Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


For Business, Ample Pain to Share
The economic plan offered by President Clinton last night gives corporate America and Wall Street, like the nation's households, plenty to think about.
The President sought specific sacrifices from business, like higher corporate taxes and fewer deductions.
But there were subtle symbols that he was trying to establish new relationships between the Government and corporate America.


Eskimo Pie Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CLINTON'S ECONOMIC PLAN: In New York; For Wealthy, Equanimity And Anxiety
From the lobbyists' suites of Washington to the paneled corridors of Wall Street law firms, stewards and counsels of the privileged classes yesterday accepted with a mix of equanimity and trepidation the word that it would cost more to enjoy those privileges under President Clinton's tax proposals.
In Manhattan, Broadway theater owners wailed that curtailing the deductibility of business meals and entertainment expenses to 50 percent from 80 percent would be "devastating," and some restaurateurs worried that it could further hurt their fragile industry amid a tentative comeback.


Applied Materials Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Japan's Economy Will Emerge Stronger
To the Editor:
Re "Behind Japan's Economic Crisis" (Op-Ed, Feb. 1): Isn't Akio Mikuni's description of Japan's economic difficulties, as reflected in a sharp stock market decline over the last two and a half years and by declining growth, rather exaggerated?


INSIDE
China Frees Key Dissident
The Chinese Government announced that it had freed a prominent figure in the 1989 student protests.
Page A6.
Libyan Plant Concerns U.S.
U.S. officials said intelligence agencies had concluded that Libya was building a subterranean chemical-weapons plant.
Page A7. 2 Boys Die in Queens Fire
Two boys, ages 7 and 4, died in a flash fire in a house in Queens that may have been an illegal day-care center, fire officials said.
Page B1. 3 Films Lead Oscar Pack
"Howards End," "Unforgiven" and "The Crying Game" dominate the Oscar nominations.
Page C15.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
PREVENTING household accidents requires thoughtfulness and common sense above all, but ridding the home of potential causes of accidents and making improvements to correct potentially dangerous conditions certainly helps.
Falls, poisonings and fires head the list of household accidents resulting in deaths, with children and the elderly especially vulnerable, the National Safety Council reports.
Following are ways to prevent such accidents in your house or apartment.


BWIP Holdings (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Marine Harvest International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Walter Teller, 82, Author and Editor Of Nature Books
Walter Teller, the author and editor of books on American landscape and literature, died yesterday at a hospital in Princeton, N.J., where he lived.
He was 82.
The cause was cancer, said his son, Walter S. Teller of Los Angeles.


Marky Mark to Appear in Anti-Bias Ads
Marky Mark, the rap performer and model for Calvin Klein underwear, agreed yesterday to appear in public service advertisements against bias crimes.
The decision was the result of a three-week campaign by the Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation, and the Committee Against Anti-Asian Violence, seeking an apology from the performer for being associated with incidents they said were cases of bias.
While Marky Mark's manager, Dick Scott, and the two groups have not come to terms on who will pay for the ads, a spokeswoman for the Gay and Lesbian Alliance, said it hoped for video advertisements of the type that could be shown on MTV.
Late yesterday, the groups and Marky Mark's publicity representative, Gary Stromberg, were trying to come to terms on the wording of a statement to be read at noon today in Times Square on the singer's behalf.


Essay; Great Leap Backward
That squishy sound you heard throughout President Clinton's economic address -- the weakness at the core of his proposals -- is a refusal to deal with the explosion of Federal spending.
A decade ago, Speaker Tip O'Neill snookered President Reagan in a deficit reduction deal: For one dollar in tax increase, promised the Democrat, Congress would cut three dollars in spending.
Never happened; Democrats claim there never was a deal.


Review/Dance; Using a Thesaurus, Jennifer Muller Mixes Words With Movement
The air rang with appreciative laughter and cheers for Jennifer Muller's jazzy new "Thesaurus," the culminating work on an opening program on Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater.
But this and another recent Muller piece on the program, "Glass Houses," seem to be dances for people who care less about dance than about sleek good looks and social bromides.
Ms.
Muller talked of the mystery of dance in an opening-night speech.
But there was no mystery here.
"Thesaurus," danced to initially bracing music by Buddy Rich and His Orchestra, is likely to become a Muller classic.
It is a bright, fast-paced romp for 11 performers who wear yellow trunks and halters and dance with a variety of cleverly conceived yellow props.
The piece is based on the 500 words Ms.
Muller found listed under "to move" in Roget's Thesaurus.
The choreography is ingenious, weaving together steps and gestures that clearly communicate even surprising meanings like "dab" and "whisper" -- though "go pitapat" and "hang on the skirts of" slipped by unnoticed.


U.S. Says Libya Is Building a 2d Poison-Gas Plant
United States intelligence agencies have concluded that Libya is building a subterranean chemical-weapons plant capable of producing and storing poison gas, Government officials said today.
The underground factory remains disguised as part of a water project, but intelligence officials believe its purpose is to augment a vast above-ground chemical complex whose existence was exposed by the West nearly four years ago.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Andre Previn Avery Fisher Hall
It has been so long since Andre Previn forsook the jazz piano to become a classical maestro that he has learned somewhat to his chagrin that he is a relic in a field he abandoned more than 25 years ago.


CleveTrust Realty (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Claire's Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


A Detailed Art Deco Renovation Built Inch by Painstaking Inch
IT began as one of the elegant albeit compact apartments that are the quintessence of New York: a one-bedroom duplex on Central Park West, with a stepped-down living room, park and city views and a graceful staircase curving up to the master bedroom.
Separate entrances on two different floors, a bathroom with a window overlooking Central Park and a galley kitchen completed the layout.
The location -- in the Century, one of Manhattan's most stylishly retro co-ops -- added to the apartment's Old-World glamour.
What else could Paolo Ferrari, an Italian lawyer who spends a few days a month in the city, need?
"Lots, it turned out," said Sandro Marpillero, an architect who, with Marc Donnenfeld, a set designer, was commissioned to rejigger the 1,700-square-foot space.


Michael Jackson's revival may not win him any new endorsements.
HE'S famous, but infamous, too.
He's dangerous, but perhaps not as much as before.
He's bad, but he's not evil.
And while he's not the thriller he used to be, his ratings have been a killer.
The celebrity in question is Michael Jackson, who has recently embarked on a series of public performances and appearances after years of reclusive behavior.
Entertainment industry executives have attributed the singer's about-face to a desire to bolster his image in the wake of what are considered disappointing American sales for his latest album, "Dangerous" -- the first fruits of his much-heralded $65 million contract with Sony -- as well as to draw attention to Heal the World, his charitable foundation.


Tootsie Roll Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Scana Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


America's Better Self Got Lost in Aliens Law; 'Victims' Who Exploit
To the Editor:
I cannot fathom why Anthony Lewis and others have painted Zoe Baird and Kimba Wood, President Clinton's first two nominees for Attorney General, as victims of a male-dominated society simply because they employed illegal aliens as child care workers (column, Feb. 8).


Atlantic City Names Account Candidates
The Atlantic City Conventions Center Authority said yesterday that it had selected 10 semifinalists for its $2 million account, which had been handled by Dana Communications Inc. in Hopewell, N.J., for the last year.
Bob McHugh, a Conventions Center spokesman, said the account had been placed in review "to see if we could attract larger agencies with experience in the tourism marketing area."


The Plunge Continues On Nasdaq
Biotechnology stocks led a continued plunge in the Nasdaq market yesterday, even as larger stocks slowed their decline.
The Nasdaq composite index fell another 5.96 points, to 659.43, for a two-day drop of 4.5 percent.
Nasdaq stocks have now given up nearly half their gains since President Clinton's election on Nov. 3.
Yesterday, the smallest stocks were afflicted the most, while some big Nasdaq computer issues recovered in the afternoon to finish ahead.


CHRONICLE
It was also back to work for ZOE BAIRD, who returned to her job as general counsel for the Aetna Life and Casualty Company last Thursday, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
Ms.
Baird, 40, took a leave of absence from her $507,000-a-year post after she was nominated as Attorney General by President Clinton.
She withdrew from contention for the post on Jan. 22 after revelations that she and her husband had hired illegal aliens to take care of their young son and had not paid Social Security taxes on their salaries.


Review/Theater; 5 Southern Bridesmaids With Gossip to Share
The title characters in "Five Women Wearing the Same Dress," bridesmaids at a society wedding in Knoxville, Tenn., look like peach sundaes.
Atop their heads are hats of spun sugar and when one removes her dress, it stands of its own volition.
The play by Alan Ball (at the Manhattan Class Company) is as frothy and frivolous as the costumes, and it is unable to sustain a negligible plot over a full-length course.
In common with "Steel Magnolias," which is the role model as good-old-girl comedy, the play has its diversions.
Mr.
Ball is quick with one-liners and comebacks and seems to have spent a great deal of time eavesdropping on female gossip.
Although the situation is of the purest white-bread variety, there are small signs of rebellion in this bastion of Southern womanhood.
The groom's sister is an uncloseted lesbian and the bride's sister keeps a poster of Malcolm X on the wall of her bedroom, the setting for Mr.
Ball's gathering.


Review/Theater; The World of Disney Transferred to Ice
Looking for a fast-moving musical with a coherent book, memorable tunes, vivid characters, a generous helping of nostalgia, sparkling costumes and travelogue scenery that extends from the depths of the sea to outer space and pauses along the way in ancient Egypt, at jungle ruins, on a tropical island and in an Elvis-era diner?
Try Radio City Music Hall, where "Walt Disney's World on Ice" has taken up residence through Sunday.
Maybe it helps to be a child to be thoroughly enchanted by this show, but grown-ups needn't be ashamed to be captivated by the immense skill that underlies the entertainment.
After all, as has been noted, the good old-fashioned Broadway musical is still alive and well at the Disney Studios in Hollywood.


AT HOME WITH Richard Pryor; Still Laughing Through the Pain
ALL night long Richard Pryor could not sleep.
A few dreams crashed over him but left him jarred and jangled as they departed.
Finally, when a gray light crept past the poinsettias in the backyard and the two Labrador retrievers lying nose to nose, over the sullen pool and into his bedroom, he slept.
It was the still, luscious half-sleep of the morning that sickness can occasionally bring.
Richard Pryor calls it the thinking sleep.
When it was over, after his hair had been washed and brushed and his sponge bath was done, he sat propped up in bed, eyes watery, the tingling from his multiple sclerosis racing down his slender fingers, and his head rolled a bit from side to side.
He also wore a small smile because he had thought some good thoughts this morning and put some pieces into place.


American Cyanamid Names Chairman
The American Cyanamid Company named its heirs apparent to top posts yesterday, appointing Albert J. Costello chairman and chief executive, succeeding George J. Sella Jr., who is retiring.
The Wayne, N.J.-based company also named Frank V. AtLee, 52, an executive vice president, to replace Mr.
Costello as president.
Repositioned the Company
Industry analysts generally applauded the moves, which take effect April 1.
The two top executives are seen as having complementary strengths -- Mr.
Costello in agricultural products and Mr.
AtLee in the medical area.
They are also credited with helping to reposition American Cyanamid during the last decade by selling consumer products divisions and chemical businesses, areas it plans to leave altogether.


Bestop Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Mutual Risk Management reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Paper Losses
As cyclical stocks spun higher and higher since October, Kimberly-Clark was among the most dynamic.
Paper companies were thought likely to benefit from the recovery.
Now Kimberly-Clark is in the vanguard of the market's retreat.
Investors gave the stock an added shove yesterday after the company cautioned analysts about its earnings prospects.


Genuine Parts reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kemper Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Struggling Town Pins Hopes on Theater Revival
WHEN the Apple House grocery here closed last spring, a once distinctive stretch of Route 44 suddenly looked seedy.
And in a town that could give lessons on how to be the quintessential New England village, seedy just doesn't fit.
People here now say they should have seen it coming as more and more buildings in the town's small commercial center were abandoned.


CLINTON'S ECONOMIC PLAN: The President's Day; Clinton Is a Revisionist Even With His Writers
Dozens of aides spent hundreds of hours of endless toil drafting the speech that President Clinton took to Capitol Hill with him tonight.
But that was not the speech that Mr.
Clinton actually delivered.
In the end, much of the President's address -- whole paragraphs even -- were completely ad libbed by a politician who loves nothing more than to tinker with, and rewrite, his own words.


Healthsouth Rehabilitation Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


American Management Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hill Out of Action
Duke forward GRANT HILL will be sidelined indefinitely with a sprained left toe suffered in last weekend's loss to Wake Forest, Coach MIKE KRZYZEWSKI.


Report Cites Ice on Wings As a Factor in Fatal USAir Crash
The crash of USAir Flight 405, which killed 27 people last March during a severe snowstorm at La Guardia Airport, was caused by a combination of ice buildup on the wings, human error and confusion in the cockpit, Federal investigators said today in their final report on the accident.
The report, issued by the National Transportation Safety Board, concluded that the entire airline industry had been lax in training crews to detect hazards caused by ice and to compensate for such conditions.
But changes in regulations by the Federal Aviation Administration since the March 22 crash have made the incident less likely to be repeated, the report said.


Washington Memo; As Democrats Return, One Remains in Exile
For nearly half a century, Clark M. Clifford was an imposing political presence in Washington, advising Democratic Presidents on the most sensitive of issues.
Now, at a time when the Democrats have regained the Presidency, he would be expected to offer himself as a counselor to the new occupant of the White House.
Instead, Mr.
Clifford is spending much of his time defending himself against criminal charges involving bank fraud.


Analog Devices reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


Hearing Held On Freeing Drug Abuser
During the eight months to a year that he lived with his son in Connecticut, Larry Hogue returned to New York City, where he ended up in psychiatric hospitals for emergency treatment a half-dozen times, a lawyer for New York State said yesterday.
Citing court records, she argued before a panel of appeals judges that to allow Mr.
Hogue, who is now being held at a state mental institution, out of the hospital and back into the care of his family in Connecticut would likely have the same result.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Tshala Muana The Ritz
Late on Friday night, at the Ritz, Tshala Muana introduced a ballad by praising God and urging listeners to pray every day.
Then, in the dance tune that followed, she hiked up her skirt, bared her navel and shimmied her hips.
During the set, hip-shaking easily overshadowed devoutness, in songs that found a dozen different ways to make dancing irresistible.


Gaylord Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CLINTON'S ECONOMIC PLAN: Health Care; Putting Limits on Growth of Medicare
President Clinton proposed tight new restraints on Federal payments to doctors and hospitals tonight in order to save $60 billion in Medicare and Medicaid over the next five years.
And to raise money for the Medicare program, he asked Congress to increase the payroll tax on people earning more than $135,000 a year.
In proposing to slow the growth of the two big health programs, Administration officials said they had made every effort to protect elderly people and the poor.
But groups representing the elderly expressed concern that the proposed cuts in payments would make doctors less willing to take Medicare patients.
Doctors are not required to take Medicare patients.


Sigma-Aldrich Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Castle (A.M.) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


PARENT &amp; CHILD
ALTHOUGH the parents of a bride or groom are often told that they're not losing one child, they are gaining another, that's far from the complete story.
Each generation of in-laws brings with it unspoken beliefs and assumptions about the other that may get their relationship off to a poor start.
A daughter-in-law may interpret the presumption that she'll join her new husband's parents for holiday celebrations as a denial of her adulthood and personal wishes.
The parents who invite her may view what they're doing as a way of welcoming her to the family and may be puzzled by her hostility.


Corrections
A front-page article on Saturday about the surge in mortgage re financings referred incorrectly to the president of the Boston Company Economic Advisors Inc.
He is Allen Sinai.


Tasty Baking Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


AlaTenn Resources (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


After a Toddler's Brutal Slaying, Britain Agonizes
The picture of the 2-year-old boy with a cherubic face, a mop of brown hair and moist dark eyes stared out from the front pages of the newspapers today, as it has almost every day since Friday -- the day he disappeared from a Liverpool shopping center while his mother stood in line at a butcher shop.
Another picture, a grainy one from a security camera in the shopping center, showed the 2-year-old being led away by the hand by an older boy, who appears to be between 10 and 14.
And on Tuesday a new picture surfaced, from a video camera at a construction office down the street, that shows two youths holding the boy, either swinging him or subduing him.


Review/Dance; From New Zealand, A Dancing Mozart
A new ballet need not be perfect to be rewarding to watch.
The Royal New Zealand Ballet demonstrated that on Sunday afternoon when it presented the New York premiere of Gray Veredon's "Wolfgang Amadeus" at Brooklyn College, under the auspices of the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts.
The two-act work is a portrait of Mozart, and its accompaniment is a taped collage of the composer's solo, orchestral and vocal pieces.
Although not all of its 13 scenes are equally effective, it is never dull.
Mr.
Veredon is a New Zealand-born choreographer who has worked with several European companies, including the Stuttgart Ballet, and he appears to favor an eclectic style that blends classical ballet with various contemporary influences.


AGCO Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Myers Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CLINTON'S ECONOMIC PLAN: News Analysis; Taste of Harsh Medicine
Bill Clinton campaigned last year on the promise of economic change.
Tonight he described in detail how difficult and painful that change would be.
Not since World War II has a President proposed such strong medicine.
And not since Ronald Reagan 12 years ago called for a popular program of deep tax cuts and much more money for the Pentagon has a President recommended such a fundamental shift in how the Government operates.


CHRONICLE
"Does crime pay?" CHARLES W. COLSON was asked at a news conference yesterday morning.
Mr.
Colson, President Richard M. Nixon's special counsel who served seven months in prison for conspiracy in the Watergate cover-up, smiled, paused and said, "In my life, crime has paid in riches far beyond money."


COMPANY NEWS: Promotional Train Tour; A Rolling Vision Of the Future
Ross E. Rowland Jr., scion of a railroad family and a self-made millionaire in the commodities market, is taking to the rails again.
Mr.
Rowland, who conceived and ran the steam-powered American Freedom Train that toured the country to commemorate the nation's Bicentennial in 1976, is revisiting that mobile exhibition, albeit with a new twist.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Not Quite Petunia
Q.
Last summer, I saw a flowering plant that looked like -- but wasn't -- a petunia, with unusual veined blossoms.
Do you know this plant and where I can get it? -- Gerald McArthur, Washington
A.
I have little doubt that the flower you saw is the delightful summer-blooming annual from Chile called painted tongue (Salpiglossis sinuata).
Its handsome, velvety, funnel-shaped blooms, which average between two and three inches in both length and width, remind me of petunias, too; and I have always wondered why this free-flowering plant is not more widely grown.
The hybrids, known as the Bolero mixes, come in colors like red, yellow, orange and purple and have handsome contrasting veins.


Intel Maps Outlook for New Markets
Andrew S. Grove, chairman of the Intel Corporation, sketched out today his company's vision of how "electronic meetings" -- made possible by blending personal computers and telephones -- would drive growth in the desktop computer industry in the future.
In a meeting with Wall Street analysts near Intel's headquarters here, Mr.
Grove said the company would invest $1.6 billion in new capital equipment in 1993 to keep its lead in the world market for semiconductors.


Prices for Wheat Advance On New Hope for Exports
Wheat prices jumped today on signs of a revival in exports, but trading in many other commodities was cautious ahead of President Clinton's speech tonight on the details of his plan for the economy.
Meanwhile, oil prices sank for the second consecutive day amid skepticism over OPEC's ability to maintain the discipline to hold to its new quotas.


Safetytek Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Owners Link Salaries To Revenue Sharing
Major league club owners took what they viewed as a major step today toward forging a new economic relationship with the players.
The owners' action, though, didn't prompt the players' union chief to run outside his Manhattan office and do cartwheels down Third Avenue.
The owners, meeting for the sixth time in less than six months, established in a unanimous vote a "linkage" between revenue sharing on their part and a salary cap on the players' part.


Polynice Joins Fast To Protest Policy
OLDEN POLYNICE, the Detroit Pistons' 7-foot, 250-pound center, says he will eat only on game days as he joins the Rev.
JESSE JACKSON in a hunger strike to bring attention to the United States' immigration policy toward Haitian refugees.
The Haitian-born Polynice said he didn't know how long his semi-fast would last.
He criticized President CLINTON yesterday for backing off a campaign promise to stop returning Haitian refugees found on the high seas back to their homeland.


Merc's Chief Is Accused of Illegal Trades
The Commodity Futures Trading Commission said yesterday that it had filed an administrative complaint against the chairman of the New York Mercantile Exchange, Zoltan (Lou) Guttman, accusing him of engaging in a series of illegal trades in 1989 that raised about $19 million to cover trading debts.
The Chicago commodities firm of Gerald Inc. and two other brokers were also accused by the Federal agency of participating in the trades.


Inspector Sought Warnings on Mammograms
The Nassau County Health Department inspector who found hundreds of violations in the mammography operation of a local physician said today that he had wanted to contact patients soon after his discovery, but that state and county officials told him it would require legal action.
In a telephone interview, Robert Walderman, a radiation safety inspector, said he had been appalled when he conducted tests in September 1991 that he believed showed severe problems in mammography procedures in the office of Dr.
Padma Ram in Floral Park, L.I.


Bridge
There are rare occasions when sharp hearing can contribute to success at the bridge table.
A case in point is the diagramed deal, played many years ago in a European Women's Team Championship match between France and Belgium.
The North-South cards were held by the star Belgian partnership of Colette Myrans and Simone Moulia, who bid to a borderline contract of six spades.
West had a lead problem: It seemed unlikely that East held the club ace, so she rejected a club lead in favor of a heart.


King Rumbling Back Into the Limelight
There is a moment just before Don King speaks when the silence almost seems deafening.
There is a question, then a pause, and then, as with a volcano erupting into lava and fire and smoke, there is no stopping him.
King takes talking to new levels.
It is less a conversation than a monologue, less an exchange of ideas than the act of King -- boxing's leading self-promoting promoter -- listening to himself.


CLINTON'S ECONOMIC PLAN: The Energy Plan; Fuels Tax: Spreading The Burden
President Clinton wants to add some new letters to the Government's tax-code alphabet soup: B.T.U.
His proposed broad-based energy tax would apply to the energy content of nearly all fuels, as measured by the British thermal unit, or B.T.U. -- the quantity of heat needed to raise the temperature of a pound of water by 1 degree Fahrenheit.


Perelman Agrees to Acquire Control of SCI Television
Ronald O. Perelman, the New York financier who controls Revlon Inc., is expanding into the television station business.
Mr.
Perelman has agreed to buy a 51 percent stake in troubled SCI Television Inc. of Denver, which owns six television stations, for a $100 million investment.


Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Nobel Winners Urge Release of Burmese Dissident
Six Nobel Peace Prize winners and representatives of two Peace Prize-winning organizations gathered in Thailand today to call for the release of a fellow Nobel laureate, the Burmese democracy leader who is in her fourth year of house arrest in her native Myanmar, formerly Burma.
"Having been brutally denied her rightful place to be an elected leader of her people, Aung San Suu Kyi remains courageously committed to the principles of freedom and democracy," former President Oscar Arias Sanchez of Costa Rica, the winner of the 1987 Peace Prize, said of the Burmese laureate.


Limited Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


Paxar Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reality and Anxiety: Crime and the Fear of It
The nation's crime rate is continuing to climb, sharply in the case of some crimes.
But for millions of Americans the fear of crime may well be outpacing its growth.
In increasing numbers, whether in cities, suburbs or small towns, Americans are arming themselves with an array of weapons, devices and gadgets intended to thwart criminals.
And with news reports of one grisly crime after another, millions of people are expressing a growing sense of vulnerability in ways large and small.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Duran Duran The Academy
Unlikely heroes are the most satisfying kind, as Duran Duran proved at the Academy on Friday night.
The members of the group, the first to earn the description "videogenic," at the dawn of the MTV era, became pariahs after their string of shiny hits fell apart in the mid-80's.
Rock purists, who despised Duran Duran's transformations of smarmy sentiment into delicious pop, rejoiced at their disgrace.


Guerillas and Israelis Battle in Southern Lebanon
Pro-Iranian Muslim guerrillas fought large-scale artillery and rocket battles with Israeli troops in southern Lebanon Wednesday in what security officials here described as the worst flare-up of violence in the area this year.
The officials said four Lebanese, including two guerrillas, had been killed and 24 wounded in the daylong battle.
They said Israeli forces and their Christian militia allies had pounded 20 Lebanese villages in retaliation for a wide-ranging attack by guerrillas of the Iranian-backed Party of God, on the northern edge of the enclave that Israel occupies in southern Lebanon as a security zone.


Cracker Barrel Old Country (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Results Plus
TENNIS Courier Is Upset by Rostagno in 2 Sets  Derrick Rostagno, a wild-card entry resurgent after taking ill twice last year, upset No. 1-ranked Jim Courier, 7-6 (7-5), 6-1, yesterday in the first round of the U.S.
Indoor championship in Philadelphia.
A threat from the opening game, Rostagno covered the court quickly and was able to stay with Courier on the sharply hit exchanges from backcourt.
"It's been a while since I've really played at the top of my game," said Rostagno, who advances to a second-round match against Paul Haarhuis of the Netherlands.
"He really flows when he plays well and he was flowing tonight," said Courier.
In another first-round match, fourth-seeded Ivan Lendl defeated Marcos Ondruska of South Africa, 3-6, 6-3, 6-2, to advance to a match against Mark Woodforde of Australia.
In second-round matches, fifth-seeded MaliVai Washington defeated Jeff Tarango, 7-5, 6-4; eighth-seeded Amos Mansdorf of Israel beat Renzo Furlan of Italy, 7-6 (7-3), 7-5; and Richey Reneberg defeated Richard Fromberg of Australia, 6-2, 6-3. (AP) Becker Tops Leconte in 3 Sets: Boris Becker survived a three-set battle against Henri Leconte to reach the second round of the Eurocard Open in Stuttgart, Germany, yesterday.
Becker worked his way to a 6-4, 6-7, 6-3 victory after wearing down the 29-year-old Frenchman.
Petr Korda of the Czech Republic, the No. 2-seeded player,advanced to the third round by beating Aleksandr Volkov of Russia, 4-6, 6-2, 6-4.
Kenneth Carlsen of Denmark became the only qualifier to reach the second round when he beat Javier Sanchez of Spain, 6-4, 6-0. (AP) Seles Gains in Paris: Monica Seles moved into the quarterfinals of the Paris Women's Open yesterday with a 6-3, 6-4 victory over Judith Wiesner of Austria.
Martina Navratilova moved into the second round, beating Katja Oeljeklaus, a German qualifier, 6-1, 6-3, in less than an hour. (AP) N.H.L Gretzky Ends 16-Game Goal Drought  Wayne Gretzky broke a career-high 16-game stretch without a goal and assisted on two goals each by Tony Granato and Mike Donnelly, leading the Los Angeles Kings to a 10-5 victory over the Minnesota North Stars in Bloomington, Minn.
Gretzky missed the Kings' first 39 games with a herniated disk in his upper back.
He had two goals Jan. 8, his second game, but then failed to score until last night. (AP) Maple Leafs 4, Flames 2: Nikolai Borschevsky scored twice in the first period as the Maple Leafs beat Calgary last night on their home ice, Toronto's first triumph over the Flames since January 1990.
Dave Andreychuk also scored twice as the Maple Leafs won their fourth straight game, tying their season-high, and snapped Calgary's run of eight undefeated games (6-0-2).
Doug Gilmour had three assists to extend his point-scoring streak to six games, during which he has accumulated 16 points to increase his totals to 22 goals and 90 points.
Joe Nieuwendyk and Joel Otto scored for the Flames. (AP) Red Wings 3, Lightning 1: Paul Ysebaert's third-period goal broke a 1-1 tie and led the Red Wings past Tampa Bay in Detroit.
Vincent Riendeau, playing for the first time since Jan. 2, made 28 saves to outduel Wendell Young, who made 22.
The Red Wings, 5-1-3 in their last nine games, moved within one point of first-place Chicago in the Norris Division. (AP) HORSE RACING  Hey Baba Lulu Wins at Aqueduct  Hey Baba Lulu, the favorite, ridden by Herb McCauley, held on to win the $88,950 Grade III Rare Treat Handicap for fillies and mares at Aqueduct.
Low Tolerance was second and Hilbys Brite Flite third in the nine-horse field.
Hey Baba Lulu covered the mile and an eighth in 1:491/5 and paid $5.80 for $2 to win. (AP)


NVR L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lubrizol Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CLINTON'S ECONOMIC PLAN: Impact on Business; Some Businesses Face Tax Rise, but Most May Get Incentives
For American business, the Clinton Administration's economic plan holds a large array of new taxes and other proposals, including an increase in the corporate income-tax rate that would have the 2,700 largest corporations pay a maximum of 36 percent instead of the current 34 percent.
At the same time, businesses would be offered substantial incentives to invest in new equipment.
Reflecting a general inclination by the Clinton team, small businesses, the main provider of new jobs, would be particularly favored.


Search for a Chancellor Divides Board Members
Members of the New York City Board of Education disagreed yesterday over how they should go about hiring a new schools chancellor, postponing discussion about the kind of candidate they want until after they decide how to conduct the search.
Yesterday's meeting, and the divergent views board members expressed during it, suggests that the search for a successor to Joseph A. Fernandez may be difficult and protracted, and raises questions about whether the board can hope to install a new chancellor by September.
In the first meeting since the seven-member board voted 4-to-3 last week not to renew Mr.
Fernandez's contract when it expires on June 30, divisions surfaced over how to replace him.


Behind Court Violence
To the Editor:
It is striking that every reported instance of murder in courtrooms was committed by a man in a divorce case or related matter (news article, Jan. 26).
As tragic as such courtroom mayhem is, it would be sadder if judges failed to see it as a symptom of more widespread unseen violence.


Inmate With H.I.V. Who Bit Guard Loses Appeal
An appeals court today upheld the attempted murder conviction of an H.I.V.-infected prisoner who bit a prison guard.
The court said it did not matter whether the virus that causes AIDScan actually be transmitted by biting as long as the prisoner believed it could.
The ruling by the Appellate Division of the Superior Court included part of the jury instruction given by the trial judge, John B. Mariano of Superior Court, who said, "Impossibility is not a defense to the charge of attempted murder.


Longview Fibre reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


America's Better Self Got Lost in Aliens Law; Do It the Canadian Way
To the Editor:
The legacy of Zoe Baird and Kimba Wood should not be a disqualification of professional women with young children from high public office because of child care needs.
Recent events show the compelling need for a change in the law to allow working parents to meet such needs.


Arkla Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CLINTON'S ECONOMIC PLAN: The Overview; CLINTON PLAN TO REMAKE THE ECONOMY SEEKS TO TAX ENERGY AND BIG INCOMES
President Clinton tonight proposed a comprehensive program of tax increases and spending cuts designed to trim the Federal deficit over the next four years by $500 billion, or 38 percent, and to revitalize the nation's economy.
In a speech to a joint session of Congress that is expected to shape at least the early stages of his Presidency, Mr.
Clinton outlined a series of new taxes that would fall most heavily on business and on relatively wealthy individuals, both active and retired.
But families earning as little as $20,000 a year -- members of the "forgotten middle class" whose taxes he promised during his campaign to cut -- will also be asked to send more dollars to Washington under the President's plan.


Israel Accepts 84 of Bosnia's Muslim Refugees
Israel has become the latest country to accept refugees from the former Yugoslavia, issuing temporary visas to 84 Bosnian Muslims who arrived here Tuesday.
Some Israeli politicians, as well as leaders of Arab groups here, had protested the Government's decision to accept the refugees, but their objections were overruled as the refugees landed at Ben-Gurion International Airport.


Teaching in a Closet, or a Shower; Crowded Classes and More Students a Portent of the Future
It is so crowded in some New York City public schools that some students get lunch at 10:30 A.M.
Some attend classes in churches, empty warehouses, factories, even defunct department stores.
Classes are taught in closets, and computer labs are converted shower stalls.
And the problem is only getting worse: The largest surge in enrollment in a quarter of a century has increased the number of students to just shy of one million, school officials say.
They add that by the end of the century, enrollment could approach the record set when the Baby Boom generation went through the system.


McClain Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BMTC Group reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Coca-Cola Enterprises reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


3 Films Dominate Nominees In Oscar Contest
Neil Jordan, the director and screenwriter of "The Crying Game," and his producer, Stephen Woolley, broke out Champagne bottles in London today when they heard that their film, a British production that has had only limited distribution in the United States, had unexpectedly been nominated for six Academy Awards, including best film, best director, best actor and best supporting actor.
"I'm not surprised; I'm flabbergasted," Mr.
Woolley said by telephone.
But Clint Eastwood, the director and star of "Unforgiven," was characteristically cool about his movie's nine nominations.
Unlike most other stars, he didn't want to be awakened, even with good news. (The awards were announced at 5:30 A.M. Pacific Coast Time.) He heard about it later in the morning on his telephone answering machine in Sun Valley, Idaho.
"I'm not an early riser," Mr.
Eastwood said by telephone.
"When I heard, I thought, well, that's nice."


WHERE TO FIND IT
LITTLE boys like round, preppy frames.
And little girls like purple.
That, at least, is the observation of Richard Hogg, president of Superspecs for Kids Only, a new store in Closter, N.J., that stocks nothing but eyeglass frames for young people between the ages of 6 months and 15 years.
Superspecs, which opened in November, carries more than 1,000 frames, including child-size ski, cycling and swimming goggles that can accommodate prescription lenses.
Many frames have cable temples so children can't yank them off.
And durable materials, like bendable metals and supertough plastics, abound.
The shop is also outfitted with coloring books, television monitors showing cartoons and two corrugated pipes children can crawl through.


Saving the City's 'Memory'
The New-York Historical Society has stood guard to an extraordinary trove of American books, ephemera, prints and paintings for 189 years.
It truly represents, as one scholar put it, "the memory of a city." Now, however, the Historical Society faces bankruptcy and dissolution.
That it inspires love is obvious: hundreds of scholars are petitioning to keep its collections intact.
That it should be preserved as is, however, isn't so obvious.
Sadly, the Historical Society's former trustees, for whom a seat on the board was as much a given as an old name and old money, didn't love it enough.
They failed to insure its endowment or proclaim its treasures to the mass of New Yorkers -- who might then have made keeping the institution alive a priority.
As a result, the society will close its doors to the public this month -- despite commendable initiative by a mostly new board and president.


Treasury Bond Prices Up Sharply
Government bond prices moved higher yesterday as the market awaited details of President Clinton's economic plan.
Some market participants stayed on the sidelines, showing their uncertainty over the President's proposals to raise taxes to cut the deficit, but were still apprehensive over where the burden would fall, traders said.
In trading, prices rose sharply on the basis of a Reuters report detailing President Clinton's projections for a falling deficit.
The Reuters figures showed a $331.9 billion deficit for the 1993 fiscal year, $262.5 billion for 1994, $241 billion in 1995, $205.3 billion in 1996 and $206.5 billion by 1997.


Cigna Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reviews/Music; 'Cav' and 'Pag' Return to the Met
With a few notable exceptions, the Metropolitan Opera has had slim success in casting Mascagni's "Cavalleria Rusticana" and Leoncavallo's "Pagliacci" in recent decades.
A new revival of Franco Zeffirelli's 1970 production, last seen four seasons ago, offers a good deal more unsuccess and another notable exception.
As Santuzza in "Cavalleria," Waltraud Meier was superb at the first performance on Friday evening, singing clearly and evenly throughout her range, carrying lines smoothly and coloring her tone richly.
She gradually worked an incisive, telling edge into her voice without sacrificing its basic beauty; even her shrieks were musical.
And she projected a riveting dramatic presence, convincingly fragile as well as ferocious.


Caesars World Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Helping Little Girls Hold On to Confidence
LITTLE girls, so eager to talk and so full of thoughts and feelings, often turn into big girls who speak hesitantly, worry about their every move, and wish only for the day when they will have a boy to call their own.
Increasingly, studies are showing that most girls have a great deal of self-confidence until the age of 9, but most lose it by the time they reach high school.


Car Need Freon? Better Fill Up Soon
MOST air-conditioners in American cars are running on borrowed time because production of the refrigerant they use will soon be prohibited.
The cost of repairing a car air-conditioner is already rising, and in a few years repairs will be almost impossible.
So a driver with a broken unit will either have to buy an expensive new one that uses an ozone-friendly refrigerant or do without.
That is true even for most 1993 models, and it will be for some 94's.
But in the last few months people shopping for new cars have been presented with an increasing number of models using a refrigerant considered safe for the ozone layer.
The list will undoubtedly get longer in the next few months.


CNA Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


No Jurors Seated in Beating Case
Prospective jurors were questioned for a second day today in the Federal trial of four officers charged with civil rights violations in the beating of Rodney G. King, with the first juror yet to be seated or disqualified.
Lawyers did not move beyond the first panel of 12 prospective jurors chosen at random on Tuesday as they probed for hidden biases, misconceptions or fears that could hinder an impartial verdict.


Sports of The Times; It Seems That Tyson Has a Shot
THE man fighting Mike Tyson's battle was balding, middle-aged, wore glasses and arrived on the scene Monday wearing a rumpled trench coat over a dark suit and carrying a black briefcase.
There was a time not long ago when Mike Tyson could handsomely fight his own battles, bounding into the ring wearing black trunks and black boxing shoes and 10-ounce gloves.
That's all.
No robe, no hood, no socks, even.
He always appeared more than eager to get on with the task of knocking someone's head off.
Now Mike Tyson, who once called himself the baddest dude on the planet (with documentation to make that case), had placed his considerable self in the hands of the man in the trench coat, Alan Dershowitz, the renowned attorney from Boston.
The scene of conflict was not a prize ring but a grandiose appeals court in the Indiana state capitol building in Indianapolis.


Simms's Next Pass May Be to Another Roster
With unfettered free agency in the National Football League only 11 days away, the Giants' two veteran quarterbacks seem to be positioning themselves for future employment.
Jeff Hostetler is the one the Giants will probably try to keep, which means Phil Simms will probably play somewhere else.
Almost everyone involved is choosing words carefully.
Simms is vacationing with his family in Florida.
Hostetler, speaking from his home in Morgantown, W. Va., said little.


Australia Campaign Takes an American Tone
When Prime Minister Paul Keating and John R. Hewson, his opponent in the national election on March 13, met for their first television debate last Sunday, Channel 9 viewers here were startled to see a squiggly white line inching across the screen as each candidate spoke.
Called "the electronic worm" by the press, the line was a graphic rendering of the audience's reaction to the debate.
Each of the 128 audience members controlled a dial registering everything from total disapproval to complete agreement.


CLINTON'S ECONOMIC PLAN: The Overview; CLINTON PLAN TO REMAKE THE ECONOMY SEEKS TO TAX ENERGY AND BIG INCOMES
President Clinton tonight proposed a comprehensive program of tax increases and spending cuts designed to trim the Federal deficit over the next four years by $500 billion, or 38 percent, and to revitalize the nation's economy.
In a speech to a joint session of Congress that is expected to shape at least the early stages of his Presidency, Mr.
Clinton outlined a series of new taxes that would fall most heavily on business and on relatively wealthy individuals, both active and retired.
But families earning as little as $20,000 a year -- members of the "forgotten middle class" whose taxes he promised during his campaign to cut -- will also be asked to send more dollars to Washington under the President's plan.


Serbs Unearth 23 Bodies From Mass Graves


Regan Says Revenue Picture Has Improved
In a review of the state's monthly cash report, Comptroller Edward V. Regan said today that the state has received $1.26 billion more in revenues over the last 10 months than had been projected last April, when the current budget was passed.
Expecting that the economy will grow slowly this year, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has proposed a tight-fisted $31.5 billion spending plan that projects a $3.7 billion deficit and calls for deep cuts to school aid and Medicaid.
But Republicans have said that the Governor's economic projections are far too gloomy.


Kuhlman Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Payco American Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Allied Clinical Laboratories (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Abortion Rights Group Uses Chinese Pill to Goad French
Abortion rights groups announced yesterday that they were testing the Chinese version of the abortion pill RU486 in America in an effort to encourage the French maker of the drug to sell its own pill in the United States or let someone else do so.
The groups said they had brought in a supply of the Chinese pill and had begun testing its safety on animals.
The groups, led by the Abortion Rights Mobilization, which is based in New York, plan to seek clearance soon from the Food and Drug Administration for tests on humans, a necessary step if they are to win approval to sell the drug here.


Hanson Plc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Two Players Lose
JAY BERGEN, a New York lawyer representing three clubs in salary arbitration cases, won one and argued one yesterday.
Bergen, who has been the busiest club representative this arbitration season, appeared before ROBERT CREO in Chicago and presented the Yankees' case for paying infielder RANDY VELARDE $600,000 instead of $1.05 million.
Velarde batted .272 while earning $360,000 last year.
Pending Creo's decision, Bergen has a 3-1 record.
NICHOLAS ZUMAS, another arbitrator, ruled yesterday in favor of Bergen and his client, the San Francisco Giants, over JEFF BRANTLEY.
The relief pitcher, who was 7-7 with a 2.95 earned run average last season, had a $1,125,000 salary for 1992.
He will now earn $1.5 million instead of the $2.6 million he sought.


American Ecology (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Prosecutor Mocks Defense In Trial on Sexual Assault
In sarcastic tones, a prosecutor in the Glen Ridge sex-assault trial today mocked defense lawyers' explanations for the sexual encounter in March 1989 between four former high school football players and a mildly retarded schoolmate.
As he began his closing argument in the 18-week-old trial in Superior Court, the prosecutor, Glenn D. Goldberg, directed much of his derision at Michael Querques, the lawyer in the forefront of the defense team's effort throughout the trial to depict the young woman as a promiscuous sexual aggressor who initiated all the acts the state contends were crimes.


CHRONICLE
MARILYN QUAYLE, the wife of former Vice President Dan Quayle, is joining the Indianapolis law firm of Krieg DeVault Alexander &amp; Capehart, it announced yesterday.
In fact, WILLIAM R. NEALE, a partner and longtime friend of the Quayles, said that although she was returning to Washington after the announcement, she was already starting to work, by phone and fax.
The Quayles plan to move to Indianapolis in June, and until then, Mrs.
Quayle, a 1974 graduate of the Indiana University School of Law, will commute to the office from Washington.
She will focus her practice mainly in the areas of corporate, international business and health-care law.
"Our clients will benefit from the expertise and knowledge Marilyn has developed over the past 16 years in Washington," Mr.
Neale said.


Dorothy K. Willner, Sociologist, 73, Dies
Dorothy K. Willner, a sociologist who persuaded the United Nations to adopt guidelines protecting the rights of consumers, died on Saturday at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
She was 73 and lived in Manhattan and Southampton, L.I.
She had cancer of the small intestine, her husband, Sidney, said.


Furniture Show for Couch Potatoes?
CRAIG NUTT, an artist from Northport, Ala., makes tables and chairs with legs in the shapes of asparagus, chili peppers or ears of corn.
Carl Tese, who lives in Arlington, Va., makes tables with legs made of exotic wood veneers and edged in chicken feathers.
It is not a surprise that the two artists are paired in a show, "New Works by Carl Tese and Craig Nutt," at the Meredith Gallery in Baltimore.
"Both artists are using traditional forms and shapes of furniture, but each is embellishing them differently," said Terry Heffner, associate director of the gallery, where the exhibit of 15 pieces runs through Feb. 27.


Wachtler Pleads Not Guilty


Average Money Fund Yield Was Flat in Latest Week
The average yields on money market funds were little changed in the latest reporting week, reflecting the policies of the Federal Reserve Board, analysts said yesterday.
"What we're seeing is the stability of the Federal Reserve policy of holding interest rates where they are now," said Walter S. Frank, the chief economist at The Money Fund Report, a research publication that tracks money market funds.


Books of The Times; An Imaginary Round Table on Social Concerns
Systems of Survival A Dialogue on the Moral Foundations of Commerce and Politics By Jane Jacobs 236 pages.
Random House. $22.
Why do things go wrong in human society?
It's a question that would normally stun the mind into a torpor, but it doesn't at all in Jane Jacobs's intellectually invigorating new book, somewhat unfriskily titled "Systems of Survival: A Dialogue on the Moral Foundations of Commerce and Politics."


Mexico Pulls Out of Fund That Has Roiled Trade Issue
Under sharp pressure from the United States, Mexican officials said today that the Government's main development bank would withdraw from a private investment fund set up to buy American companies and move them to Mexico to take advantage of lower wages.
The announcement came almost immediately after the United States trade representative, Mickey Kantor, told his Mexican counterpart that he would not begin new negotiations on the North American Free Trade Agreement until Mexico resolved the issue of its role in the fund.


COMPANY BRIEFS
FOURTH FINANCIAL CORP., Wichita, Kan., has agreed to acquire Commercial Landmark Corp., Muskogee, Okla., for an undisclosed amount of stock.
GITANO GROUP INC., New York, has sold its Accessory Network division to companies owned by Abe Chehebar, the division's president, and Joey Chehebar, a division vice president, for $15.1 million.


Drug Mixture Halts H.I.V. in Lab, Doctors Say in a Cautious Report
A medical student has found what Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston says "may be the Achilles' heel of H.I.V.," the virus that causes AIDS, and has developed a novel drug strategy that eliminates the virus from human cells grown in the test tube.
The strategy involves using a combination of three drugs to attack a single component of H.I.V., an enzyme that makes copies of the virus's genetic material.
In test tubes, the combination of drugs has blocked the virus from growing and from spreading to other cells, the team is reporting Thursday in the British scientific journal Nature.


Calendar: Orchid Show in the Bronx
Orchids Under Glass
New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard
, Bedford Park,
Bronx; (212) 220-8777
.
Orchids will be on display in the Fern Gallery of the Enid A. Haupt Conservatory from Saturday through Feb. 28.
The garden and conservatory are open Tuesday through Sunday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Grounds admission is by contribution of $3; students, those 65 and older, or 6 to 16, $2.
Conservatory admission is $3 and $2, respectively; no charge on Saturdays, 10 A.M. to noon.
Children's Garden Program
Clark Botanic Garden, 193 I. U. Willets Road, off Glen Cove Road, Albertson, L.I.; (516) 484-8600.
The children's garden program for spring, which meets on Saturday mornings through June 26, starts April 3.
Classes in July and August are on Tuesdays and Thursdays.
The fee is $35 for the spring session, and $60 for the combined spring-summer program.
Advance registration; the deadline is March 19.
Volunteer Orientation
Planting Fields Arboretum, Planting Fields Road, Oyster Bay, L.I.; (516) 922-9206.
An orientation program for those interested in volunteering to work at the arboretum will be held on Monday, 8:30 A.M. to 1:30 P.M.No charge; reservations requested.
Coe Hall, the Tudor revival mansion at Planting Fields, also needs volunteers.
For information: (516) 922-9210 on weekdays.
Scent and Color
Bartlett Arboretum, 151 Brookdale Road, off High Ridge Road, Stamford, Conn.; (203) 322-6971.
"Winterbloom '93," a flower show, will be held on Saturday and Sunday, 1 to 4 P.M.
Plants will be for sale.
No charge for admission.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the collapse of plans to rebuild the Boston Garden misidentified the train station over which the new arena would be built.
It is North Station.


Synbiotics Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Market Place; Cummins Engine is tuned up for a boom in the truck market.
ANALYSTS say the Cummins Engine Company is humming on all cylinders.
After several years of heavy spending on new products, the diesel engine maker, based in Columbus, Ind., has halted the erosion of its market share in the heavy-duty truck business and sharply increased its share of the pickup truck sector.
Last Friday's encouraging fourth-quarter earnings report signaled a long-awaited return to healthy profitability.
And Monday's announcement of a long-range partnership with Komatsu Ltd. of Japan underscored the global leverage Cummins has acquired through its investment in emission-control technology for its new engines.


New York Needle Exchanges Called Surprisingly Effective
New York City's ambitious research effort to measure whether needle exchange programs can slow the spread of AIDS among intravenous drug users has attracted significant numbers of addicts and convinced many of them to share their needles less often, experts evaluating the program say.
Six months after the efforts began, the experts say that the city's four demonstration programs -- including a storefront to dispense hypodermic needles on the Lower East Side and outreach work on the streets in Harlem and the Bronx -- have succeeded in enrolling 5,000 addicts, far more than in previous needle exchange programs in the city, both legal and illegal.


Spiegel Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Theater; Divided by Space and Captivity, but United in Spirit
In "Two Rooms," at the Signature Theater Company, Lee Blessing offers a disturbing double-edged view of a hostage crisis.
Moving back and forth between a prisoner in Beirut and his wife at home, the playwright artfully explores the shared stoicism that unites the characters, and the external forces that keep them divided.
While other hostage dramas, like "Someone Who'll Watch Over Me," keep their focus firmly on the hostages, Mr.
Blessing is chiefly concerned with the debilitating emotional effects on their families.
At issue is their victimization and the need for pressure to be brought against blind bureaucracy and governmental inefficiency in rescuing those who become political pawns.


Welfare Compromise for Auto Makers
Trucks carry cargo.
Cars carry passengers.
The distinction is obvious to everyone -- except Detroit auto makers.
They're pressuring the Clinton Administration to reclassify Japanese minivans and sports utility vehicles as trucks.
The Big Three aren't confused, just greedy.
Once minivans are mislabeled as trucks, tariffs would automatically rise from 2.5 percent to a whopping 25 percent.


Northrop Corp. (N)
Net income at the Northrop Corporation declined 65 percent in 1992 mainly because of a $152 million charge against third-quarter earnings to cover the costs of extending developmental schedules on the Tri-Service Stand-Off Missile, a highly secretive conventional cruise missile.
The missile is being developed for all three military services under a fixed priced development program.
For the fourth quarter, a decline in the development contract for the B-2 and lower margins on the F/A-18 and 747 aircraft brought a drop in revenues and net income.


China Frees Leading 1989 Dissident From Prison
The Government announced today that it had released a prominent Chinese dissident, a student who had come to symbolize the tide of pro-democracy demonstrators whose march on Tiananmen Square nearly four years ago ended in a military crackdown.
The release of Wang Dan, a thin and perpetually serious 24-year-old, along with two other dissidents today, is likely to stimulate calls for a broader amnesty of political prisoners.
The timing suggests that China is trying to reduce the criticism about human rights violations and send a peace offering to the Clinton Administration.
Others Still Being Held
The official dispatch by the New China News Agency announcing Mr.
Wang's release said that all students who were jailed in connection with the 1989 pro-democracy demonstrations have now been freed.
Despite that announcement, however, some students are still known to be in prison, as are other dissidents like Wei Jingsheng, who is serving a 15-year sentence for earlier democracy protests.


Bosnia Neighbors Nervously Seek Pacts
A flurry of diplomatic activity has swept the Balkans in the last week as political leaders from this volatile area have taken steps to strengthen regional ties to prevent sparks from the Bosnian war from igniting nationalist conflicts that could engulf their countries.
In the first visit to independent Macedonia by an important head of state, President Turgut Ozal of Turkey today discussed military assistance to this former Yugoslav republic, which was left without a military when the Yugoslav Army withdrew last spring, taking with it even faucets from barracks sinks.


A Rebel Takes On the U.S. Alpine
It was a world Alpine championship that for many skiers, was more of a bitter pill than a shot of good medicine.
In the course of the 12-day event, which ended Sunday in Shizukuishi, Japan, there was rain, fog, snow, wind, an earthquake and race cancellations galore.
But out of the tempest came an unexpected ray of hope for the United States Ski Team.
Picabo Street, the 21-year-old rebel of the women's B Team, garnered a silver medal in the combined -- downhill and slalom -- and with it, a promotion to the A Team.


Keep Electric Boat Busy in Post-Cold War Era
To the Editor:
You have been reporting that the Electric Boat Company in Groton, Conn., will have large layoffs in connection with the end of the cold war and a reduced need for new submarines (front page, Feb. 9).
The facility evidently must be subsidized to preserve it to make submarines, should the need arise.


Aritech reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.N. Agency Halts Most Bosnia Aid; Condemnation by U.N.
Clearly surprised and irritated by the decision to suspend United Nations relief work in much of Bosnia and Herzegovina today, the Security Council condemned both the Serbs and Muslim-led Bosnian Government for blocking aid convoys and demanded they be allowed safe passage throughout the country immediately.
At the same time, the Council began to discuss plans for setting up a new international tribunal to judge those accused of war crimes in the former Yugoslavia.


T.W.A. Files Its Plan To Leave Bankruptcy
Trans World Airlines filed its plan yesterday to emerge from Federal bankruptcy protection.
The plan would give T.W.A.'s creditors control of the airline in exchange for eliminating $4 billion in debt.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.59
4.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.90
2.91
3.83
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.02
3.07
3.95
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.86
5.94
6.99
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.10
7.14
7.90
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.35
8.35
8.95
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.15
6.16
6.80
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Bill Clinton's Moment
New Presidents are given very few opportunities to define themselves to the country and define what they expect from the country.
Some seize the chance, some don't, but the truth is that these moments of definition rarely return.
Bill Clinton's address to Congress and the nation last night on economic policy was just such a moment.
He knew that and tried to seize it.
Battles are sure to be fought over the details of his program, but Mr.
Clinton cannot be faulted for squandering his chance to stake his turf.


Petrovic Will Miss Shootout
Drazen Petrovic, overlooked in the selection for the National Basketball Association All-Star Game, decided today that he would not participate in the Three-Point Shootout exhibition this weekend in Salt Lake City.
After re-injuring his right ankle in Tuesday night's 100-88 victory over the Milwaukee Bucks at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, Petrovic chose today to skip the Shootout and ignore the apparent snub in the vote by the fans and the coaches.


Vincent Jones, 86, A Former Executive For Gannett Papers
Vincent S. Jones, a retired newspaper executive and leader in news organizations, died on Monday at Genesee Hospital in Rochester, where he lived.
He was 86.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


Rexon Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Would-Be Buyer of The Post Accepts Restrictions on Assets
Lawyers for Steven Hoffenberg, the chairman of Towers Financial Corporation and the prospective buyer of The New York Post, agreed yesterday to permit the Securities and Exchange Commission to impose certain emergency controls on the operation of Towers, including stringent limits on his use of the company's assets.
The settlement, approved by Federal District Judge Whitman Knapp at a hearing in Manhattan, also calls for the appointment of a trustee to monitor the company's books as it continues in operation, and to oversee an independent audit of the company.
And it requires Mr.
Hoffenberg to give the S.E.C. a separate accounting of his personal assets.


Semak's Assists Are the Devils' Tonic
The power play that had been so productive in the last two games, accounting for six goals, was completely ineffective tonight for the Devils.
But New Jersey found another way to give St.
Louis the blues.
It came in the form of Aleksandr Semak, the diminutive and energetic Russian center, who created three goals in the Devils' 4-3 triumph over the Blues at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Joe Jones, an Artist With a Musical Bent And an Inventor, 58
Joe Jones, an artist, musician and inventor of music machines and mechanical orchestras, died on Feb. 9 at his home in Wiesbaden-Erbenheim, Germany.
He was 58.
The cause was heart failure, said Geoffrey Hendricks, a friend and colleague, who informed The Times of his death yesterday.


Reviews/Music; Uptown Compositions With a Bit of Downtown
Parnassus has proudly proclaimed itself a bastion of the uptown school of contemporary composition, a turf it shares with Speculum Musicae and a few other tenacious ensembles.
The group has a small but devoted following, and one often sees composers -- even those whose music is not being performed -- in its audiences.
Several were on hand on Monday evening at the Ethical Culture Society Auditorium for the final concert in the group's 19th season.
The varied program was a reminder, for anyone who needed one, that the boundaries separating the uptown and downtown schools are sometimes more ambiguous than their most strident adherents claim.
One work that might find a home with either audience was Stephen Hartke's "King of the Sun." Its language, though by no means simplistically tonal, offered easy access, partly because Mr.
Hartke used techniques not generally associated with the rigorous side of academic composition.


An Out-of-Work Sensation Wakes Up in the Running
Jaye Davidson of "The Crying Game," a late sleeper, awoke at 5 P.M.
London time yesterday and thus learned of the Academy Award nominations from an answering machine.
"You could've said to me yesterday that I would wake up and be part of the royal family, and I would have been less surprised," said this year's most attention-getting nominee for a supporting role.
"The Oscars are Joan Crawford, Jack Nicholson, Elizabeth Taylor; the Oscars aren't me. In England, people dismiss the idea of getting nominated for an Oscar out of hand because it's something you never expect."
Expected or not, this eyebrow-raising nomination will have a profound effect on the secrecy that has thus far surrounded "The Crying Game." It will also have no small effect on the nominee.
Hired for the film's pivotal role with no previous acting experience, Jaye Davidson had a temporary job in a shop two months ago, then landed some runway modeling assignments and is now out of work despite contacts in both the fashion and publicity businesses.
"London is very depressed at the moment, so there's not much work around whether you've got contacts or not," said this overnight sensation, who can now be expected to have an additional contact or two.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  U.N.
SUSPENDS BOSNIA AID  The United Nations relief agency suspended most of its operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, waiting for opposing political leaders to honor commitments to allow convoys of urgently needed food and medicine to pass.
The move meant an immediate halt to most of the missions being undertaken in what has become one of the most complex and dangerous relief operations in the history of the United Nations.
A1  MACEDONIANS LOOK TO BOSNIA  A flurry of diplomatic activity has swept the Balkans as political leaders from the volatile area of Macedonia have taken steps to strengthen regional ties to prevent sparks from the Bosnian war igniting nationalist conflicts.
A8


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Feb. 12
Feb. 5
Feb. 14
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.2
7.0
Distillate production, daily
2.8
2.8
2.7
Gasoline stocks
236.7
235.0
231.1
Distillate stocks
123.3
126.2
116.5
Crude imports, daily
6.2
6.6
5.9
Product imports, daily
2.0
1.9
1.7
Crude stocks
338.1
332.1
332.8
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
86.0
84.5
78.9
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Ewing Has Himself To Blame for Snub
On a slow news night Tuesday at Madison Square Garden -- Mavericks lose!
Mavericks lose! -- Pat Riley took it upon himself to write the lead for every news reporter worth his or her laptop computer.
It is inconceivable and unconscionable, the Knicks' coach declared, that Patrick Ewing could be beaten out for the starting Eastern Conference All-Star team by Shaquille O'Neal, a mere 7-foot-1-inch, 303-pound rookie.
"I can't worry about that stuff," said Ewing.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the Imperial Army Headquarters in Tokyo referred incorrectly in some editions to the ritual suicide there by the novelist Yukio Mishima in 1970.
He went inside the building from the balcony before killing himself.


Dewey Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Historical Society Holds Black History Trove
To the Editor:
Among the treasures that will soon be buried from public view at the New-York Historical Society (news article, Feb. 9) is a rare collection of African-American documents from New York City's early history.


Ewing (43) and Starks (39) Overwhelm Hornets
When the Charlotte Hornets set a track-meet pace tonight, Patrick Ewing and John Starks responded with a remarkable finishing kick.
Ewing had a season-high 43 points.
Starks had career highs in both points (39) and assists (13).
Together, they led the Knicks to a scintillating come-from-behind 124-116 victory at the Charlotte Coliseum, sending New York into the All-Star Game break with the best record (34-16) in the Eastern Conference.


Penn Central Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Polaris Industries Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Checking In for Tea At the Stanhope
AFTER years of visiting the Metropolitan Museum of Art, I had come to consider the Stanhope Hotel, across Fifth Avenue, an exhibit I could never get in to see.
The volunteers at the museum's information desk always recommend tea at the Stanhope, but after numerous attempts through the years, showing up in the lobby with my mom, only to find the six -- count 'em -- six tables inside perennially filled, I gave up.
Or thought I did.
Somehow, the Stanhope circled back.
Last year, it was a trysting place in John Guare's play "Four Baboons Adoring the Sun," as it is in John Irving's novel "The Hotel New Hampshire," albeit for a brother and sister.
Anne Rice's well-heeled vampires favor the Stanhope in her best-selling "Tale of the Body Thief." I started asking other New Yorkers if they had ever stayed at the Stanhope, which had undergone a $28 million renovation in 1986.
None had.
Actually, the closest most had come was eating at its highly touted sidewalk cafe.
They hadn't made it inside, either.


Technology Favored in Donn Handicap
Technology was named the 5-2 favorite today when nine senior stars of racing were entered in the Donn Handicap, which will be run here Saturday at Gulfstream Park as the opening event in the $6.3 million American Championship Racing Series.
Strike the Gold, Best Pal and the European champion St.
Jovite won't be there.
The first two are recovering from ailments, and St.
Jovite is being primed for his debut three weeks later in the Gulfstream Park Handicap, the second race in the series.
But they are all expected to become leading members of the handicap division and the nine-race series, which ends with the Woodward Stakes at Belmont Park on Sept. 18.


Mixed Greeting for Clinton Plan; Bonds Jump
The yield on the long-term Treasury bond sank to an all-time low yesterday as the credit market focused on President Clinton's plan for reducing Government borrowing by cutting the budget deficit.
As prices of Government securities soared, the yield of the 30-year Treasury bond sank to 7.02 percent, down from 7.10 percent on Wednesday and the lowest level for the issue since the Government began selling 30-year bonds in 1977.


Ciba-Geigy Unit Dismisses Ketchum
The Ciba Consumer Pharmaceuticals division of the Ciba-Geigy Corporation, based in Woodbridge, N.J., unexpectedly dismissed Ketchum Advertising New York yesterday and consolidated its account, without a review, at Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor Inc. in New York.
Total Ciba-Geigy billings at Jordan, McGrath now more than double to an estimated $25 million.


A View From a High-Tech Perch
Like many of the engineers in Silicon Valley, Geoffrey S. Goodfellow, a computer hacker turned high-tech entrepreneur, is a cynic when it comes to Washington.
Normally rising at 5:30 A.M., he has little time to ponder politics, and he was still working Wednesday night when President Clinton gave his economics address.
Despite Mr.
Goodfellow's detachment, he acknowledged that after catching up with the news this morning he was grudgingly optimistic about the President's economics plan, which would give small companies like his a permanent investment tax credit.


BASEBALL: Emotional Spring Cleaning for Yanks and Mets; Abbott Ignoring Arbitration Loss
Twelve days after failing to avoid salary arbitration with the Yankees, Jim Abbott reported to his new team today vowing to still hold the loftiest of intentions.
"It's not easy coming to a new team and having that be your first association," said Abbott, a left-handed pitcher who lost his bid for $3.5 million on Feb. 5 when an arbitrator, Anthony Sinicropi, awarded the Yankees' offer of $2.35 million.
"Arbitration losing was like the last chapter of a bad book. But arbitration's over now. I have to be grown up about it."
And pragmatic.


Losing Speed
Losing Speed For airlines, railroads and truckers, the Administration's proposed higher energy taxes and OPEC's production cuts are bad news.
After outpacing the market this year, transportation issues have been among the worst performers this week.


U.S. Trade Deficit Grew 29% in 1992
The nation's trade deficit widened last year as the economic recovery revived Americans' appetite for imports and as economic stagnation in Japan and Western Europe dampened demand for American goods there, the Commerce Department said today.
The amount of merchandise imported into the United States exceeded the amount exported by $84.34 billion, a 29 percent increase from $65.40 billion in 1991.
The deterioration in the overall trade balance followed four years of steady improvement from a trade deficit of $152.12 billion in 1987.


Germans Feel Pain of Unity, Squabbling Over Who Pays
When Germany was reunited in October 1990 and the way ahead looked clear and rosy, Chancellor Helmut Kohl told his people that no one would feel any pain.
More than two years later, the industrial powerhouse in the western half is sinking fast into recession, with unemployment now at 7.4 percent and rising.
Instead of blooming, the formerly Communist economy in the eastern half collapsed under the pressure of competition, dragging the rest of the country with it and stirring widespread anger and frustration.


Air Express International reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


A. P. Gagge, 85, A Biophysicist And Researcher
A.
Pharo Gagge, a biophysicist who was a leader in studying the interaction of human body temperature with the environment, died on Saturday at his home in Branford, Conn.
He was 85.
The cause of death was heart failure, his family said.


Noland Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Theater; The Small-Town Trauma Of a Store That's Failing
In the small Texas town that is the setting for "Bargains," a snobbish mother names her daughters Diana and Fergie while her neighbors call their children Donny and Marie.
Jack Heifner's play is quaint and, like the failing department store at the center of the story, it is unremunerative.
It does not pay the audience back for its investment of time.
That store is stocked with notions and less than fashionable clothes.
Even a summer sidewalk sale would not bring in the customers who now shop at the discount market on the nearby highway.
"Bargains" (at Primary Stages) begins as a comedy dealing with the depressed state of the local economy but rambles its way to an artificially upbeat ending in which the characters suddenly fulfill their dreams.
As the play wanders, it never takes the time to make an inventory of its assets or to make sense of its story.
In fact, one of the two principal female characters changes so radically during the intermission as to make the play seem like two separate one-acts.


Farm Fresh Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Solid if Unheroic, Regan Leaves Books Tidy
Edward V. Regan, who announced his resignation as State Comptroller today, leaves behind a record as a sound manager of the state's pension funds, a prolific auditor of state agencies and local governments and a consistent critic of the state's heavy borrowing and fiscal gimmickry.
But he also leaves a legacy as a government official who, despite more than 14 years as Comptroller, never really became a major force in either the fiscal or electoral politics of the state.


COMPANY NEWS: Get the Lead Out; Tiffany Recalls A Line of Chinaware
Quick, check your china.
Was it purchased at Tiffany &amp; Company?
Does the name of the pattern sound like an expensive French restaurant?
Had any headaches lately?


U.S. Van Attacked in Somalia
A Toyota Land Cruiser belonging to the United States Embassy came under gunfire in southern Mogadishu today, in what embassy officials described as a carjacking attempt.
The Somali driver of the car was injured by broken glass.
Col.
Fred Peck of the Marines, a spokesman for the joint military task force, said an Air Force colonel, Richard Mentemeyer, was in the van, along with two embassy employees, when the shooting occurred.
Col.
Mentemeyer, the military's liaison to the embassy, fended off the gunmen, who fled.
Later searches of the surrounding streets yielded no suspects.


Chain Names Goldberg Moser
Stuart Anderson's Black Angus and Cattle Company restaurants chain in Los Altos, Calif., said yesterday that it had selected Goldberg Moser O'Neill in San Francisco to handle its account, previously at J. Walter Thompson San Francisco.
Billings were estimated at $10 million.
Goldberg Moser was awarded the chain's account after a two-month review that also included two other San Franciso-based shops, Citron Haligman Bedecarre and Mandelbaum Mooney Ashley.


Hormel Foods Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


Among Traders, Words Of Qualified Approval
A disembodied voice began to give a report card on President Clinton's economic address at 7:40 A.M. yesterday as broad-shouldered young men in shirt-sleeves who trade stocks sipped coffee in plastic foam cups.
It was the morning huddle on the trading floor of the First Boston Corporation, and the traders were listening to a a call from London on the early optimism of the overnight European markets.


Jets Give Coslet a One-Year Extension
The Jets took some pressure off Coach Bruce Coslet yesterday, announcing that they had given him a one-year contract extension that will take him through 1994.
Financial terms were not announced.
In effect, the extension will keep Coslet from being considered a lame-duck head coach in 1993 and divert some of the focus from his job security.


Herbalife International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


On Stage, and Off
The author of 'Jacob Zulu' faces an unpleasant choice: giving up a Broadway production or his Dramatists Guild membership.
A rancorous dispute between the Dramatists Guild and the Steppenwolf Theater Company of Chicago surfaced this week when five leading playwrights aired their grievances over a Broadway production contract they say Steppenwolf bullied another playwright into signing.


Evening of Premieres
The New York Virtuoso Singers, directed by Harold Rosenbaum, will perform works by American composers on Saturday at 8 P.M. at St.
Peter's Church, Lexington Avenue at 54th Street.
The program includes four world premieres: Brian Fennelly's "Keats on Love," Michael Gordon's "XVI," Katherine Hoover's "Four English Songs" and Julius Burger's "Miserere," a work written in 1917.
Also on the program are the New York premieres of "And So the Swans" and "The Chorus of Marvels," by George Perle; "Ave Verum Corpus," by John Harbison, and "Lullaby for a Newborn Baby Too Soon Gone," by Elaine Lebenbom.
Walter Hilse will accompany the ensemble on piano and organ.
Tickets are $12.
Information: (914) 763-3453.


Projections on Interest Costs Confuse the Treasury Market
Traders and dealers in the Treasury market were confused yesterday by the Clinton Administration's projections that the Government would save $11.5 billion in interest expense over the next four years by shifting away from longer-term securities and selling more shorter-term issues instead.
The subject is of vital importance to Treasury dealers because a shift in the mix of securities sold would influence the price of outstanding long-term notes and bonds, as well as the direction of long-term interest rates.
For one thing, a scarcity of longer-term issues is likely to push up their prices, thereby reducing yields.


Sony Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Books of The Times; 9 Historical Profiles in 4 Categories
Icons of Democracy American Leaders as Heroes, Aristocrats, Dissenters and Democrats By Bruce Miroff 422 pages.
Basic Books. $25.


Moscow Journal; Who'll Speak Up for Russia Now? Nixon, No Less
Old cold warriors need not fade away.
Take Richard M. Nixon -- at 80, he is battling on with much of the same fervor he showed in his celebrated jousts with Nikita S. Khrushchev 34 years ago.
Only he is not fighting against Communists now, but for Russia.
In speeches, on Op-Ed pages and today in Russia, the former President has become one of the most dedicated advocates of the notion that the United States must not ignore Russia now that Communism has collapsed.


Hundreds Are Lost As Crowded Ferry Capsizes Off Haiti
Hundreds of passengers aboard a badly overloaded Haitian ferry are believed to have drowned when the vessel sank off the country's southern peninsula early Wednesday, officials said today.
The Haitian authorities and United States Coast Guard officials said the victims, passengers on a regularly scheduled ferry linking remote areas of the peninsula with the capital, Port-au-Prince, could number 1,500 or more.


Komag Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Potash Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Art in Review
Richard Long  65 Thompson Gallery  65 Thompson Street  SoHo  Through March 13
Since the late 1960's Richard Long's output has consisted of photo-documentation of long treks, often through the countryside of his native England, and lines or circles of piled loose stones transported from the sites of his travels.
Placed out of doors, these careful arrangements are at the farthest remove from the bulldozer esthetic of some 70's Earth Art.
They intrude on the natural world only temporarily, drawing attention to it rather than altering it.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Clinton Plan
Debate over President Clinton's economic program began as new White House figures showed that almost all of the deficit reduction proposed for the next two years would come from tax increases, with almost none from spending cuts.  [ Page A1. ]  New budget tables showed that the cumulative deficit reduction for the next four years would be $325 billion, not $500 billion.  [ A15. ]
The proposed energy tax based on the heat content of fuels would alter costs for fuel producers more than it would change consumption patterns, analysts say.  [ D1. ]


Restaurants
Arizona 206 could be an easy place to dislike.
It is small, overcrowded and loud, with a bar that never has an empty stool and a hostess who has the harried expression of an Alamo defender.
Of course, scores of Manhattan restaurants fit that description.
But few have regional American food as dazzling as this place.
Considering the intricacy of its Southwestern cuisine, it is remarkable how Arizona 206 has managed to maintain such a high level of food and service over seven years (and with four chefs).
Six months ago, the reins were turned over to 26-year-old David Walzog, a veteran of Gotham Bar and Grill in Manhattan and Red Sage, a Southwestern-style restaurant in Washington.
Mr.
Walzog is more daring and iconographic in style than his predecessors, and he certainly runs the palate through a chili gantlet.
It is also evident that his flavor combinations are devised with intelligence and care.


The Spoken Word
BLACK HISTORY CELEBRATION, American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 79th Street.
An afternoon of gospel and blues music, with a slide show and lecture titled "Male Image in African Art" by Cynthia Turner, an anthropologist and art historian.
Tomorrow and Sunday, 1 to 4:30 P.M.
Admission by contribution: $5; $2.50 for children.
Information: (212) 769-5315.
BLACK HISTORY LECTURE, Harlem Dance Foundation, 142 West 121st Street.
"Escape," the story of the pursuit of freedom by two slaves, William and Ellen Craft, on the Underground Railroad in 1848, is told by the couple's great-granddaughter, Ellen Craft Dammond, with photographs and journals.
Sunday at 2 P.M.
Admission: $7; $4 for students and the elderly.
Information (212) 662-2057.
"STEVE TESICH AND SUSAN GRIFFIN: A DIALOGUE," Joseph Papp Public Theater, Martinson Hall, 425 Lafayette Street, East Village.
A discussion with Mr.
Tesich, a playwright, and Ms.
Griffin, an author, about Mr.
Tesich's latest play, "On the Open Road." Sunday at 6 P.M.
Admission: $10.
Part of a series called "Public Platforms." Information: (212) 598-7150.
FICTION ON CORNELIA STREET, Cornelia Street Cafe, 29 Cornelia Street, Greenwich Village.
Suzanne Falter-Barns and Phil Vitale will read from their works.
Sunday at 7 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 989-9319.
POLITICS AT THE Y, 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
John Taylor, a political columnist, will speak.
Sunday at 7:30 P.M.
Admission: $15.
Reservations: (212) 996-1100.
GARDENING LECTURE, Planting Fields Arboretum, Mill River Road, Oyster Bay, L.I.
"A Selection of New and Old Favorite Plants for Exciting Gardening," by Dr.
J.
C.
Raulston, a professor of horticultural science at North Carolina State University.
Sponsored by the American Rhododendron Society, American Rock Garden Society, Holly Society of America and the Friends of Planting Fields.
Sunday at 2 P.M.
Free with $3 parking fee at the arboretum.
Information: (516) 922-9200.
AN EVENING OF LESBIAN LITERATURE, CUNY Graduate Center Auditorium, 33 West 42d Street, Manhattan.
Two free panel discussions: "Heroes Looking Back," with Maria Irene Fornes, Bertha Harris, Jill Johnston, Barbara Smith and Lisa Kennedy; followed by "Lesbian Literature Now and Tomorrow," with Dorothy Allison, Blanche McCrary Boyd, Nicole Breedlove, Melanie Kaye-Kantrowitz and B. Ruby Rich.
Sponsored by the Center for Lesbian and Gay Studies and PEN American Center.
Today, 5:30 to 10 P.M.
Information: (212) 334-1660.
ADAM CLAYTON POWELL LECTURE, Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street.
Wil Haygood, author of "King of Cats: The Life and Times of Adam Clayton Powell Jr.," will discuss the Congressman's life and contributions to black culture.
Tomorrow at 2 P.M.
Free with suggested contribution to the museum: $5; $3 for children and the elderly.
Information: (212) 534-1672.
POETRY READING, Anseo, 126 St.
Mark's Place, East Village.
Readings featuring Todd Colby, Shannon Ketch, Bonny Finberg and Heidi Schwartz.
Sunday at 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 982-0370.
POETRY READING, Dyckman House Museum, Broadway at 204th Street, Inwood.
Readings by poets, including Lillian Morrison, author of the collection "Whistling the Morning In." Sunday at 2 P.M.
Donations accepted.
Information; (212) 304-9422.


Industry Gauges Costs Of Proposed Energy Tax
Energy analysts and industry officials said today that the new tax that President Clinton has proposed on the heat content of most fuels would alter costs unevenly among producers in the coal, oil and natural gas industries.
Most said the impact on producers would outweigh any reduction in fuel consumption.
For instance, producers of thick, heavy-grade oil from California fields would face higher costs not only from the new tax on the oil itself but also because of new taxes on the natural gas they pump into reserves to loosen the oil and cause it to flow to oil wells.


U.S. and Allies Discuss Sanctions To Force Mobutu to Yield Power
In the aftermath of the rioting and looting this month that claimed hundreds of lives in Zaire, the United States, France and Belgium are considering political and economic sanctions against Zaire and its leader, Mobutu Sese Seko, Western diplomats said today.
Such a move would put pressure on President Mobutu, who has ruled for 28 years, to hand over real power to an interim government.


A Raise for Disabled List?
Arbitrators yesterday heard the salary cases of MARQUIS GRISSOM and the Montreal Expos and CARLOS QUINTANA and the Boston Red Sox.
Quintana sought a raise to $850,000, from $340,000, even though he missed all of last season after an automobile accident.


Review/Theater; The Rock Of an Age Of Message And Melody
"Tapestry: The Music of Carole King" floods the Union Square Theater with music that is as familiar and comforting as homemade chicken soup on a frigid winter night.
The slickly produced revue, in which six vocalists and a rock sextet perform more than 30 songs for which Ms.
King wrote the music, aspires to be little more than a choreographed concert.
If it lacks the theatrical energy, imagination and wit of anthologies like "Ain't Misbehavin' " and "Sophisticated Ladies," it offers a richly nostalgic overview of a songwriter whose work seems more traditional today than it did 20 years ago.
Ms.
King had the distinction of becoming a pop star a decade after she had established herself as a successful composer of teen-age pop songs with her husband, the lyricist Gerry Goffin.
Overnight, it seemed, her phenomenally successful 1971 album, "Tapestry," made the frizzy-haired songwriter with a Brooklyn twang an urban earth mother for the rock generation.


Clinton's Aides Sell Message on the Trading Floor
Two of the top economic aides to the President went to Wall Street yesterday and were greeted with praise for the Administration's efforts to reduce the deficit but were questioned on his commitment to cut spending.
The aides, Robert E. Rubin, chairman of the National Economic Council, and Alice M. Rivlin, deputy director of the Office of Management and Budget, met about 45 executives for lunch in the New York Stock Exchange board room to assure them about the President's plans.


Corporations Have to Pay Fair Tax Share
To the Editor:
"Press Harder on Deficit Reduction" (editorial, Feb. 5) couldn't be wronger.
For a clear explication of our deficit, I suggest the book "Who Will Tell the People?" by William Greider.
He analyzes the deficit in about four pages following page 71:


Ex-Officials Urge U.S. to Act to End Serbian Siege
A week after the Clinton Administration announced its decision to become more involved in peace talks for Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Administration came under fire today for failing to take more forceful action to halt Serbian aggression.
In testimony before the Senate and House foreign relations committees, high-ranking officials from previous administrations suggested stepped-up action, including air strikes, an end to the arms embargo there and the commitment of American ground troops to lift the siege of Sarajevo.
The critics included Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, former United Nations delegate, Zbigniew Brzezinski, national security adviser under former President Jimmy Carter, and William Colby, former Director of Central Intelligence.


U.S. and Allies Discuss Sanctions To Force Mobutu to Yield Power
In the aftermath of the rioting and looting this month that claimed hundreds of lives in Zaire, the United States, France and Belgium are considering political and economic sanctions against Zaire and its leader, Mobutu Sese Seko, Western diplomats said today.
Such a move would put pressure on President Mobutu, who has ruled for 28 years, to hand over real power to an interim government.


DDB Needham Gets 2 New Assignments
DDB Needham Worldwide Inc. has been awarded two new international assignments.
The Budget Rent A Car Corporation in Lisle, Ill., selected the agency to handle its international advertising and marketing accounts in Europe, the Middle East, Africa, Australia and the Asia-Pacific region.
The accounts, with combined billings estimated at $18 million, were previously divided among various local agencies.
DDB Needham handles Budget's American account through its Tracy-Locke unit in Dallas.


CBI Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Leggett &amp; Platt reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.87
3.09
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.87
2.90
3.87
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.98
3.02
3.99
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.71
5.86
7.00
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.02
7.10
7.90
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.35
8.35
8.95
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.04
6.15
6.80
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Newspaper Group Selects Agency
The Newspaper Association of America said it had appointed Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. in New York as the first agency to develop an overall strategic program, in an effort to strengthen and expand newspaper marketing and readership.
Billings were not disclosed.


Virginia Beats Duke Again, Adding to the Downdraft
Virginia 58, Duke 55
A Virginia team struggling to return to prominence ran into a Duke squad attempting to find itself without its injured leader tonight.
The result was a fierce defensive game in which the Cavaliers took the lead for good in the final three minutes and held on for a 58-55 victory.


Accounts
*
News Electronic Data, Clinton, N.J., to Emmerling Post Inc., New York, as the first agency to handle the account of the electronic publishing company.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Gitano Group Inc., New York, to Mullen Advertising, Wenham, Mass., to handle the apparel company's $8 million account, previously in-house.
Other agencies competing in the review were not disclosed.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY Oilers Beat Penguins  Esa Tikkanen scored the winner just 20 seconds after Ron Francis had tied the score for Pittsburgh as the Edmonton Oilers rallied twice to beat the Penguins, 5-4, in Pittsburgh last night.
The Oilers, the league's third lowest-scoring team, rallied from deficits of 2-0 and 3-2 to deal the Penguins just their fifth home-ice loss in 30 games.
Pittsburgh's home record is 22-5-3. (AP) N.B.A.
Suns Near Home Mark  Richard Dumas scored a career-high 32 points and Charles Barkley had a triple-double as Phoenix beat the Atlanta Hawks by 131-119 to move within a game of tying a franchise record of 19 consecutive home victories.
Phoenix is on the road for two games before returning Feb. 26 against Utah.
Barkley got his 14th career triple-double with 25 points, 16 rebounds and 12 assists. (AP)
Rockets 119, Celtics 84: Carl Herrera scored a career-high 18 points to lead seven Houston players in double figures, and the Rockets held Boston to 8 second-quarter points in the victory last night in Houston. (AP) Trail Blazers 105, Lakers 103: Terry Porter's layup with 27.1 seconds left capped Portland's rally at home in the fourth quarter.
Carlsen is a 19-year-old left-hander from Denmark who has zoomed from No. 1,036 to No. 62 in the ATP ranking in one year.
Sixth-seeded Michael Stich rallied past Marc Rosset, 7-6 (7-2), 3-6, 7-5.
Rosset double-faulted with two match points at 5-4 in the third set. (AP) Navratilova Wins Easily: Second-seeded Martina Navratilova moved into the quarterfinals of the Paris Women's Open with a 6-0, 6-2 victory over Natalya Medvedeva of Ukraine in 63 minutes.
Three other seeded players also breezed: No. 3 Conchita Martinez over qualifier Nancy Feber, 6-0, 6-0; No. 4 Jana Novotna over Noelle Van Lottum, 6-3, 6-0, and No. 7 Julie Halard over Nathalie Herreman, 6-1, 6-1. (AP) Lendl Advances: Fourth-seeded Ivan Lendl advanced to the quarterfinals of the $700,000 U.S.
Indoor tournament in Philadelphia.
Lendl defeated Jim Grabb, 6-4, 7-6 (7-3). (AP) GOLF Wind, Rain and Over Par  In a field of 157, only Jay Haas could break par in windy and rainy conditions in La Jolla, Calif., that turned yesterday's first round of the Buick Invitational into something approaching low comedy.
Haas put a birdie-birdie finish on a two-under-par 70 at the North course at Torrey Pines, the shorter and easier of the two courses used for the first two rounds.
Tied for second at 72 were Payne Stewart, Bobby Clampett, Greg Whisman and Kelly Gibson.
On the other end of the spectrum: John Daly had a 79, Ben Crenshaw 80 and Chip Beck, who had a 59 two years ago, went to an 81. (AP) BOXING Paramount Bout Canceled  Last night's scheduled bantamweight bout at the Paramount at Madison Square Garden between the No. 1 contender, Junior Jones of Brooklyn, and Enrique Jupiter of Mexico City was canceled after Jupiter failed his prefight physical.
Dr.
Barry Jordan, the medical director for the New York State Athletic Commission, said that a CAT-SCAN and a followup magnetic-resonance imaging test detected possible brain lesions that could pose a danger to Jupiter.


Health Candidate Reveals Tax Failure
Mary Jo Bane, the Social Services Commissioner for New York State, has disclosed to Federal officials that she failed to pay Social Security taxes for two household employees.
Ms.
Bane is being considered for appointment as assistant secretary at the Department of Health and Human Services.
Terrance McGrath, a spokesman for Ms.
Bane, said tonight that Administration officials had assured Ms.
Bane that her nonpayment of Social Security taxes would not derail her appointment.


Review/ Art; Exploring A Labyrinth Of Ambiguities
THE exhibition of Joseph Beuys's drawings, which opens Sunday at the Museum of Modern Art, is the largest and best survey in this country in more than a decade of the man who can fairly be called Europe's most influential postwar artist.
Still, an exhibition of Beuys's drawings, even one that encompasses installations and multimedia pieces as this one does, can go only so far.
Seven years after Beuys's death at 64, his art remains a maze of conundrums and enigmas.
And what show could do more than hint at the charismatic persona that became the essence of Beuys's work through the performances and political activities that made him world famous?
One of the canonical images of 20th-century art is surely the death-masklike image of Beuys himself: gaunt, hollow-eyed and hollow-cheeked, invariably dressed in vest and battered hat.
Shaman or charlatan?
For more than one generation of politically minded artists, and especially for his fellow German artists, Beuys has been regarded with a reverence matched in its ferocity only by the ridicule that has also been heaped upon him.
It was part of his openness of spirit that he reacted to mockery with disarming courtesy.
Among the many aspects difficult to reconcile about Beuys was that he was both a kind of megalomaniac and also virtually indifferent to art-world success in the traditional sense.


Then Again, It Could All Backfire
President Clinton's economic plan might not produce the burst of growth and new jobs he hoped for because of a phenomenon that economists love to dissect: unintended consequences.
On one hand, consumers could, as the President no doubt hopes, be cheered by his package of stimulus and deficit reduction measures and nudge the economy forward with increased spending.


CLINTON'S ECONOMIC PLAN: Ross Perot; Perot Sees Some Good Intentions But Too Much Old-Time Politics
Ross Perot said today that it was "completely unrealistic to expect meaningful cuts in Government spending from Congress" as long as the present political ground rules remain in force.
Speaking on the morning after President Clinton unveiled an economic program combining spending cuts and increased taxes in an effort to reduce the deficit, Mr.
Perot praised Mr.
Clinton for "assembling a team full of wonderful intentions." He also said he thought the President understood "the disaster of these huge deficits."


Boeing Will Cut One-Fifth Of Work Force in 18 Months
The Boeing Company, responding to a slump in orders from the world's struggling airlines, said yesterday that it would eliminate 28,000 jobs over the next 18 months.
Three weeks ago, the company said that declining aircraft orders would force a cutback in production of all its commercial planes and that significant job reductions would be made.
Yesterday it provided the details of the cuts, which were at the high end of analysts' estimates.


INSIDE
Dispute on Homeless Ruling
A ruling in a lawsuit aimed at forcing New York City to provide housing for discharged homeless mentally ill patients set off a furious dispute over the court's intention.
Page B1.
Barring H.I.V. at the Border
Opposing the President's position, the Senate voted to bar immigration of people infected with H.I.V.
Page A11.


U.N. Chief Presses Japan for Peacekeeping Troops
On the first visit of a United Nations Secretary General here in more than a decade, Boutros Boutros-Ghali spent the last week in Tokyo backing away from his earlier suggestions that Japan amend its "peace constitution," while at the same time pressing reluctant Japanese leaders to dispatch peacekeeping missions around the globe.
During several days of talks here, Mr.
Boutros-Ghali was an occasional target of protesters for his suggestion of a wide peacekeeping role for Japan, and he seemed to make little headway in getting the Government of Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa to commit itself to dispatching troops beyond the first small encampment in Cambodia, where they are building roads and bridges.


Break It Up, Keep It Moving


Turcotte Is Out for 3 More Weeks
A second set of X-rays has revealed that Rangers center Darren Turcotte suffered a hairline fracture in his left foot 11 days ago and will miss at least three more weeks of action.
Turcotte, the team's third-leading scorer with 46 points on 22 goals and 24 assists, injured the foot on Feb. 8, when the Rangers played the Devils at the Meadowlands, but the original set of X-rays showed no fracture.
In disclosing the fracture yesterday, the Rangers said Turcotte was expected to return sometime during the Rangers' five-game trip west, which opens against San Jose tomorrow night.
Now, Turcotte will not make the trip.


At the Bar; A probate lawyer turns impresario, reviving music so sweet to his client's ears.
Ask Julius Burger to describe what his lawyer did for him, and he responds as best a 95-year-old man, the victim of two strokes, can.
His eyes water, and as he reaches for an elusive encomium he pounds his cane on the floor in frustration.
Finally, the mot juste wends its way through the damaged neurological maze.
"Everything!" he exclaims. "Everything!"


Ruling Issued On Housing Mentally Ill
New York State's highest court issued a ruling yesterday in a suit aimed at forcing New York City to provide housing for homeless mentally ill patients discharged from city hospitals.
But the decision immediately set off a furious dispute between the city and advocates for the mentally ill over what the court intended.
Lawyers for the mentally ill said the ruling required the city to provide housing with supportive services to thousands of homeless mentally ill people released from city hospitals -- a burden that the city estimated would cost $300 million.


Grey Advertising Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that are scheduled to close soon: Closing This Weekend
"HENRY V," Theater for a New Audience at the Playhouse at St.
Clement's Church, 423 West 46th Street, Clinton.
Shakespeare's drama, featuring Mark Rylance and directed by Barry Kyle.
Through tomorrow.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow, 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 279-4200.
NEW YORK CITY BALLET, New York State Theater, Lincoln Center.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow, 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday, 1 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $11 to $55.
Information: (212) 870-5570.
"VOICES OF SCOTLAND," Grolier Club, 47 East 60th Street, Manhattan.
A collection of early manuscripts, including J. M. Barrie's "Peter Pan." Through tomorrow.
Hours: Today and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Information: (212) 838-6690.
"JO HA KYO," St.
Mark's Church, Second Avenue and 10th Street, East Village.
A collaboration by Yoshiko Chuma and the School of Hard Knocks and Tan Dun, a composer.
Part of the Danspace Project.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight through Sunday, 8:30 P.M.
Contribution: $10.
Information: (212) 674-8194.
"BORN GUILTY," American Jewish Theater, 307 West 26th Street, Chelsea.
A drama by Ari Roth about a Jewish journalist who interviews children of Nazi war criminals for a book he is writing; directed by Jack Gelber.
Through Sunday.
Performances: tonight and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 633-9797.
ANDRES SERRANO, Paula Cooper Gallery, 155 Wooster Street, SoHo.
"The Morgue: Cause of Death," a collection of photographs.
Through tomorrow.
Hours: Today and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 674-0766.
"VISIONES DEL PUEBLO: THE FOLK ART OF LATIN AMERICA," Museum of American Folk Art, 2 Lincoln Square, Columbus Avenue at 65th Street, Manhattan.
Artwork ranging from toys to masks from 17 Latin American countries.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Today through Sunday, 11:30 A.M. to 7:30 P.M.
Admission by contribution: $2.
Information: (212) 595-9533.
Closing Next Weekend
"ANNA CHRISTIE," Roundabout Theater, 1530 Broadway, at 45th Street.
Eugene O'Neill's drama, featuring Natasha Richardson, Liam Neeson, Rip Torn and Anne Meara; directed by David Leveaux.
Through Feb. 28.
Performances: Tuesday, Thursday and Friday, 8 P.M.; Wednesday and Saturday 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday, 2 P.M.
All performances are sold out, but returned tickets may be available two hours before the show.
Tickets: $45 and $50.
Information: (212) 869-8400.
"THE SISTERS ROSENSWEIG," Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater, Lincoln Center.
A comedy by Wendy Wasserstein about three sisters, featuring Jane Alexander, Christine Estabrook and Madeline Kahn.
Through Feb. 28.
Performances: Tuesday, Thursday and Friday at 8 P.M.; Wednesday and Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
All shows are sold out, but returned tickets may be available an hour before the show.
Tickets: $37.50.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
Reopens March 3 at the Barrymore Theater, 243 West 47th Street.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"FROM HARLEM TO HOLLYWOOD: AMERICAN RACE MOVEMENT 1912-1948," American Museum of the Moving Image, 35th Avenue at 36th Street, Astoria, Queens.
An exhibition of posters, photographs and oral histories.
Through Feb. 28.
Hours: Tuesday through Friday, noon to 4 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, noon to 6 P.M.
Admission: $5; $4 for the elderly; $2.50 for students.
Information: (718) 784-4520.
PRESIDENTS' MANUSCRIPTS, Pierpont Morgan Library, 29 East 36th Street, Murray Hill.
An exhibition of famous papers written or autographed by Abraham Lincoln and George Washington, including papers referring to Lincoln's 1858 "House Divided" speech about slavery and letters by Washington reflecting his thoughts during Revolution.
Through Feb. 28.
Hours: Tuesday through Saturday, 10:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Admission: $5; $3 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 685-0008.


How Senate Voted
Following is the 76-to-23 roll call by which the Senate voted today to prevent people infected with the AIDS virus from immigrating to the United States.
A "yes" vote was a vote to make the ban a Federal law; a "no" vote was a vote that would have allowed the Clinton Administration to lift the ban.


A Revised Cuomo Budget Reduces Cuts for Schools
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo released a revised budget today that gives an additional $78 million in aid to public schools, greatly reducing proposed cuts for dozens of middle-income school districts on Long Island and in Westchester County.
The revised budget still calls for a $52 million reduction in the $8.6 billion school aid package.
But by tinkering with his proposed school aid formula, Mr.
Cuomo softened, and in some cases eliminated, cuts for 255 districts.
Yonkers, for instance, which would have lost $536,841 under Mr.
Cuomo's original budget, would now gain $1.5 million in aid.


On My Mind; That $100,000 Ilk
Between President Clinton's first economic speech and his second, two days apart, something important turned up missing.
The best thing that could happen to Mr.
Clinton and his chances of becoming a successful President would be to keep it missing -- the divisive class-conflict tone that ran through parts of the first speech.


Mark Ellingson, 88, Educator Who Led Technology Institute
Dr.
Mark Ellingson, educator and president of Rochester Institute of Technology for 33 years, died at his home in Rochester on Feb. 12.
He was 88.
Complications from a stroke caused his death, William McKee, the spokesman for the institute, said.


Hunt Continues for Millions Missing From Cash Courier
A week after they seized the assets of a Long Island armored-car company, Federal law-enforcement officials are still trying to determine what happened to the estimated $40 million they say is missing.
While authorities say the company's owners, Robert J. and Susanna M. Scaretta, lost large sums at Atlantic City casinos, they doubt that their gambling debts could come close to the amount that is missing.


Auto Makers in Paint Deal
The Big Three auto makers formed a consortium today to share technology and costs for developing low-emission paint systems aimed at reducing air pollution at more than 50 automotive assembly plants in the United States.
The consortium will work to develop powder-based primer and clear-coat systems through the improvement of materials, equipment and operations, said John Young, chairman of the low-emission paint consortium who is an executive engineer at the Ford Motor Company.


CLINTON'S ECONOMIC PLAN: The President's Day; CLINTON CAMPAIGNS FOR TIGHTER BELTS
President Clinton and his top aides today began a cross-country public relations blitz to sell his economic proposals, with the President urging receptive spectators in St.
Louis to let their Congressmen know they will not be punished for making "tough, hard decisions."
Addressing several thousand people packed into the old passenger hall and stairways of Union Station here, the President said that giving elected lawmakers political breathing room on budget cuts and tax increases was the only way his program would get through Congress.


TV spots you read have become a popular production technique.
AS if it were not enough that consumers are expected to watch commercials, now they are being beseeched to read them as well.
The imaginative use of typography has become one of the most popular production techniques in television advertising.
In spot after spot sponsored by large marketers like A.T.&amp; T., Citibank, Coca-Cola, Jaguar, Pepsi-Cola and Subaru of America, words seem to obey the unspoken commands of hyperactive lexicographers by rolling, floating, scrolling, dissolving, shrinking, expanding, leaping and hopping their way up, down and across the screen.


Michael Foods (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Art in Review
Roman Vishniac International Center of Photography Midtown  1133 Avenue of the Americas, at 43d Street  Through April 18
When Roman Vishniac (1897-1990) photographed in the Jewish communities of Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary at the end of the 1930's, he cannot have imagined the horrors that would soon obliterate those settlements and their inhabitants.
But the coming of the Holocaust gave Vishniac's pictures great historical importance, and deep poignance, as visual records of a rich and vanished culture.


Sports of The Times; The Coaches Get Some Sympathy
HEARD Dick Vitale squawking on the tube the other night, screaming "Shame, shame," at the athletic director of the University of California, and to my utmost chagrin, I found myself partly agreeing with Vitale.
At the risk of sounding facetious, I, too, have a few reservations about Robert Bockrath's firing Lou Campanelli as coach smack in the middle of the basketball season.
We didn't used to write "fired" in The New York Times, but times have changed, and boy, did Bockrath fire Campanelli.
A classic firing.
Don't like what you're doing, my man.
You're outta here.


Musicians' Workshop Planned at Carnegie
Sir Georg Solti, the music director laureate of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, and Judith Arron, the executive director of Carnegie Hall, announced yesterday that Sir Georg would lead a two-week Professional Training Workshop at the hall June 8-22, 1994.
The workshop, one of a series of educational programs Carnegie has been presenting, is expected to cost about $500,000, Ms.
Arron said, and will include two public performances.
The orchestra for the project is to include 80 musicians between the ages of 18 and 28, who are to be selected by audition, as well as principal players drawn from the Boston, Cleveland and Philadelphia Orchestras and the Los Angeles Philharmonic.
The New York Philharmonic is not represented because it will be on tour during the workshop.


Pirates Focus on Reality Instead of Expectations
As the Seton Hall Pirates attempted to navigate through an increasingly unsatisfying season, having taken on the high expectations of others as their own, Terry Dehere began to find himself asking a disheartening question: When is the hard work going to pay off?
It is a question that can cause players and teams to come apart.
As the Pirates approach the grind of tournament play, the thoughts had crept into his mind.


Anti-Bias Demonstration Elicits an Apology From Marky Mark


People
*
Andrew S. Pakula was named senior vice president and director of new business at Bozell Worldwide, New York, succeeding Susan Scott, who left.
Mr.
Pakula previously held the same position at Deutsch/Dworin Inc., New York. *
Cleve S. Langton, senior vice president for business development at DDB Needham New York, was promoted to the new position of executive vice president and director of multinational client and business development worldwide.


Cosby Returning to NBC
NBC will bring back its biggest star of the 1980's, Bill Cosby, in a new hourlong series to start in 1994, the network announced yesterday.
Mr.
Cosby, whose comedy series "The Cosby Show" helped take NBC from third place to first in the ratings in the mid-1980's, will try to do the same thing again for the network, which has seen its ratings plunge.


McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CLINTON'S ECONOMIC PLAN: Defining the Terms; Surtax: Whatever Its Name, It Still Equals 39.6% Tax Rate
Although Clinton Administration officials have long referred to it as a "millionaires' surtax," the proposed 10 percent surtax on high-income households would in effect establish a new top tax rate.
It would affect Americans with taxable incomes of $250,000 or more (a figure that translates into adjusted gross income of $305,000 or more).
In practice, the surtax would create a new top tax rate of 39.6 percent.


DDB Needham Gets 2 New Assignments
DDB Needham Worldwide Inc. has been awarded two new international assignments.
The Budget Rent A Car Corporation in Lisle, Ill., selected the agency to handle its international advertising and marketing accounts in Europe, the Middle East, Africa, Australia and the Asia-Pacific region.
The accounts, with combined billings estimated at $18 million, were previously divided among various local agencies.
DDB Needham handles Budget's American account through its Tracy-Locke unit in Dallas.


Tax Provision on Donations Could Be a Boon to Museums
Buried in the sweeping economic plan outlined by President Clinton on Wednesday is a provision on tax deductions for charitable gifts that would produce far-reaching benefits for museums, universities, conservation groups and other nonprofit organizations.
The provision, by eliminating a measure in the 1986 Tax Reform Act, would make all major gifts to nonprofit organizations fully deductible at current market value rather than at the purchase price, which is nearly always much lower.
This would encourage art collectors, for example, to donate paintings to museums rather than holding onto them or selling them on the open market.
The Cost in Lost Revenue
The proposal would cost the Federal Government about $70 million a year in lost revenue, the Treasury Department estimated in a document released yesterday.


Restaurants
Arizona 206 could be an easy place to dislike.
It is small, overcrowded and loud, with a bar that never has an empty stool and a hostess who has the harried expression of an Alamo defender.
Of course, scores of Manhattan restaurants fit that description.
But few have regional American food as dazzling as this place.
Considering the intricacy of its Southwestern cuisine, it is remarkable how Arizona 206 has managed to maintain such a high level of food and service over seven years (and with four chefs).
Six months ago, the reins were turned over to 26-year-old David Walzog, a veteran of Gotham Bar and Grill in Manhattan and Red Sage, a Southwestern-style restaurant in Washington.
Mr.
Walzog is more daring and iconographic in style than his predecessors, and he certainly runs the palate through a chili gantlet.
It is also evident that his flavor combinations are devised with intelligence and care.


Will Mullahs Rescind Rushdie Death Edict?
To the Editor:
Re "A 4-Year Death Sentence, and Counting" by Salman Rushdie (Op-Ed, Feb. 7): Only by understanding the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's alleged authority to issue his death fatwa against the author of "The Satanic Verses" can we comprehend the prospects of rescinding the edict.


NBC and the Lawyers
To the Editor:
Re "NBC, Hiding Behind the Lawyers" (editorial, Feb. 17), on the fiery collision of General Motors pickup trucks shown on "Dateline NBC":


Senate Opposes Immigration Of People With AIDS Virus
In a sharp rebuff to President Clinton, the Senate voted overwhelmingly today to stop the Administration from allowing the immigration of people infected with the virus that causes AIDS.
Although the Senate action has little chance of becoming law, the 76-to-23 vote, in which 34 Democrats voted against the President, illustrated both the lingering discomfort in the Senate over AIDS and immigration issues and the new President's lack of control over the Senate.
It could foreshadow trouble as Mr.
Clinton moves beyond economic issues to pursue his social agenda, which includes support for actions long advocated by homosexual-rights groups.


U.S. and Allies Discuss Sanctions To Force Mobutu to Yield Power
In the aftermath of the rioting and looting this month that claimed hundreds of lives in Zaire, the United States, France and Belgium are considering political and economic sanctions against Zaire and its leader, Mobutu Sese Seko, Western diplomats said today.
Such a move would put pressure on President Mobutu, who has ruled for 28 years, to hand over real power to an interim government.


Red Sox Sign Russell
The Boston Red Sox, who had the worst save percentage in the American League last season, signed free-agent relief pitcher Jeff Russell to a one-year deal yesterday and hope to make him their stopper.
Russell, a 31-year-old right-hander traded from Texas to Oakland last August, made eight scoreless relief appearances for the Athletics in their drive for the American League West title last season.


Holyfield-Bowe Gets Closer
One heavyweight title bout came a step closer to reality yesterday, but the prospects for another one faltered.
As the undisputed former champion, Evander Holyfield, formed a unified promotion team to negotiate a rematch with the two-thirds champion, Riddick Bowe, a move by Don King was blamed for stalling the prospective bout between the one-third champion, Lennox Lewis, and Tony Tucker.
Holyfield cleared the way for a possible pay-per-view rematch for his World Boxing Association and International Boxing Federation titles in June by patching things up with his former promoter, Dan Duva.
Duva announced that he and Holyfield's new promoter, the rapper Hammer, would negotiate as a team.


New Dioxin Tests Delay Dredging of Newark Bay
The prospect of dredging the container-port terminal in Newark Bay was further delayed today, after the Army Corps of Engineers directed port officials to conduct new sediment tests for dioxin.
The annual dredging of ship berths has been delayed for almost three years as the Corps and the Environmental Protection Agency have sought to determine whether the dioxin-tainted sediment was safe enough for disposal at an ocean dump site near a major fishing ground off Sandy Hook, N.J.


Prosecutor Continues Assault On Tactics in Glen Ridge Case
A prosecutor in the Glen Ridge sex assault trial today continued to impugn the defense and solicit sympathy for the mildly retarded young woman the state contends was assaulted by four schoolmates nearly four years ago.
As he did on Wednesday when he began his closing argument, Glenn D. Goldberg drew sarcastic contrasts between comments that defense lawyers made during the trial and what he at one point called the "rape" of the young woman with a bat and a broom handle on March 1, 1989.
He also offered the jury images, drawn from testimony by prosecution witnesses, of the young woman's mental disability, vulnerability and her eagerness to win friends.


Islanders Fret, Fritter, Fail to Take 4th Place
After losing by 4-2 to the St.
Louis Blues at Nassau Coliseum tonight, the Islanders had much to mutter about.
They fretted about Brett Hull's fluky goal that bounced in off the glass and then the backside of their goalie, Mark Fitzpatrick.
They kicked themselves over yielding a tie-breaking goal to Ron Sutter with 1 minute 56 seconds to go in the third period and an empty-netter to Jeff Brown in the game's final second.


Coke Promotes 2 Executives, Stirring Talk of Succession
The Coca-Cola Company named two senior vice presidents yesterday, creating apparent front-runners for the job of chief executive.
Coca-Cola said the executives, John Hunter and M. Douglas Ivester, would report directly to Roberto C. Goizueta, the chairman and chief executive, who is 61.


CLINTON'S ECONOMIC PLAN: The Overview; Battle Lines Begin to Form on Clinton Economic Plan
The political debate over the budget began in earnest today as Republicans said President Clinton wanted to raise taxes without reducing Government spending enough and the President defended his program for improving the economy.
The debate over the President's program, on Capitol Hill and around the country, was fueled by new figures published by the White House showing that almost all the deficit reduction proposed for the next two years in the package Mr.
Clinton outlined Wednesday would come from tax increases, with almost none from spending cuts.


CLINTON'S ECONOMIC PLAN: In the Region; Tax Package Seen as Net Gain for New York Area
President Clinton's fiscal program would be a net plus for the New York metropolitan region, fiscal and energy policy analysts say.
And that would be a big change for a part of the country that has grown accustomed, under recent Republican Administrations, to feeling neglected by Federal taxing and spending policies.
The energy tax will bite less deeply here because households and businesses are more energy efficient than in the rest of the country, and the region's industries are favored by the President's economic stimulus program.
Where the region would pay is in income tax increases, because household wealth is greater than average.


DDB Needham Gets 2 New Assignments
DDB Needham Worldwide Inc. has been awarded two new international assignments.
The Budget Rent A Car Corporation in Lisle, Ill., selected the agency to handle its international advertising and marketing accounts in Europe, the Middle East, Africa, Australia and the Asia-Pacific region.
The accounts, with combined billings estimated at $18 million, were previously divided among various local agencies.
DDB Needham handles Budget's American account through its Tracy-Locke unit in Dallas.


Sounds Around Town
Witherspoon Rejuvenated
Jimmy Witherspoon, Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street, Manhattan, (212) 533-7902.
The career of the blues singer Jimmy Witherspoon seemed finished a few years ago after an operation for throat cancer left him only a husky ghost of his richly colored voice.
But he has regained his earlier vocal powers, even adding an octave to his range.
Next week he is to receive a $15,000 Lifetime Achievement award from the Rhythm-and-Blues Foundation; this weekend, he gives New York a sample of his rejuvenated voice.
Backed by a trio led by the pianist Bross Townsend, with John Moody on bass and Michael Carvin at the drums, he will sing at Fat Tuesday's tonight and tomorrow night at 8, 10 and midnight, and on Sunday at 8 and 10 P.M.
There is a $20 cover charge and a $10 minimum.
Lee Konitz's Path
Lee Konitz Duo, Tishman Auditorium, the New School, 66 West 12th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 229-5620.
The alto saxophonist Lee Konitz has followed his own personal way through jazz since the mid-1940's, sometimes paralleling current trends, sometimes taking off in new directions.
In the 40's he was a follower of Lennie Tristano when most young alto saxophonists were in the Charlie Parker camp.
He was in Miles Davis's "Birth of the Cool" group and later in Stan Kenton's big, tumultuous band.
In the years since, he has been the essential flavoring in a variety of small groups.
Tonight, in one of his infrequent New York appearances, he will open this season's Jazz at 6 series, playing duets with the pianist Peggy Stern.
Tickets for the concert, which begins at 6 P.M., are $10 at the door.
McKenna on the Green
Dave McKenna, Tavern on the Green, Central Park West at 67th Street, Manhattan (212) 873-3200.
The rumbling, rolling sound of Dave McKenna's piano is being heard in the Tavern on the Green's Chestnut Room for the first time.
The repertory is Mr.
McKenna's usual mix of classic songs of the 1920's, 30's and 40's, but the Tavern's Hamburg Steinway Model D Concert Grand adds a special glow to his distinctive way of developing the songs.
He comes to the piano tonight and tomorrow night at 8:30, 10:30 and 12:30, and on Sunday at 8:30 and 10:30 P.M.
The music charge is $15 tonight and tomorrow, $10 on Sunday, with no minimum.


Steinbrenner Is Itching to Bat
As pitchers and catchers began to filter into the Yankee training camp yesterday in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., George Steinbrenner, the principal owner, said he liked the long-distance look of his club.
"While it cost me a lot of money, we have a very good team," Steinbrenner said, in a phone interview from Tampa, Fla.
"Joe Molloy did a very nice job. For being a basketball coach one year, then running a baseball team the next year, I'm very proud of my son-in-law."


Court Upholds Law Closing L.I. Landfills
Three years after Long Island's East End towns defied a state law ordering them to close their landfills, New York State's highest court held today that the law is constitutional and that the landfills must indeed close.
The ruling by the Court of Appeals represented a major victory for the state in a long-running feud.
The three towns have been holdouts in the state's campaign to force Long Island's local governments to close their landfills to protect the island's fragile underground water supply.


Art in Review
Charles LeDray  Tom Cugliani Gallery  40 Wooster Street  SoHo  Through Feb. 27
Childhood is a big subject in contemporary art these days and clothing, used in any number of ways, is not exactly scarce either.
Nonetheless, Charles LeDray's miniature handmade garments manage to stand out, both for their understated, yet on-target, emotional impact and for their homey, unfailingly touching sense of handicraft.


CLINTON'S ECONOMIC PLAN: New Spending; The President's Fine Print Asks Fundamental Change
Embedded in the fine print of President Clinton's budget request are fundamental changes in Federal policy: less money for the military, more aid for children, greater emphasis on the prevention of disease, and a new view of environmental protection as a source of jobs, not a drag on the economy.
Whereas in January 1992 President Bush anticipated a yearly Pentagon budget of $289 billion by 1997, Mr.
Clinton's plan calls for cutting military spending to $249 billion in that year, mainly by cutting troop levels and outlays for the Star Wars antimissile defense program.


U.S. Obtains 2 Guilty Pleas In $8 Million Brooklyn Theft
Two of the four men accused of stealing $8.2 million from a Brooklyn armored-car company in December have pleaded guilty, the Federal authorities said last night.
Their pleas came amid indications that the men would testify against the other two.
One man who pleaded guilty, Joseph Jesus James, 24, of Bethpage, L.I., helped investigators to break the case on Feb. 3, officials of the Federal Bureau of Investigation have said.
The F.B.I. has said Mr.
James admitted taking part, implicated the others and lead agents to a vacant Brooklyn apartment where $8 million of the stolen money had been hidden.
Mr.
James pleaded guilty on Tuesday.


After Fall From Grace, Maradona Starts Over
"Ole, ole, ole, ole, Dieeego, Dieeego," shouted the crowd every time he touched the ball.
"Diego Is Silver," "Thank You, Diego," read the banners at the River Plate stadium, named for the muddy river it sits next to.
Amid raucous chanting, endless confetti, firecrackers and waves of stomping by more than 70,000 fans that shook the the bleachers, Argentina welcomed its prodigal soccer star, Diego Armando Maradona, back to center stage tonight as the Argentine national team played Brazil to a 1-1 tie.


Part of Woman's H.I.V. Suit Against Johnson Dismissed
A Federal judge in Kalamazoo, Mich., yesterday dismissed part of a lawsuit filed against MAGIC JOHNSON by a Lansing woman who says he infected her with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
The lawsuit, filed in October by a woman referred to in court documents only as Jane Doe, alleges that Johnson either knew he was infected or should have told her he was at high risk for having H.I.V. when the two had sex in June 1990.


Miscellany
Promotion and Marketing Executives, Los Angeles, will change its name, pending membership approval, to Promotion and Marketing Executives in the Electronic Media.
James Chabin, the association's president, said the change reflected the influence of technologies like cable television.


South Bronx Slaying Prompts Neighborhood Vigil


CLINTON'S ECONOMIC PLAN: The Cabinet; Pitching Clinton Program, the Cabinet Hits the Road to Talk of Better Times
Members of President Clinton's Cabinet were deployed around the country today to plead for passage of his economic-recovery package, mixing promises of better times with warnings that they would not come soon.
"There will be no big turnaround the first year," Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen told students at a high school auditorium here.
"That's not going to happen. It is too complex a problem." But Mr.
Bentsen, citing job-training programs and the youth service component of the President's program, pledged to the students, "We're investing in you."


That's Why Staten Islanders Want to Secede
To the Editor:
As a member of both the Charter Commission for Staten Island and the New York State Assembly representing New York City's smallest borough, I must respond to "Secessionist Turmoil"(editorial, Feb. 7).


Islanders Fret, Fritter, Fail to Take 4th Place
After losing by 4-2 to the St.
Louis Blues at Nassau Coliseum tonight, the Islanders had much to mutter about.
They fretted about Brett Hull's fluky goal that bounced in off the glass and then the backside of their goalie, Mark Fitzpatrick.
They kicked themselves over yielding a tie-breaking goal to Ron Sutter with 1 minute 56 seconds to go in the third period and an empty-netter to Jeff Brown in the game's final second.


Restaurants
Arizona 206 could be an easy place to dislike.
It is small, overcrowded and loud, with a bar that never has an empty stool and a hostess who has the harried expression of an Alamo defender.
Of course, scores of Manhattan restaurants fit that description.
But few have regional American food as dazzling as this place.
Considering the intricacy of its Southwestern cuisine, it is remarkable how Arizona 206 has managed to maintain such a high level of food and service over seven years (and with four chefs).
Six months ago, the reins were turned over to 26-year-old David Walzog, a veteran of Gotham Bar and Grill in Manhattan and Red Sage, a Southwestern-style restaurant in Washington.
Mr.
Walzog is more daring and iconographic in style than his predecessors, and he certainly runs the palate through a chili gantlet.
It is also evident that his flavor combinations are devised with intelligence and care.


Get the Cancerous Pesticides Out of Our Food; Time for Irradiation
To the Editor:
Re "Tainted Hamburger Raises Doubts on Meat Safety" (news article, Jan. 27):


Review/Television; The Ordeals of the Beirut Hostages And Those Who Tried to Free Them
Using the combination of journalistic investigation and dramatization that worked so effectively in recent projects like "Dead Ahead: The Exxon Valdez Disaster," HBO Showcase and Granada Television of Britain are now offering "Hostages," the harrowing story of several civilians taken hostage in Lebanon between 1985 and 1987 and held for four years or more.
The docudrama has its American premiere on HBO at 8 P.M. tomorrow.
Much of the film focuses on the plights of John McCarthy (Colin Firth), a British television correspondent, and Brian Keenan (Ciaran Hinds), an Irish teacher of English.
Early on, they find themselves together in a dingy cell, watched closely by their volatile captors and struggling to devise survival techniques.
A sense of humor proves crucial. (Part of their experience is fictionalized in the powerful play "Someone Who'll Watch Over Me," currently on Broadway.)


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  ALERT ON DAY CARE WENT UNHEARD
Less than a month ago, police officers alerted the New York State's child abuse phone line about an unlicensed day-care center in a house in Hollis, Queens, a police spokesman said.
The officers questioned whether the 82-year-old woman who ran the center was too old to provide capable care.
But city and state officials said that they had no record of the home until two boys died in the basement.
B3.
Many parents depended on 'Mommy Brown" for inexpensive child care. B3.
REPORT WARNS OF CAR-POUND VANDALISM
Having a car towed to a city pound is not only one of the most hated experiences for a New York City motorist, it can also place a car in danger of damage, a report says.
B3.
CLINTON PLAN'S BENEFITS FOR NEW YORK
President Clinton's fiscal program would be a net plus for the New York City metropolitan region, fiscal and energy policy analysts say.
And that would be a big change for a part of the country accustomed to feeling neglected by Federal taxing and spending policies.
A17.
A benefit for the Actors Studio with Gay Talese and Susan Sontag brings longtime opponents Gore Vidal and Norman Mailer together.
B2.
Two men accused of stealing $8.2 million from a Brooklyn armored-car company in December plead guilty.
B3.
REGION
REGAN TO LEAVE AS COMPTROLLER
State Comptroller Edward V. Regan, the top-ranking Republican in New York State government, announced that he was resigning the job he has held since 1979 to become president of an economics institute at Bard College.
Mr.
Regan's surprising announcement set off a whirl of speculation about whom the Legislature would select to replace him.
A1.
Regan's mixed legacy. B4.
CUOMO REDUCES BUDGET CUTS TO SCHOOLS
Governor Cuomo released a revised budget that gives an additional $78 million in aid to public schools, greatly reducing proposed cuts for dozens of middle-income school districts in Long Island and Westchester.
B5.
L.I. LANDFILLS ORDERED CLOSED
Three years after several towns on Long Island -- Riverhead, Southold and East Hampton -- defied a state law ordering them to close their landfills, New York State's highest court held that the law is constitutional and that the landfills must indeed close.
B5.
ATTACK ON SEX-CASE DEFENSE CONTINUES
A prosecutor in the Glen Ridge, N.J, sex assault trial continued to impugn the defense and solicit sympathy for the mildly retarded young woman at the center of the case.
B5.
Whereabouts of $40 million missing from a L.I. cash courier is still unknown.
B5.
Governor Weicker vetoes a bill offering tax-relief to the middle class.
B6.
Dioxin tests delay dredging of Newark Bay. B4.
Nassau County grapples with the troubling case of 255 faulty mammograms. B6.
Our Towns by Evelyn Nieves B6
Chronicle B6


CLINTON'S ECONOMIC PLAN: The Deficit; Another Look at the Figures: A Smaller Trim in the Deficit
The deficit reduction proposed by President Clinton on Wednesday night would total $325 billion over the next four years, not nearly $500 billion, as The New York Times and some other news organizations reported today.
This became clear in more complete budget tables issued today by the Administration.
The $500 billion figure -- actually $493 billion -- represents the total amount of tax increases and specific spending cuts that Mr.
Clinton proposed.
It was emphasized in documents the White House handed out Wednesday.
But it does not take account of $169 billion in tax cuts and new Government spending Mr.
Clinton wants for programs he favors.


CLINTON'S ECONOMIC PLAN: The Space Program; Space Station, Trimming Back, Survives the Ax
The space agency said late yesterday that its planned 350-foot-long space station would be slimmed down at President Clinton's request to help cut the nation's budget deficit.
Daniel S. Goldin, Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, said in a brief statement that the station would survive in a leaner form after a planning shake-up.


CHRONICLE
When WOLFGANG PUCK, the chef, was asked to open a branch of his Spago restaurant in Las Vegas a year and a half ago, he said yes, but with one condition that had nothing to do with his California cuisine.
"I love boxing, so I told the developer that the only way I'm ever going to open in Las Vegas is if I can get to every fight with free ringside tickets," Mr.
Puck said in a telephone interview from Los Angeles the other day.
"And he said yes."


Dixie Yarns (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Don't Let Community Policing Down
New York City's "Safe Streets, Safe City" program declared in 1990 that "The Police Department will adopt community policing as its dominant operational philosophy. . . ." But the program drags because of inadequate training to change the way officers at all levels think about their jobs.
Community policing seeks to change the reactive nature of traditional patrol, in which radio cars are dispatched when victims call 911.
Police find themselves rushing to deal with the aftermath of crime while doing little to prevent it from happening in the first place.


Trenton Unveils Tougher Laws Against Car Theft
In a proposal that would greatly toughen both the juvenile code and motor-vehicle criminal laws, a legislative task force recommended a set of laws today against crimes involving a vehicle that would take the offenses out of juvenile court, include boot camps and other penalties for first-time offenders, no matter how young, and would allow prison sentences of up to 10 years for joyriding or eluding a police officer.


OPERA RECORDS: A COLLECTOR'S VALHALLA
THIS is not a pretty story.
It begins one Christmas morning, when I was 6 years old and my paternal grandmother's boyfriend, "Uncle" Leo, sat on and broke my hours-old shellac recording of "Tubby the Tuba." It was my first record, and I had played it only once.
I cried all day and vowed then and there to collect as many records as I could and guard them with my life.
Never again would my peace of mind and ease of soul be forfeit to another human being.
Collecting the records was only a matter of money.
As a child, I was fully conversant with the concept of the layaway plan.
I took after-school jobs at the public library shelving books and at the Robin Hood Cafeteria carrying trays to ransom my copies of "The Little Engine That Could" and "Hansel and Gretel" from the local record shop.
Dickens would have wept.


U.S. AWAITS SIGNAL ON MIDEAST TALKS
The Clinton Administration will make the Middle East a priority only if there is a commitment on all sides to resuscitate peace talks, reporters traveling with Secretary of State Warren Christopher were told today.
Mr.
Christopher intends to use his first foreign visit as Secretary of State to determine how serious the parties are before committing the Administration to a time-consuming process that could detract from other foreign policy issues and yet yield no results.


A Guide to the Coverage
DETAILS OF THE PROGRAM  THE OVERVIEW In the face of Republican criticism, President Clinton began an energetic defense of his economic package.
A1


Mandela's Group Accepts 5 Years of Power-Sharing
The African National Congress subdued its angry militant wing today and approved a plan to let minority parties share in governing the country for five years after the end of white monopoly rule.
The agreement, which takes South Africa a major step closer to its first post-apartheid government, creates the prospect that President F. W. de Klerk's National Party would stay on as a junior partner in running the country until near the end of the century.


When the President Comes to Hyde Park; Selling a Plan in the Town Where the Spirit of Roosevelt Is Everywhere
Verne Newton, director of the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library here, received the strangest phone call at his home last Sunday afternoon.
It was from a guard at the library who said that some New York Telephone technicians were at the front gate and needed permission to install 20 new phone lines there.
Immediately.
To the amazement of the guard, and of Mr.
Newton, the President of the United States was planning to come to town on Friday to sell his economic plan.


15 Cellular Companies In U.S.-Canada Alliance
Hoping to fend off looming competition, 15 big cellular phone companies announced an alliance covering most of the United States and Canada that will make it easier for people to make and receive calls between different cities.
The American participants include most of the regional Bell companies and the GTE Corporation and the Centel Corporation, two big independent telephone companies.
On the Canadian side is Mobility Canada, a consortium of cellular companies that offer service in most Canadian cities.
The only Bell company not taking part is the Southwestern Bell Corporation, based in St.
Louis.


Krystal Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3


Art in Review
Gary Stephan  Mary Boone Gallery  417 West Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 27
Gary Stephan's conservative abstract paintings are sometimes vacuous, sometimes redeemed by visual wit and elegance of execution.
The five new canvases in this small show are in the latter category.
In these tall airy rectangles, Mr.
Stephan's svelte geometric shapes -- the ellipses, curved dumbbells and pointy hexagons that have been his staples for some time now -- delicately jostle one another on high splindly platforms.
They suggest weightless acrobats waiting for the trapeze to swing their way again.
Sometimes the platforms break, and both their shattered parts and the shapes fall through space.


Mexican Hero vs. American Mouth, Promoted by Guess Who
For an uncertain while on Saturday night, Julio Cesar Chavez has a chance to live a sort of Mexican dream: he can pummel a loud, hostile gringo and get paid for it.
Chavez's challenger for the World Boxing Council superlightweight title, Greg Haugen of Henderson, Nev., has been telling anyone who will listen that he really doesn't hate Mexicans, that he's not a racist, that he never said anything nasty about Chavez's mother.


Haitian Hijacks a Missionary Plane to Miami
A plane belonging to an American missionary organization was hijacked in Haiti today and ordered to fly with its 9 passengers to Miami, where the hijacker immediately surrendered to a SWAT team.
Just before 6:20 P.M., the plane landed at Miami International Airport and taxied to a special area, called the penalty box, reserved for hijacking cases.
F.B.I. agents quickly surrounded the aircraft and subdued and handcuffed the hijacker, who did not seem to resist.


Toro Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Soft Snow Is Hard On Skiers In Downhill
A downhill course more characteristic of a sled-dog race than a national Alpine championship made the going tough today for some of North America's best skiers.
But World Cup skiers still rose to the top when it came time for medals.
The course here on Mary Jane Mountain was a relatively easy 1.1-mile run with flat terrain and soft snow.
It is the kind of run geared for the regional skiers who come here hoping to make a name for themselves.


For Children
'Through Sisters' Eyes'  'Children's Books Illustrated by African-American Women Artists'  Newark Museum  49 Washington Street  (201) 596-6550  Recommended ages: 7 and up  Through Feb. 28
When Jan Spivey Gilchrist receives a manuscript, she reads it several times before deciding which medium -- gouache, pencil or pastel -- she will use to illustrate the book.
Her work is part of a small but engaging show of art by 11 black women who illustrate children's books.


After Fire Parents Tells Of Making A Choice
Under the grandmotherly gaze of a woman they called Mommy Brown, children sang, danced and ate home-cooked meals of fried chicken and spaghetti inside a one-story brick home in Hollis, Queens, then went home with their parents at the end of the workday.
In a working-class community where families scrape by on two incomes, Eleta Brown, 82, quietly provided inexpensive but unlicensed day care in her home at 183-27 Dunlop Avenue, as neighbors came to view her as something of a surrogate grandmother.


The Devil and the Commander
The price of admission -- $500 to $1,000 -- was steep, but for the glit-lit crowd that gathered in Weill Recital Hall at Carnegie Hall earlier this week, there was one moment, at least, that was worth it.
There, on opposite sides of the stage, were those old literary jousters, Gore Vidal and Norman Mailer, regarding each other warily, in the midst of a Shavian battle of wits, barely seeming to notice Gay Talese and Susan Sontag standing between them.
After contemplating a remark of Mr.
Mailer's, Mr.
Vidal, resplendent in a dark suit and wine-red vest, crossed to his rival in a majestic saunter and clasped one of Mr.
Mailer's hands with his own two.


Sounds Around Town
Sharrock's Brew
Sonny Sharrock Band, the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, East Village, (212) 219-3055.
Countless Fender-wielding flash masters make claims to being kings of rock guitar, but Sonny Sharrock bears the true mark of a royal.
A suave synthesist of Hendrix-style blues and jazz shot through with heavy metal, Sharrock concocts his musical brew with consummate elegance.
His band cooks the way a fusion group should, if that term referred to music that's inspired and adventurous, and never compromised.
Shows are Saturday at 8 P.M. and midnight.
Tickets are $10, available through Ticketmaster or at the door.
Words and Music
Composers' Forum 57th-Anniversary Benefit, Dia Center for the Arts, 155 Mercer Street, SoHo, (212) 334-0216.
Throughout history, music and words have engaged in an amorous wrestling match.
Poets take inspiration from the violin's cry, while composers build mansions to house the work of bards.
In songs, whether in rock or opera, words and music alchemically blend to create an entirely new expression.
The Composers' Forum 57th-Anniversary Benefit celebrates this union with an afternoon of the spoken word by writers and musicians.
Participants include Susan Sontag, whose latest novel, "The Volcano Lover," explores the pleasures and costs of estheticism; Lou Reed, the guitarist, singer and songwriter, who personifies New York rock-and-roll; Thulani Davis, the novelist, librettist and poet of the black experience, and Robert Ashley, the composer whose rebellious experiments have helped revitalize opera.
Saturday from 4 to 6 P.M.
Tickets: $50 reserved; $20 general admission.
Berry at the Ritz
Chuck Berry, the Ritz, 254 West 54th Street, Manhattan, (212) 541-8900.
Like the Washington Monument or the Grand Canyon, a Chuck Berry show is something every American knows he or she should get around to seeing some day.
Now is as good a time as any, especially since Mr.
Berry, unlike those inanimate wonders, won't be around forever.
He's arrogant; he plays short sets; he acts as if he doesn't care.
But if you have any respect for rock-and-roll, Chuck Berry is a requirement.
The A-Bones and Lou Diamond Phillips and the Pipefitters open.
The show begins tomorrow at 9 P.M.
Tickets: $20 in advance; $23 at the door; $25 for reserved seats.


Agencies Were Unaware Of Center Where 2 Died
Less than a month ago, police officers in New York City called the state's child abuse phone line about an unlicensed day-care center in a row house in Queens, a police spokesman said yesterday.
The officers, who had responded to a domestic dispute at the house, were concerned that the 82-year-old woman who ran the center might be too old to provide capable care.
But the officers' concerns did not reach officials in the state or city agencies that regulate day care, and no action was taken.
Officials from the city's Department of Health and the state's Department of Social Services said yesterday that they were unaware of the existence of the center on Dunlop Avenue in Hollis until Wednesday afternoon, when thick smoke from a flash fire in the basement of the house suffocated two boys, 7 and 4 years old, within minutes.


Halt in Aid Leaves Bosnians Stunned, and Hungry
Relief officials began to mothball their operations across Bosnia today after the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees suspended deliveries of most of the food, medicine and winter survival supplies in this battered country.
By the weekend most deliveries, which have totaled about 30,000 tons a month, are expected to stop, leaving an estimated 1.6 million recipients cut off.


Comptroller Resigns Albany Post To Head Institute at Bard College
State Comptroller Edward V. Regan, the top-ranking Republican in state government, announced today that he was resigning the job he has held since 1979 to become president of an economics institute at Bard College.
Mr.
Regan's announcement stunned his staff and the state's political establishment, setting off a whirl of speculation about whom the Legislature would select to replace him.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8  A.N.C.
BACKS POWER-SHARING  The African National Congress subdued its militants and approved a plan to let minority parties share in governing the country for five years after the end of white rule.
A1  SANCTIONS ON ZAIRE DISCUSSED  The U.S., France and Belgium are considering political and economic sanctions against Zaire to pressure President Mobutu Sese Seko to yield power.
A2


Lawyers as Entertainers (Out of the Courtroom)
Just as the poet Wallace Stevens never made it into the textbooks for his work as an insurance lawyer, Robert Gurland has not attracted wide attention as a commercial litigator.
He has as a jazz vocalist, though.
In addition to performing on stage with musicians as diverse as the Kinks and P. D. Q. Bach, he has "done entire horn sections on albums," he said.
That is to say he has the unusual talent of making his voice sound like a trumpet.


R and N Lines Disrupted
Subway service on the R and N Lines was suspended for about 30 minutes last night when an unidentified man apparently slipped off a platform at the Times Square Station about 11 P.M. and fell to his death beneath the wheels of a southbound R Local headed for Fort Hamilton in Brooklyn, the transit police reported.
Officer Anthony Sepulveda, a transit police spokesman, said that witnesses told investigators that the man apparently lost his footing and tumbled onto the tracks.


Museum Set to Lose Indian Treasure
For years, Audrey Stevens, the curator of a small one-room museum in the town library here, treasured the museum's collection of Indian artistry: an array of beaded shirts and purses, suede leggings, wooden pipes and braided locks of human hair.
The fact that the items had been stripped from the bodies of Indians killed in the massacre at Wounded Knee in 1890 escaped her.
"I always thought of them as artworks," she said.
"I'm sorry I didn't realize the significance of these things."


Today's TV Listings
Television and radio news, listings and advertising appear today on pages B16-17.


Irwin Altman, 66, Educator, Dies; Led High-Scoring School District
Irwin M. Altman, the superintendent of the school district that for years has ranked first in reading and mathematics scores in New York City, died on Wednesday at Montefiore Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 66 and a resident of the Bronx.
The cause of death was cancer, a school district spokeswoman said.


Diner's Journal
Caribbean Fare
Lolabelle, at 206 East 63d Street in Manhattan, is the latest venture of the peripatetic Yvonne (Lola) Bell, who started but is no longer associated with the Caribbean restaurant called Lola at 30 West 22d Street.
Lolabelle, opened just 11 weeks ago in the former John Clancy's East, is as popular as rum punches at Club Med, although a recent visit failed to ascertain why.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about Trans World Airlines referred incorrectly in some editions to the carrier's bankruptcy reorganization plan.
T.W.A. filed its reorganization plan yesterday.
It still needs approval from the Federal Bankruptcy Court.
The article also misstated the site of the Federal Bankruptcy Court handling the T.W.A. case.
It is in Wilmington, Del.


The Vision Beyond the Plan
All President Clinton promised was an economic plan, but his speech to Congress offered something even rarer along the marshy rim of the Potomac -- a vision.
If Republicans and Democrats in Congress will only step back from Mr.
Clinton's specific proposals, they will discover, perhaps to their horror, that he has assumed the best about them -- namely, that they are capable of conducting business in a brand new way, lifting their sights beyond the short political horizons that normally govern Congressional deliberation.
So what is Mr.
Clinton's vision?
At its simplest, that it doesn't matter whether you tax and spend by Democratic or Republican rules, as long as you are willing to make politically difficult choices.
Ronald Reagan did not much like choosing, so he came up with the idea of cutting taxes, revving up defense spending and assuming that diminished revenues would strangle spending on pesky social programs.


New Clinton. New Era.
The Bill Clinton you saw on TV was not the Bill Clinton I ran against.
I am pleased the evolution has taken place.
Finally, a President who talks about the deficit, competitiveness, long-term growth and generational responsibility.
A new era.
A hard look at hard choices.
Does the economic package go as far as I, Warren Rudman and my Concord Coalition colleagues would go?
Not really.
We're more focused on deficit reduction.
Are the savings as real as claimed, and will they survive the Congressional journey?
I don't know.


Merc Chairman Rejects Call for Resignation
The board of the New York Mercantile Exchange yesterday called for its chairman, Z. Lou Guttman, to resign after the Government charged him with civil violations of commodities laws.
But Mr.
Guttman refused to resign, saying the issue should be decided by the full membership of the New York Merc instead of the board alone.
The 42-year-old chairman, an aggressive trader who rose to become one of the most powerful figures in the commodity industry, is apparently betting that he will get more support among the 760 members of the Merc than he did among the 19-member board.
He has been chairman of the New York Merc since 1988.


The Art Market
A Collection in Danger
The London art world is in an uproar over what may turn into de-accessioning at the highest level.
An internal British Treasury Department document that was leaked to the press last week proposed selling off the Government's extraordinary holdings of paintings and furniture.
These works of art, which include paintings by artists like Gainsborough, Walter Richard Sickert, Augustus John and Frank Auerbach, adorn British Embassies and Government offices around the world.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Agreed to terms with Jeff Russell and Ken Ryan, pitchers; John Valentin, shortstop; and Jeff McNeely, outfielder, on one-year contracts.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Agreed to terms with Craig Grebeck, infielder, on a one-year contract.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Agreed to terms with Jack Lazorko, pitcher, on a minor-league contract.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Agreed to terms with Ray Stephens, catcher, on a one-year contract.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Agreed to terms with Scott Brow, Huck Flener, Aaron Small and Rick Steed, pitchers; Derek Bell and Juan Del La Rose, outfielders; Randy Knorr and Greg O'Halloran, catchers; and Tom Quinlan, infielder, on one-year contracts.
National League  FLORIDA MARLINS -- Agreed to terms with Junior Felix, outfielder, on a one-year contract.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Agreed to terms with Bob Ayrault, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
Hockey National Hockey League  MINNESOTA NORTH STARS -- Recalled Mike Torchia, goaltender, on an emergency basis from Kalamazoo of the International Hockey League.
International Hockey League  PEORIA RIVERMEN -- Recalled Peter Kasowski, forward, from the Dayton Bombers of the East Coast Hockey League.
SAN DIEGO GULLS -- Acquired Mark Ferner, defenseman, on loan from Ottawa of the National Hockey League.
Olympics  USA VOLLEYBALL -- Named Rod Wilde assistant coach for the men's team.


BMC Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mueller Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


U.N. Council Moves to Create Balkan War-Crimes Tribunal
The Security Council is expected to vote unanimously early next week to ask the United Nations Secretary General to prepare a new international tribunal to judge those accused of war crimes in the Balkan conflict.
This will be the first time such a war crimes tribunal has been created since the victorious World War II Allies set up the Nuremberg tribunal to try the leaders of Nazi Germany.


BASEBALL: Emotional Spring Cleaning for Yanks and Mets; Torborg to Strive For a New Image
The contract, which runs for three more seasons and pays him nearly half a million dollars a year, is among the most lucrative for any manager in the National League.
The spotlight is hot and constant.
The record to date -- 72-90 -- is a personal affront and an organizational embarrassment.
The 1993 assignment for Jeff Torborg, then, is unforgiving.
Turn the page on all the ugly images of 1992, turn around the Mets and turn the organization's managerial investment into dugout dividends.


Corrections
An article on Monday about a review of trade policies in Washington referred incorrectly to the position of Representative Nancy Pelosi, a California Democrat, on a possible bill to link China's trade status to human rights improvements there.
She heads a group of representatives who plan to introduce a bill, but only after the Senate has confirmed the appointments of the President's senior aides for Asia policy.


Joseph Oyugi, 58, Dies; Kenyan Served at U.N.
Joseph H. Oyugi, an official at the United Nations, died on Feb. 8 at his home in Queens.
He was 58.
The cause of death was cardiac arrest, his family said.


Miami Tries Treatment, Not Jail, in Drug Cases
The decorum of the Dade County Justice Center gave way to warm applause the other morning as a judge, prosecutor and public defender joined three dozen or so drug offenders cheering one of their own, Gala Dee Melton.
"Welcome to humanity, and you look great," Judge Jeffrey Rosinek told Ms.
Melton, a smiling, neatly dressed 30-year-old.
Just a month ago she was in the same courtroom, strung out on crack, wearing soiled, tattered clothes and displaying a black eye.


Art in Review
Dafydd Jones  Ryan Weideman  Opsis Foundation  561 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through tomorrow
Heaven help you if Dafydd Jones fixes you in his viewfinder.
Mr.
Jones, a Welshman who photographs for The New York Observer, specializes in deliciously cruel pictures of the social elite at play.
In this delightful selection of pictures, he demonstrates an uncanny talent for making elegantly dressed people at glitzy parties look foolish.


Review/Film; Pride and Craftsmanship in a Blue-Collar Family
The place is Queens, the time the mid-1950's and the occasion the wake for Papa Vitelli (Joe Paparone), an immigrant carpenter from Italy who came to America as a young man to make a new life.
Amid the rich confusion of talk, arguments and laughter, the old man's three sons, Niccolo (John Turturro), the eldest, who's called Mac; Vico (Michael Badalucco), and Bruno (Carl Capotorto) stare down at the embalmed remains.
Their silent recollections are shattered when the old man suddenly sits up in a fury to point out the shabby craftsmanship of the coffin.
How could they have allowed it?
Doesn't anybody care?
Doesn't anybody pay attention anymore?
Just as abruptly, the tirade is over and the corpse lies back, exhausted.
Again properly dead.
It's almost as if it didn't happen.


Riley Sees the Good And Bad in the Knicks
Asked for an overall assessment of the Knicks as they headed into the All-Star Game break, Pat Riley responded this way:
"If somebody said before the season that the Knicks were going to have the best record in the Eastern Conference right now, I would've said, 'Great.' But if somebody said the Knicks were going to have 16 losses, then I would've said it wasn't good enough -- not from what I had anticipated.


Oce-van der Grinten NV (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


John Alden Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Editorial Notebook; Political Body Language
Scenes from the economic speech: Bill Clinton throwing away the script as he chides Republican snickerers in the balcony.
Vice President Al Gore, perhaps thinking he was off camera when he was still on, baldly gesturing to the chamber for more applause.
Dan Rostenkowski of Illinois wearing a curdled face, preoccupied by scandal.
Colin Powell, seeming a bit on the surly side after battling Mr.
Clinton on military budget cuts and homosexuals in the armed services.


Times Names President and Shifts Business Executives
The appointment of Russell T. Lewis as president and general manager of The New York Times was announced yesterday by the newspaper's publisher, Arthur Sulzberger Jr.
Mr.
Lewis will be responsible for all business departments at the newspaper, where he was most recently executive vice president and deputy general manager.
He succeeds Lance R. Primis, who was named in September as president and chief operating officer of the newspaper's parent, The New York Times Company.


Angels Want a Refund
The California Angels want something done about the December trade with Toronto that brought them third baseman KELLY GRUBER with a serious shoulder injury.
Angels Manager BUCK RODGERS said yesterday that the team would try to rescind the trade.
He said Gruber, who underwent arthroscopic surgery on his nonthrowing shoulder Tuesday, might not be available to play until midsummer.


Irresponsible Ads for Strong Brew
"I was the first in my family to go to college," intones the narrator, a clean-cut young black man in shirt and tie, pictured relaxing on his front porch in a tough inner-city neighborhood.
"It was a night-school thing, which is cool, because now I can do some good things."
No, this isn't a public service spot urging kids to stay in school and avoid drugs.
As the college grad and a younger friend talk, they are drinking from bottles of Colt 45 malt liquor, a brew all too popular with young black men.
The cozy porch scene, in a new commercial from G. Heileman Brewing Company, is part of an irresponsible marketing strategy destined to appeal to underage consumers -- and a further argument for stricter regulation of malt liquor products.


H.U.D. Rule Puts Squeeze on Holocaust Survivor
Since 1964, Fanny Schlomowitz, an 84-year-old Holocaust survivor, has been kept from poverty by the monthly payments she receives from the German Government to make up for her mistreatment by Nazis in World War II.
But now, those same payments are making it difficult for her to afford the federally subsidized one-bedroom apartment where she has lived for the last 12 years -- in the Kivel Campus of Care, a sunny, well-tended project for the elderly where she helps take telephone messages and puts together the daily bulletin board announcements.


Smucker (J.M.) Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Security Lapses at Car Pound Detailed, Bringing Plan for Enhancements
Having a car towed to a New York City pound is not only one of the most hated experiences for a motorist, it can also place a car in danger of being damaged, according to a report released yesterday by the city's Department of Investigation.
More than 300 towed vehicles that were supposed to be in the secure custody of the city were vandalized in the first 10 months of last year at just one pound that was studied, with owners reporting stolen items ranging from cellular telephones and portable radios to clothing and cash, the Department said.
Pound managers also reported that homeless people have slept in impounded vehicles.


Recalculating The Deficit


Echo Bay Mines Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Tax Change Would Skew Bottom Line
If corporate income tax rates are raised, as President Clinton has proposed, many of the largest companies in the United States will be forced to report sharply lower earnings.
And the fall in reported profits will vastly exceed the actual cash cost of the higher tax rates.
But some banks, as well as companies with financial problems, are likely to post much better earnings than they otherwise would.


Get the Cancerous Pesticides Out of Our Food
To the Editor:
In "A Trace of Pesticide, an Accepted Risk" (The Week in Review, Feb. 7), responding to the list of 35 carcinogenic pesticides in foods announced by the Environmental Protection Agency, you miss some simple facts.


'Peer Gynt' in Brooklyn
Bibi Andersson is to appear in Ibsen's "Peer Gynt," a production of the Royal Dramatic Theater of Sweden, directed by Ingmar Bergman, at the Brooklyn Academy of Music from May 11 to 15.
The production is to open Mr.
Bergman's third visit to the academy. (He was last there in 1991.) He is also to direct Yukio Mishima's "Madame de Sade," to be performed May 20 to 22.
Tickets are to go on sale on April 1.


Laws on Pornography Only Need Enforcing
To the Editor:
New York City Councilman Charles Millard, arguing for an "adult use" zoning ordinance in the city in "Stop the Porn Explosion" (Op-Ed, Jan. 29), incorrectly states that regulating the content of adult video stores and strip joints "violates the First Amendment." The Supreme Court has repeatedly held that obscene material, or " 'hard core' pornography," is unprotected by the First Amendment.
Nor is obscenity protected under the free-speech clause of the New York Constitution.


Islanders Fret, Fritter, Fail to Take 4th Place
After losing by 4-2 to the St.
Louis Blues at Nassau Coliseum tonight, the Islanders had much to mutter about.
They fretted about Brett Hull's fluky goal that bounced in off the glass and then the backside of their goalie, Mark Fitzpatrick.
They kicked themselves over yielding a tie-breaking goal to Ron Sutter with 1 minute 56 seconds to go in the third period and an empty-netter to Jeff Brown in the game's final second.


Hearst Knee Injury Found
The status of all-America running back GARRISON HEARST as a top-10 draft prospect has been threatened by a torn knee ligament, which was discovered during a routine exam by the National Football League.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AIR CANADA, Montreal, Canada's largest airline, said it had agreed to sell five DC-8-73 cargo planes for more than $100 million to DHL Airways Inc., the United States arm of DHL World Wide Express.


CHRONICLE
In 1984, SCOTT HAMILTON skated to a gold medal at the Winter Olympics in Sarajevo, and the city, as he remembered it yesterday, was "beautiful, surrounded by hills and trees, in a bowl of mountains."
At least that's how it was then.
But Mr.
Hamilton said that now, when he sees images of the shattered Bosnian capital on television or in newspapers, "I feel devastated."


New Jersey Concern Is Tied to Iraq Arms Network
The chairman of the House Banking Committee said today that a Paramus, N.J., company had served as part of the network that Saddam Hussein used in his efforts to build a nuclear arsenal.
Representative Henry Gonzalez, a Texas Democrat, said the company, Express Resources, had served as the United States branch of Euromac, a European company that was identified in the 1980's in court and intelligence documents as a front for the Iraqi government.


Lin Broadcasting Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kathryn M. Ryan, 68, a Writer Who Assisted on 'Longest Day'
Kathryn Morgan Ryan, an author and editor, died on Tuesday at the Indian River Hospital in Vero Beach, Fla.
She was 68 and lived in Ridgefield, Conn., for many years before moving to Vero Beach.
The family said that the cause was emphysema and that she had long been ill.


Legislators in Russia Urge Tilt Toward Serbs
Russia's Supreme Soviet voted overwhelmingly today for a nonbinding resolution that would overturn Russian policy on the conflict in the Balkans.
Several days after President Clinton's special envoy on the Bosnian crisis met with Russian legislators and Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev, the Supreme Soviet voted 162 to 4 to urge the United Nations to impose sanctions on Croatia or, if not, to lift them on Serbia.





Corrections
A front-page summary of the Clinton economic proposals yesterday described a proposed income tax change incorrectly in some copies.
The proposed surtax would raise the tax rate on taxable income above $250,000 by 10 percent, from a rate of 36 percent to one of 39.6 percent.
A table of case studies showing the impact of the proposal calculated the surtax incorrectly in one case.
A family with a taxable income of $283,746 would owe a surtax of $1,215; the family's total tax would be $94,692, an increase of $12,545 over the tax bill under current rules.


Review/Dance; Locked in a Room With Their Fates
Hell is other people in a room with no exit.
This existential image, diluted from Jean-Paul Sartre, is now only too familiar.
But it remains consistently compelling as a metaphor for the human condition, especially for contemporary French choreographers.
Jennifer Muller, who has frequently toured in France with her company, the Works, now offers a variation on the theme and succeeds surprisingly well.
"The Waiting Room" was given its premiere on Wednesday night in the Works' second program at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea), where the company performs through Sunday.


Valentino Sings! New Opera Planned   Special to The New York Times
The Washington Opera has announced that it would present the premiere next season of an opera by Dominick Argento based on the life of Rudolph Valentino.
The opera, "The Dream of Valentino," is to be a co-production with the Dallas Opera, which is to present it the following season.
Its cost, $1.2 million, is being met by the two opera companies and grants from the Meet the Composer/Reader's Digest Commissioning Program, the National Endowment for the Arts and the Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund.


At Home Abroad; 'What Will Happen?'
Bangladesh has a land area small er than Wisconsin and a population of 114 million.
Its numbers are growing so fast that by the year 2025 it will outstrip the present U.S. population of 250 million.
"What will happen to those poor people?" M. F. Perutz of Cambridge University asked last fall in a piece in The New York Review of Books.
"Even if by some miracle of science enough food could be produced to feed them, how could they find the gainful employment needed to buy it?"


Mirage Resorts reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Taxes vs. Growth
The Clinton campaign that promised a plan for economic growth has suddenly turned into an Administration demanding across-the-board sacrifice from the American people.
Indeed, the myth that Americans are undertaxed has become the defining principle behind President Clinton's economic policy.
The truth is that Americans are overtaxed, not undertaxed.
Sacrifice is not an economic policy and it's certainly not a goal for which the nation should be striving.
Besides, it's not the people who need to sacrifice, it's the bloated Government.


Robert B. Lisle Lawyer, 80
Robert B. Lisle, a corporate and labor lawyer, died on Tuesday at his home in Greenvale, L.I.
He was 80.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Elizabeth.


Money Fund Assets Listed
The total assets of the nation's 616 retail money market mutual funds increased $2.49 billion, to $386.60 billion, in the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 381 taxable retail money market funds were up $2.30 billion, to $304.64 billion, while the assets of the 235 retail tax-exempt funds increased $188.5 million, to $81.96 billion.


Grand Slamming of Promoters
KingVision/SET Pay Per View's "Grand Slam of Boxing," a four-course meal of title bouts being served at 9 P.M. tomorrow for $24.95, arrives after a 77-day delay that owes itself to the tense diplomatic relations between the promoter Don King and Seth Abraham, who runs HBO Sports and pay-per-view TVKO for Time Warner.
Once, King broke matzoh at Abraham's Passover table (a scene that begged for videotaping).
Now, they emit all the symptoms of mutual loathing.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday under the heading "The President's Day," about President Clinton's preparations for his economic address to Congress, misidentified the Deputy Treasury Secretary in some copies.
He is Roger Altman.


CLINTON'S ECONOMIC PLAN: News Analysis; Fragile Plan for Change
It was a staggeringly long agenda that President Clinton laid before Congress and the nation Wednesday night, and his aides say he plans to press for much of it in his first year in office.
Not only does he intend to undo the Reagan revolution by increasing taxes, slashing the military budget, trimming spending here on some old projects, increasing it there on some new ones; he also proposes to create an entirely new system of health care, to reform campaign laws, to launch a service corps, to "end welfare as we know it," to impose gun controls, and on and on.


Executives Mix Worry With Praise
Business ex ecutives found much to praise and worry about -- in President Clinton's economic program.
"Everybody's watching and waiting to see what happens," said Kenneth Pontikes, chairman and chief executive of Comdisco Inc., the nation's largest independent computer leasing company.
Mr.
Pontikes said that after speaking with his tax advisers and several customers, his growing optimism about the economy had been tempered by a feeling of caution that would persist until it was clearer what Congress would do with the proposals.


Imo Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CLINTON'S ECONOMIC PLAN: The Vice President; In Selling His Boss's Domestic Program, Gore Is Also Selling Himself
Vice President Al Gore kicked off a high-profile effort to sell the Administration's economic package today with a round of meetings and travels that could enhance his stature as an important adviser to President Clinton.
Mr.
Gore has been a constant presence at the economic policy meetings and Cabinet sessions that the President has held since he took office.
But his role has often been overshadowed in news reports by accounts of the influence of Mr.
Clinton's wife, Hillary.


Geico Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Film; An Army of Skeletons In a Dark Ages Battle
Sam Raimi's "Army of Darkness" comes closer to comic book sensibility than many a real comic book does, thanks to Mr.
Raimi's broad, jokey visual style and his taste for pre-teen-age humor.
If your favorite reading matter comes with pictures, you may well appreciate his directorial verve.
Taken on its own terms, "Army of Darkness" displays some ambition and wit, though not nearly enough to lend it broad appeal.
It is best watched as a string of wild visual effects that, as in recent films like "Death Becomes Her," take on a life of their own.
Among these are tricks showing the film's hero, Ash (Bruce Campbell), growing an extra head and splintering into chattering Lilliputian versions of himself.
Moments like these understandably upstage the rest of the action.


Delays Criticized in Mammogram Case
In contrast with Nassau County, New York City was able to resolve problems with a troubled mammography operation within three months and was prepared to notify patients if their tests had proven faulty.
A similar case in Nassau County has dragged on for almost a year and a half, and 255 patients have yet to be notified of possible problems with their mammograms.


Art in Review
Julia Wachtel  American Fine Arts  40 Wooster Street  SoHo  Through Feb. 27
Julia Wachtel's colorful, crisply satirical appropriation paintings have always been as political as they are formal, and they've had a quiet but undeniable influence on local art for nearly a decade.
For example, her use of schlock figures from popular culture (in her case the pathetic cartoon characters on greeting cards) preceded Jeff Koons's translation of such figures into sculpture, as demonstrated by "Hystorical," a 1983 painting that hangs in the gallery's office.
So it is especially painful to see Ms.
Wachtel's latest efforts, which present derivative dilutions of strategies she helped formulate.
These seemingly transitional paintings suggest an amalgam of work made in the 1980's by Richard Prince, Peter Halley and the team of Wallace and Donahue.
They combine hard-edge abstraction and daytime television, juxtaposing silkscreened images of faces on the afternoon talk shows with monochrome panels that are variously notched and shaped.
The colors and images appear to be subtly matched, both in hue and in emotional vapidness.
In "Massapequa," the face of a woman with bright orange lipstick and a greenish tint is embedded in panels of bright orange and green; in "I'm O.K., You're O.K." a stolid male face is framed in panels of anonymous brown and yellow.
It turns out that the colors are taken from corporate logos, mall interiors and fast food restaurant uniforms.
To some extent, Ms.
Wachtel's subject has always been the falseness of American life, and there is certainly no small relationship between television's canned emotions and the mindless palette of corporate America.
But for the moment that relationship remains largely conceptual, more in the artist's head than on canvas.


A Sport Comes of Age: Prize Money for Medalists
USA Track &amp; Field, setting a bold example for the cautious International Amateur Athletic Federation, has decided to offer prize money to American medalists at the indoor and outdoor world championships.
Ollan Cassell, executive director of USA Track &amp; Field, announced yesterday that his organization would give $5,000 to anyone who wins a gold medal, $1,500 for a silver medal, and $500 for a bronze medal at the indoor championships in Toronto March 13-14.
A different reward schedule, possibly more lucrative, will be used for the outdoor championships at Stuttgart, Germany, in August.


Foes of Corporate Tax Say It Hurts Investment
If President Clinton wants to jump-start investment and kick the American job machine into higher gear, why would he raise corporate taxes?
Arguing that the corporate tax makes capital more costly, favors debt financing and gums up the tax system, conservatives from Milton Friedman to Alan Greenspan have long advocated that it be abolished.
The Treasury could easily replace the $100 billion or so it raises from corporations, they point out, by treating all businesses as partnerships and then taxing business owners -- the shareholders -- for profits or losses.


Spreading the Lessons of Hard Time on a Hard-Luck Street
TWO doors from Harvey George's storefront office, the petty drug dealers never let up.
Bundled fat against the cold, cupping 40-ounce beers like coffee, they hustle outside the corner bodega in rain, snow, sleet, whatever.
Harvey George may be the only person on Martin Luther King Jr.
Drive who cares to see beyond their ski masks.
He peels past their "What you lookin' at?" glares, forgives (for a moment) their lowly purpose and marvels at the view: kids, 16, 17 years old, full of drive.
Budding entrepreneurs.
On the wrong course, obviously.
But what if they were steered straight?


Republicans Honor Weinberger
At a gathering of conservatives attended by three of the men pardoned by President George Bush for their roles in the Iran-Contra affair, Senator Bob Dole of Kansas tonight paid an emotional tribute to Caspar W. Weinberger, the Defense Secretary in the Reagan Administration, for having escaped the relentless efforts of the special prosecutor in the case, Lawrence W. Walsh.
Senator Dole, the minority leader, called Mr.
Walsh, "Not a prosecutor, but a persecutor," and added, "It seems to me that the time has come for Lawrence Walsh to move on to another line of work."


Westhampton Beach: A Cruel Reminder of a Stormy Past


No Headline
"That itty-bitty energy tax is like the difference between whether my son and I order a pizza in the house one night, or not. My dad, who is in the income bracket that is going to be affected said to me: 'You're going to give up a pizza. I am going to give up a $200 dinner with wine, but we've all got to do something.' It's just the way it is." -- CARLA GREEN, a waitress in St.
Louis.  [ A16:2. ]


Consumer Prices Rose At 6.1% Rate in January
Consumer prices jumped five-tenths of 1 percent in January, the biggest increase in two years, and industrial output recorded its fourth straight monthly advance, the Government reported today.
The latest outpouring of economic statistics also included a third weekly decline in first-time claims for unemployment benefits, the highest industrial operating rate in 15 months, and record volumes of both exports and imports for December.


Blue Chips: A Ride on the Wild Side
Stocks soared, then plunged, then regained most of their ground yesterday as investors struggled to grasp the impact of President Clinton's budget plans.
The Dow Jones industrial average streaked across an 81-point range before closing down exactly 10 points, at 3,302.19.
But more Big Board stocks advanced than declined, on heavy volume of 311 million shares, and the Nasdaq market closed with moderate gains.


How to Beef Up New York Police Foot Patrols
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 28 news article on the failure of New York City's Dinkins administration to civilianize administrative posts held by police officers is right on the mark.
Citizens would receive more bang for the buck if the administration honored its pledge to hire civilians, who cost about half as much as police officers, and redeploy officers performing desk jobs to foot patrol.
However, there are additional ways to augment foot patrol.


INDIRECT EFFECTS OF THE ENERGY TAX
In addition to the direct effects of President Clinton's proposed energy tax, which are fairly easy to calculate for typical households, the new tax would ripple widely into the economy, affecting prices on items as diverse as air fares, aluminum siding and restaurant pizza.
In fact, according to the Energy Department, once the tax is fully in place in 1996 a typical family would pay about $120 a year through the gas pump, oil tank or electric meter and would pay about twice that in these indirect costs, for a total of $320 a year.


30-Year Bond Hits a Low Yield of 7%
The yield of the 30-year Treasury bond fell to another record low yesterday as many investors shifted from short-term to long-term issues.
The bond's yield fell to 7 percent, from 7.02 percent Thursday, which was then the lowest 30-year Treasury bond yield since the Government began selling the issue in 1977.


INSIDE
At Least 285 Survived Sinking of Haitian Ferry
As hopes faded for discovering more passengers alive, the Red Cross said it had accounted for 285 survivors from a ferry that sank off Haiti's southern peninsula.
So far, 179 bodies have been reported recovered; survivors and officials put the passenger count at 800 to 1,200.
Page 3.
Reading Scores Drop
Reading scores dropped in 9 of 10 New York City elementary schools last year.
Performance also declined in junior high schools.
Page 22.
A Society Becomes History
After 188 years, with a crowd of 120 gathered outside, the New-York Historical Society closed its doors.
Will it ever reopen?
Stay tuned.
Page 9.


Supply Side Goes by the Wayside
Call it Reaganomics in reverse.
One decade and one $300 billion Federal deficit later, President Clinton wants America to roll back the supply-side revolution that toppled marginal income tax rates to 28 percent, from 70 percent in the 1980's.
And he wants to bring back many of the tax breaks that favored certain kinds of investment and charitable giving, many of which were abolished in the 80's as the nation embraced a bold economic experiment of generating growth by blending low rates with fewer loopholes.


Domestic Partnership Is Not a Civil Right
To the Editor:
It is a sad day when even The Times charges bias when someone disagrees with an editorial opinion.
"Not Enough for Domestic Partners" (Feb. 6) accuses me of being "obstructionist" and hostile to civil rights because I believe, based on legal counsel, that state law pre-empts New York City Council action on a domestic relations law.


Sex-Offender Registration Laws Pit Victims' Rights Against Civil Rights
John Curtis Peterson left prison two years ago to find that suddenly everyone in the Seattle suburb of Hansville, Wash., knew who he was and what he had done.
Mr.
Peterson, a 33-year-old sometime gardner and clam digger, lost three jobs in the next three months because of his notoriety, the police say.
He was evicted from the mobile home he was renting and was reduced to living in his car for a time.
But he found little compassion for his plight: In 1986, Mr.
Peterson was convicted of raping a 4-year-old boy and molesting a 6-year-old boy in Hansville, a leafy city overlooking Puget Sound.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-4 TROOPS, SOMALIS AND SHOOTINGS
The killing of a 13-year-old Somali boy by a United States marine and the military's lack of helpfulness when his family tried to find out what had happened suggests the difficulties of sending forces trained for combat on other missions.
It also reflects a souring of enthusiasm for the relief mission.  1


White House: A Computer Nerdville
In policy and practice, this is supposed to be a high-tech Presidency.
Bill Clinton's vision of America's future is of a nation linked by a "data superhighway" -- a web of fiber-optics wizardry able to bring everything from libraries to movies to blueprints into every home, school and office at the touch of a button.


Connecticut Cable Operator Creates Fairfield County, N.Y.
For decades, if not centuries, state residents have debated whether Fairfield County, with its Greenwich estates and its Westport weekend homes, was more a New York City suburb than a true region of Connecticut.
In recent days, Cablevision Systems, the cable television company that serves the county, has cast its vote definitively with New York City.


Weston (George) Ltd. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Our Language Can't Do Without 'Zoo'
To the Editor:
On behalf of bookstore workers and everyone else concerned with our country's appalling rate of illiteracy, I urge the New York Zoological Society to reconsider its decision to drop the word "zoo" (front page, Feb. 4).


Lights, Cameras, The Shaq!
He walked in, and the sea of reporters and crews of cameramen who were crammed into a banquet room parted wide.
It was Shaquille O'Neal, not Michael Jackson, creating the human ripples.
All hail the Shaq.
So began the hyped-up All-Star weekend for the National Basketball Association, which this year, basically, is the Shaquille O'Neal Show.


Riser Foods Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 9


Quaker Chemical (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Another Postponement for 'Annie' Sequel
"Annie Warbucks," the financially troubled and often-delayed sequel to the hit musical "Annie," has fallen short of its investment goal and will not come to Broadway this season, its producer announced yesterday.
The show, with book by Thomas Meehan, music by Charles Strouse and lyrics and direction by Martin Charnin, was to have opened on April 21 at the Neil Simon Theater.


Placing Stop-Loss Orders on Stocks Can Help Investors Sleep at Night
YOU'RE riding a winning stock, maybe Intel, that rose from $46 a year ago to close yesterday at $115.375.
You're tempted to sell to lock in your gain in case it takes a nose dive.
On the other hand you think -- maybe, just maybe -- it will keep on climbing and you'll miss out on even higher profits.
But, then again, you don't want to loose sleep over it.


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic Ensembles Merkin Hall


This Time, His Number Will Raise to the Roof
The surroundings should be familiar for Billy Smith on Saturday afternoon when his number, 31, is retired in pre-game ceremonies at Nassau Coliseum.
A crowd close to capacity is expected, rare for the Islanders in recent seasons but common when Smith guarded the net during the four-year Stanley Cup dynasty of the early 1980's.
The cup champions will be there as well, although they will be the visiting team, the Pittsburgh Penguins, who are seeking their third post-season playoff trophy in succession.
Smith's number will join the No. 5 of Denis Potvin and the 22 of Mike Bossy in the rafters.
They were his teammates when the Islanders were the best team in the league from 1980 to 1983, between the eras dominated by the Montreal Canadiens and the Edmonton Oilers.
Although no announcement has been made, it is likely that Bryan Trottier's 19 will soon join the group.
He, too, was part of those teams.


Immigrants Infected With AIDS
Should the United States allow immigrants infected with the virus that causes AIDS to enter the country for extended stays?
President Clinton said "yes" during the campaign.
He pledged to remove the AIDS virus from the list of diseases that automatically exclude would-be immigrants.


Gordon Bradford, 68, Banker Helping Africa
Gordon Bradford, a banker who specialized in helping African governments with their economies, died on Wednesday in Kampala, Uganda.
He was 68 and lived in Manhattan and Saugerties, N.Y.
He had a heart attack while on a consulting assignment for the State Department, said John Charlton, a managing director at Chase Manhattan bank.


Gaines's Big Goodbye
CLARENCE (BIGHOUSE) GAINES, who has more college basketball victories than any other coach except Adolph Rupp, will retire at the end of the season after 47 years at Winston-Salem State in North Carolina.
The 69-year-old Gaines, who spent his entire coaching career at Winston-Salem, has a record of 828-440, a .652 winning percentage.
Rupp, the legendary Kentucky coach, had 875 victories over 41 seasons.


G.M.'s White-Collar Staff Is Offered a Novel Buyout
The General Motors Corporation continued its effort to trim its payroll yesterday, offering its salaried employees a plan that in effect pushes them out by paying them to look for new jobs.
The plan, which G.M. calls a "career transition program," gives management personnel in the United States and Canada the chance to take a paid leave as long as 15 months.
Employees who enter the program must leave the company.


Hyde Park Scrambles to Provide a Banner Day for President Clinton
What would a visit from the President of the United States be like without a banner welcoming him to town?
To her horror, Kate Hinz-Shaffer almost found out.
Ms.
Hinz-Shaffer, the owner of Riverwood Signs here, was tapped late Thursday morning to provide the 20-foot-by-4-foot royal blue banner that would be draped on the curtain behind President Clinton as he spoke at the Haviland Middle School today about his economic program.


Bosnia Cheering Decision by U.N. to Resume Aid
The Bosnian Government eeacted enthusiastically today to the decision by the United Nations Secretary General to resume relief deliveries across Bosnia and Herzegovina and implied that it might act as soon as Saturday to lift the blockade it has imposed on the delivery of relief supplies to Sarajevo.
"I approve this decision, this approach is very positive," said President Alija Izetbegovic, the Muslim political leader who heads the Bosnian Government.
Mr.
Izetbegovic said he had arranged for a meeting between United Nations relief officials and Sarajevo's city government on Saturday, so that the two sides could "discuss the boycott issue," meaning the Bosnian government's refusal to accept food and medical supplies for Sarajevo unless aid also was sent to Muslim communities elsewhere in Bosnia.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief report in some editions of Business Day on Thursday, about a Federal grand jury investigation of the Dow Corning Company regarding its silicone gel-filled breast implants, referred incorrectly to an investigation last year.
It was conducted at the company's request by an independent team of lawyers headed by a former United States Attorney General, Griffin B. Bell.


Proposal for Sludge Plant In Brooklyn Is Withdrawn
After a torrent of local opposition and mounting political pressure, the Dinkins administration yesterday withdrew its proposal to build a large sludge-treatment plant along the waterfront of Sunset Park in Brooklyn.
The administration's announcement that it would reconsider its plans came only three days before the City Planning Commission was to vote on the $250 million plant.


Yanks Hold 3 Aces And Seek 2 More
One need not wander too far from the manager's office to find the many ghosts of Yankee pitching legends past.
Whitey Ford.
Ron Guidry.
Tommy John.
Catfish Hunter.
Names attached to spring training instructors now are names that were once attached firmly to a winning tradition built very much on arms such as theirs.
The names that now ring one end of the Yankees' spring training clubhouse also remind of recent and much more desperate times.
Times when the Yankees found their aces down in number and their fortunes likewise dwindling as pitchers of lesser abilities failed in rotations.


Hough Brings His Knuckleball Home
The weather here has been distinctly un-springlike this week, with heavy winds and temperatures dropping below 40 degrees.
And for a while, there will be almost as many workers as players at the Florida Marlins' training camp complex, where two of the five fields are still under construction and there is plenty of landscaping to be done.


Ford to Pay Shoemaker
BILL SHOEMAKER and his family will receive $1 million from Ford Motor Co. as the result of a 1991 accident that paralyzed the former jockey, according to settlement papers made available yesterday in Los Angeles.
Shoemaker was driving a Ford Bronco II near San Dimas, Calif., when he veered off the highway and tumbled down an embankment.
Shoemaker, who rode more winners than any other jockey in thoroughbred racing history, is a quadriplegic.
He is now a trainer.


Tejas Gas Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gilbert and Wheaton to Play Davis Cup Against Australia
All of last year's heroes have declined to attend, but the United States Tennis Association has finally found a Davis Cup team to begin defense of its 1992 championship in the first round against Australia next month.
The U.S.T.A. announced yesterday that Brad Gilbert, ranked No. 34 with a 10-3 Davis Cup singles record, and David Wheaton, ranked No. 48 and making his Davis Cup debut, will play singles.
Two more cup neophytes, Richey Reneberg and Jim Grabb, the reigning United States Open champions, will team for doubles.
Top 10 Reasons Not to Play
The match against Australia will be played March 26-28 on the grass courts at Kooyong Stadium in Melbourne, the former site of the Australian Open.
The United States has defeated Australia in 24 of 42 Davis Cup encounters, the last of which earned the United States the 1990 championship.
But Australia won the last time the Americans traveled Down Under, to Brisbane in 1986.


New York Official Named by Clinton
President Clinton today nominated New York State's social services commissioner, Mary Jo Bane, to be assistant secretary for children and families in the Department of Health and Human Services.
The nomination had been expected for weeks, but there was concern that it might be derailed after Ms.
Bane told Federal officials that she failed to pay Social Security taxes for two household employees in Boston several years ago.
Those taxes were paid recently.


Harley-Davidson reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


5 POSSIBLE JURORS FOR BEATING TRIAL
The search for an impartial jury in the Federal trial of four police officers charged in the beating of Rodney G. King continued today after four days of painstaking questioning.
By the end of the day's proceedings in Federal District Court, only 5 out of an initial panel of 12 prospective jurors had survived a series of challenges by prosecutors and defense lawyers.
Those remaining were still subject to dismissal by peremptory challenges that both sides may lodge without explanation.


LG&amp;E Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Marshall Carter, 83, Intelligence Official And Marshall Aide
Marshall S. Carter, who held high posts in the United States military, diplomatic corps and intelligence agencies, died Thursday at his home in Colorado Springs.
He was 83.
His family said the cause of death was cancer.


Rockies Learn Rules According to Baylor
Don Zimmer, who very likely coached for Abner Doubleday and Alexander Cartwright, walked into the manager's office, walked behind the manager's desk and peered at the manager's feet.
Satisfied with what he saw, Zimmer said nothing and left.
"I passed out rules saying the 'CR' has to show on the stirrups," the manager, Don Baylor, said, explaining his coach's seemingly bizarre behavior.
"That's what Zim was checking. As a player, I'd wear the stirrups the way I wanted and take the $25 fine. But I hire the guy and he comes in and checks my socks."


Zeos International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Navistar International reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Bosnia Cheering Decision by U.N. to Resume Aid
The Bosnian Government eeacted enthusiastically today to the decision by the United Nations Secretary General to resume relief deliveries across Bosnia and Herzegovina and implied that it might act as soon as Saturday to lift the blockade it has imposed on the delivery of relief supplies to Sarajevo.
"I approve this decision, this approach is very positive," said President Alija Izetbegovic, the Muslim political leader who heads the Bosnian Government.
Mr.
Izetbegovic said he had arranged for a meeting between United Nations relief officials and Sarajevo's city government on Saturday, so that the two sides could "discuss the boycott issue," meaning the Bosnian government's refusal to accept food and medical supplies for Sarajevo unless aid also was sent to Muslim communities elsewhere in Bosnia.


CHRONICLE
When JENNIFER RUDIN was 11, she acted the role of Alena Synkova, a young concentration camp inmate, in an Off Off Broadway play called "Children of Terezin." In the play, written by Michael Slade in part from real diaries and archives, Alena died of typhus at the end of the first act.
Yesterday, Ms.
Rudin, now a 20-year-old college student, and the real Alena Synkova, now ALENA MUNCOVA, a 66-year-old retired film editor, met for coffee and a conversation that was lengthy and sometimes painful.


Administration Favoring a Plan To Airdrop Supplies Into Bosnia; U. N. Official Is Overruled
In an extraordinary rebuff to a high-ranking associate, Secretary General Boutros-Ghali publicly overruled the official in charge of relief work in Bosnia today and ordered an immediate resumption of operations in the area.
His decision threw into further confusion the United Nations' role in the Balkan conflict and revealed what appeared to be serious discord among those running the organization's peacekeeping and relief operations.


COMPANY BRIEFS
DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORP., Maynard, Mass., received a five-year $28 million contract for multivendor system support services for about 200 client companies of Caldwell-Spartin's, a supplier of office software.
LAKELAND FIRST FINANCIAL GROUP, Succasunna, N.J., agreed to acquire three First Nationwide Bank branches in North Jersey from First Nationwide Financial Corp.
Terms were not disclosed.


A World of Hope Away, A Daughter Floats Free
TWIRLING a strand of her long, fine hair, Tram Thuy Ngoc Tran, 17, giggled about her latest anxiety: dissatisfaction with a 95 average.
"My teacher tell me to stop coming for extra help after school," she said.
"I tell her I stop when I get 100."
Before she arrived in New York, Tram's worries were of a different order, beyond the scope of her classmates' imaginations.
They see Tram's quiet intensity, her disregard of pop culture and her annoying success at math.
What brought her into their midst is a mystery she encourages the few curious souls to ignore.


Light Up the Sky? Are We Crazy?
Two weeks ago tonight, on the coldest evening of the year, the full moon stayed above the horizon nearly till dawn.
Its light bounced so brightly off the snow that you could read the plunging thermometer without a flashlight: 25 below, 28 below, 30 below.
In the days since, as the moon has grown smaller, the Adirondack sky has brimmed with stars, safe from the competition with lunar glow.
This cycle is older than life on Earth.
But earlier this month, Russian scientists, using a thin aluminum and plastic mirror, managed to send a narrow beam of reflected sunlight back to the dark side of Earth.


Mutual Funds for Small Spenders
WHILE it can take pennies or just a few dollars to buy shares of stock, most mutual fund investors need fatter wallets.
The usual ticket for many funds is $1,000 to $2,500.
Funds consider small accounts a nuisance because they cost as much to handle as larger ones.Brandywine and a handful of other funds won't bother with people who have less than $25,000 to invest.


Bridge
Some of the most fascinating deals are those in which a small spot card proves, quite unpredictably, to have a decisive impact in the endgame.
In the diagramed deal, played Tuesday in a private game in Hobe Sound, Fla., at the home of Douglas and Emmy Fairchild, South had a very small card that proved to be very big.
East and West were Kath Geddes and Douglas Fairchild, and her opening three-heart bid propelled her opponents into four spades.
Her partner naturally expressed the opinion that he could defeat this contract.
North was Michael Edwards, a visiting Englishman with a passion for action, and he raised the ante with a redouble.
Would you expect the contract to succeed?


Classical Music in Review
Vienna Philharmonic Carnegie Hall


The Auteur Theory of Film: Holy or Just Full of Holes?
It has been 30 years since the film critic Andrew Sarris, in a ground-breaking article for Film Culture magazine, proclaimed the ascendancy of the auteur theory, which enshrined the director as the sole author of a film.
Despite the violent protests of Pauline Kael, the theory caught on, sending an entire generation of film critics out to fish for genius in the murky waters of Hollywood B pictures.
Like many a young radical before it, the auteur theory enters middle age with a slight paunch, thinning hair and a decided air of respectability.
"In the ultimate vindication," said Mr.
Sarris, the film critic for The New York Observer, "MTV has begun including the name of the director at the beginning and end of every music video."


Boy's Death in Somalia Tests Uneasy U.S. Role
The official version of the 13-year-old's death was this: The boy was about to throw something on the back of a military truck, and a United States marine, believing it was a grenade, shot and killed him.
No object was recovered on the teeming street where he died.
Lul Mahmoud Mohammed, the mother of Omar Ahmed Mohammed, first guessed that her son might have been killed as she listened to the 9 P.M.
BBC broadcast.
He had not returned home after running out to play around noon, and the BBC reported that night that a Somali child had been shot dead.


Arbitrator Sides With Expos
This must be what clubs mean when they say players win even when they lose.
Theodore High, an arbitrator, yesterday awarded Marquis Grissom the $1.5 million salary the Montreal Expos wanted to pay their center fielder rather than the $1.95 million he wanted.
Despite being the 10th player out of 15 to lose in salary arbitration hearings this winter, Grissom's salary was raised four times over the $300,000 he earned last year.


Artistic Greetings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; Dunking And Fasting For Principle
OLDEN POLYNICE stood in a downpour outside the Krome Detention Center in Miami last month waiting to visit Haitian refugees who were being detained.
He was not allowed in and was threatened with arrest before finally leaving.


Savannah Foods &amp; Ind.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Winter Storms Hit Much of the Nation


Oppenheimer Capital L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Nobelists Urge U.N. Sanctions Against Myanmar
A group of Nobel Peace Prize winners called today for Myanmar, formerly known as Burma, to be suspended from the United Nations and placed under a complete arms embargo until it releases political prisoners and ends other human rights abuses.
The delegation, made up of five Nobel laureates and the representatives of two Peace Prize-winning organizations, also appealed to Myanmar's military Government to recognize the results of a 1990 election won by followers of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the Burmese democracy leader who has been under house arrest since July 1989.


Tuboscope Vetco International Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


No Headline
Where's your checkbook and where's your pen? -- JUDGE BURTON R. LIFLAND, to a would-be buyer at a New York Post bankruptcy proceeding.  [ 24:2. ]


Jerusalem Journal; Rabbis Are Fighting (One Another)
Israelis have never seen the likes of this election campaign.
One leading contender, married with eight children, is accused of having tried to seduce several women.
Another is said to have once offered bribes to an office-seeker.
A third is accused of trying to hire a detective to run a smear campaign against his rivals.
Still another is reported to have bribed a psychiatrist to declare him mentally unfit for military service years ago.
And all of them have been publicly scorned by experts as barely competent for the job they seek.


Primark Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Varco International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Brady (W.H.) Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


U.S.-British Air Relations Rest on Treaty
To the Editor:
"No Merger Without Open Skies" (editorial, Jan. 28) is correct in identifying the fear of stronger competition as the real reason that American, United and Delta Airlines are trying to block the recent investment (not merger) by British Airways in USAir.


Elementary Schools Show Big Drop on Reading Tests
Reading scores dropped in nine out of every 10 of New York City's public elementary schools last year, with some schools showing drops of more than 20 percentage points from a year earlier, according to data provided by the Board of Education.
Performance also declined in the junior high schools, though less sharply, with 64 percent of the 181 middle schools registering drops.


Evans &amp; Sutherland Computer Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


S.I. Woman Is Killed After Answering Bell
A 46-year-old woman who had just had a cup of tea with her husband was killed on Thursday night when, he said, she opened the front door of their Staten Island home and was fatally shot in the head, the police said yesterday.
The police said last night that they had no immediate suspects or motive.


Yeltsin and Parliament Chief Step Up Feud
In a new twist to Russia's bizarre political struggle, President Boris N. Yeltsin's spokesman called on Parliament today to replace its Speaker, who had earlier rejected Mr.
Yeltsin's proposals on sharing power.
While Mr.
Yeltsin remained on vacation, the Parliament Speaker, Ruslan I. Khasbulatov, was out meeting with regional leaders in the Siberian city of Novosibirsk.
Mr.
Khasbulatov said the whole idea of a power-sharing deal with Mr.
Yeltsin was "banal."


Markel Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


United Healthcare reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Excel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lance Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


20th Century Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rematch Becoming A Battle Of Wallets
After a series of four-point, five-way conference calls that kept the trans-Atlantic cables humming for almost three hours yesterday, negotiators were said to be just $2 million away from a deal on a pay-per-view rematch in June between the heavyweight champion, Riddick Bowe, and his deposed predecessor, Evander Holyfield.
According to Dan Duva, who represents Holyfield and owns a percentage of Bowe's next bout, the two sides were agreed both on how to split the pie and on the need for more of it -- about $2 million more, Duva said, than the $20 or so million that had been projected, largely from pay-per-view revenues from Time Warner.
Telephone Tag
"We're just trying to put a deal together," said Duva, who spent the day in his Hackensack, N.J., office on the phone in various combinations of conversations with negotiators in South Africa (Bowe's manager, Rock Newman), Los Angeles (the president of Caesars World Sports, Rich Rose) and New York (Bowe's lawyer, Milt Chwasky, and the president of Time Warner Sports, Seth Abraham).


A Strong Man With a Very Heavy Grudge
Last seen in his Lycra track and field uniform, Randy Barnes was 24 years old, the world-record holder in the shot-put and a gleam in the San Francisco 49ers' eye.
He had $200,000 in the bank, the 1992 Olympic Summer Games at Barcelona around the corner and endorsements waiting in gridlock.
It was Aug. 7, 1990, and he had just landed in Malmo, Sweden, for an international meet.
He was 6 feet 4 inches tall, weighed 300-plus pounds and, from outward appearances, had not a care in the world.


11 Are Vying To Replace Comptroller
The list of candidates competing to fill the unexpired term of State Comptroller Edward V. Regan continued to grow today, with strong signs that H. Carl McCall, the president of the New York City Board of Education, would join the fray.
By the end of the day, 11 people, 9 Democrats and 2 Republicans, had expressed interest in the job.
New names that emerged included Peter Tufo, New York State Thruway Authority chairman; Assemblyman Joseph R. Lentol, a Brooklyn Democrat who is chairman of the Codes Committee; former Assemblyman Arthur J. Kremer, who was the chairman of the Ways and Means Committee for 12 years, and Comptroller Joel A. Giambra of Buffalo.


Homestake Mining Co.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Old Refinancing Rules Are Out the Window
WITH the nation gripped by the third mortgage refinancing boom in slightly more than a year and mortgage interest rates at their lowest levels in 20 years, the question of when and how to refinance is affecting more and more homeowners.
Until the mid-1980's, there were widely accepted rules of thumb for estimating the appropriateness of a refinancing.
Among them: the new rate must be at least 2 percentage points lower than the old rate, you must remain in the home for at least two more years and you must have lived there for at least two years.


Review/Rock; Hyperactive Band of One For Techno
If techno music is going to make the leap from dance clubs to the pop charts, its starkly propulsive dance rhythms are going to need melodies, identifiable stars or both.
Moby, a one-man band from New York City, could be the techno performer whose showmanship carries him to a wider audience without turning techno tracks into pop songs.
He performed last Saturday night at a rave concert at the Academy that had the requisite eye-popping lights, recorded dance music and an audience dressed in bright, loose clothes.
Moby's techno has bits of rap in it, but it depends on dissonant electronic syncopations and booming drumbeats and basslines.


Indiana Player Injured
Top-ranked Indiana, which has been limited to nine players for most of the season, suffered another blow when forward ALAN HENDERSON injured his right knee during practice yesterday in Bloomington, Ind.
Henderson's knee will be examined this weekend.


Scientist Accused as Ex-Nazi Is Denied Citizenship
A German-born scientist who played a pivotal role in developing the Saturn 5 rocket used in the American moon landings has lost an attempt to regain his American citizenship.
He gave up his citizenship and left the country in 1984 when he faced deportation for Nazi war crimes.
Justice Department officials said today that a Federal judge in California had dismissed a lawsuit filed by Arthur L. H. Rudolph, the 86-year-old retired missile expert.
He had sought to revoke an agreement he reached with the Government after Nazi hunters accused him of persecuting slave laborers when he managed a German factory that built V-2 rockets in World War II.


Beliefs
If Roger Finke and Rodney Stark are right, the current understanding of American religious history ought to be turned upside down.
If Martin E. Marty is right, Professors Finke and Stark might want to wash their mouths out with soap and water, then offer other scholars an apology.
The cause of this difference of opinion is a pugnacious book, "The Churching of America, 1776-1990" (Rutgers University Press, 1992).
The title sums up the two professors' overarching thesis: Since colonial days the United States has gone "from a nation in which most people took no part in organized religion to a nation in which nearly two-thirds of American adults do."


Don't Look Now, but U.S. Has New Skiing Sensation
Picabo Street, the free spirit of the United States Ski Team, swept down the super giant slalom run today and confirmed her early promise as perhaps American skiing's next major international challenger.
The 21-year-old from Sun Valley, Idaho, was all smiles as she swept past the finish line to a gold medal and a $5,000 first prize in the Subaru United States Alpine Championships.


Arthur Palmer, 83, Transportation Aide For New York City
Arthur E. Palmer, a former New York City Transportation Administrator and a retired environmental lawyer and consultant, died yesterday at St.
Luke's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 83 and lived in Manhattan.
He died of pneumonia and heart failure, his family said.


Bosnia Cheering Decision by U.N. to Resume Aid
The Bosnian Government eeacted enthusiastically today to the decision by the United Nations Secretary General to resume relief deliveries across Bosnia and Herzegovina and implied that it might act as soon as Saturday to lift the blockade it has imposed on the delivery of relief supplies to Sarajevo.
"I approve this decision, this approach is very positive," said President Alija Izetbegovic, the Muslim political leader who heads the Bosnian Government.
Mr.
Izetbegovic said he had arranged for a meeting between United Nations relief officials and Sarajevo's city government on Saturday, so that the two sides could "discuss the boycott issue," meaning the Bosnian government's refusal to accept food and medical supplies for Sarajevo unless aid also was sent to Muslim communities elsewhere in Bosnia.


Corrections
A brief report by Bloomberg Business News in Business Day yesterday about a decline in the common stock of the B. F. Goodrich Company misstated the sales of the company's Geon Vinyl division in 1992.
They were $950 million.


UConn Player Charged
Connecticut guard BRIAN FAIR has been scheduled for a Monday court appearance after being charged with larceny for allegedly shoplifting a $4.99 piece of electronics.
Fair, one of the Huskies' top scorers, was arrested on Tuesday night after leaving Sears in the Pavilions at Buckland Hills in Manchester, Conn.


Statistically Speaking, New York Is Alone Again
New York City will not be lumped with northern New Jersey and Pike County, Pennsylvania, into one primary metropolitan statistical area for the next census, a decision that will save city hospitals an estimated $121 million, Representative Charles E. Schumer said yesterday.
The announcement signaled another reversal in the Federal Government's decision to redefine the metropolitan areas in New York and New Jersey.
Earlier this month, another representative, Gary L. Ackerman, announced that Suffolk and Nassau counties will not be merged with New York.
That would have cost those counties an estimated $50 million in Federal aid.


Zoom Telephonics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First USA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CONVERSE CHANGES NAME OF NEW BASKETBALL SHOES
Converse Inc., the North Reading, Mass., athletic shoe maker, has decided to change the name of its newest basketball shoe, the Run 'N' Gun, after receiving complaints from some community groups in the Boston area, which said the name could incite violence among young people.
The president of Converse, Gilbert Ford, decided to switch the name of the $85 basketball sneaker to Run 'N' Slam.
Mr.
Ford said the original name is a common basketball term that refers to a fast-break style of play.
Kevin Johnson, a guard with the Phoenix Suns and the new shoe's endorser, said he was surprised by the negative reaction and did not feel the original name encouraged violence.
But he commended Converse for responding promptly.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the hijacking of a missionary plane from Haiti to Miami referred incompletely in some copies to the hijacker and incorrectly to the hostage.
The hijacker was Haitian, and the hostage was American.


Gambling Stock Has Big Plunge
Shares of Circus Circus Enterprises fell sharply today after the casino company announced that its president and chief financial officer had unexpectedly resigned.
The departure of Glenn W. Schaeffer was partly a result of criticism over a failed expansion effort, said the company's chairman and chief executive, William G. Bennett.


Prodigy Heads for New York
In Panama, where he has won all seven starts by an average of 12 lengths, they call him El Bakan, "the big shot." He won one race by 20 lengths, another by 25.
And in his last race, the track refused to accept wagers on him.
So, he was already one of those mystery horses from abroad when Robert Perez, the New York horse owner from Argentina, bought him last week.
The colt, a Kentucky-bred 3-year-old son of Yukon and grandson of Northern Dancer, was assigned for training to Alfredo Callejas, Perez's friend and Argentine countryman, who has trained Senor Speedy, Agincourt and other star horses.


Corrections
A film review in Weekend on Feb. 12 about "Trusting Beatrice" misidentified the director of "The Double Life of Veronique." He is Krzysztof Kieslowski.


Honda Motor Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


He Runs Trash Hauling With Silence and Pastry
Every Tuesday, with unshakable punctuality, a gray-haired man, hobbling on two canes, arrives at noontime at a tan-brick building in lower Manhattan, often bearing pastries that he shares over cups of espresso with other men.
Outwardly the man, James Failla, 74, has a grandfatherly appearance.
But law-enforcement officials say he is a mobster who, at these cannoli klatches, carves up New York City's rubbish-collection routes in a way that creates the highest private carting rates in the country.


K-Tel International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Political Proving Ground For the Christian Right
"You'll burn in hell," shouted a man in the audience wearing a cap bearing the words, "God loves you." And the speaker, a marine biologist who was trying to explain the theory of evolution, responded, "I hope you all die of a God-awful disease."
The emotional subject was the teaching of biblical creationism in science classes at local high schools.
The forum was one of the first school board meetings in Vista, a San Diego suburb, after fundamentalist Christian candidates won a majority in the November election.


What's Shrill to Some Is Incentive to Others
Bring up the subject of screaming coaches and Terry Dehere, Jerry Walker and Bryan Caver will say they have heard an earful.
The three play for Seton Hall, whose basketball coach, P. J. Carlesimo, has consistently rated among the top honkers and screamers of the Big East.
Win or lose.


GranCare Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Big Board and Amex Show Rise in Short Sales
The short positions in stocks on the New York and American Stock Exchanges rose in the month through early February, reversing a decline the previous month, the exchanges said yesterday.
Contributing to the increase was arbitrage trading related to mergers and a renewed willingness to bet on falling prices.


Big Holder In Citicorp Plans Sale
The Saudi prince who helped Citicorp out of its financial difficulties in early 1991 is starting to reap his reward -- one that could be worth at least $127 million.
Prince al-Waleed bin Talal told the Securities and Exchange Commission on Thursday that he intended to sell 9.2 million to 12.8 million shares of Citicorp's common stock over the next three months.


'93 Kickoff Classic: Kansas-Fla. State
Officials at both Florida State and Kansas confirmed yesterday that news conferences will be held today, presumably to announce that the Seminoles and the Jayhawks will meet in the Kickoff Classic at Giants Stadium on Aug. 28.


Review/Music; Irresistible Joins Immovable And Sparks Do Surely Fly
The conductor's job might be broken into two categories: making things happen and letting them happen.
When orchestra and conductor each have strong wills and persuasive personalities, one is left with the kind of ambivalence that has hung over Carnegie Hall this past week.
The sometimes opposing forces, in this mostly artistic but also somewhat sociological meeting of minds, have been the Vienna Philharmonic and Georg Solti.
The Vienna, as most of us know by now, is an enclave of distinctiveness in an international orchestral world where everybody now plays pretty much the same way.
With its shared ear for accentuation and rhythm and its anachronistic instrumental sound, the Vienna raises the word "provincial" to an exalted level.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY BANKRUPTCY JUDGE APPROVES POST SALE
A Federal bankruptcy judge cleared the last major hurdle keeping Steven Hoffenberg from becoming the owner of The New York Post in a court proceeding that was part high finance and part street theater.
In a hearing that included a theatrical appearance by a rival bidder who was quickly rejected, a judge approved the sale of The Post to Mr.
Hoffenberg, indicating there were no other options.
Page 1.
NEW SCHOOLS BATTLE: 'KIDS WEEK'
The new winter vacation created by Schools Chancellor Fernandez for a million New York City schoolchildren -- called Kids Week by school officials but "parents' nightmare week" by others -- is in its second year.
Parents are demanding that it be rescinded, and school officials have raised the issue in negotiations with teachers.
Page 1.
READING SCORES SHOW WIDESPREAD DROP
Reading scores dropped in 9 out of every 10 of New York City's elementary schools last year, with some schools showing drops of more than 20 percentage points, according to data provided by the Board of Education.
The sharpest drop in reading performance was at Public School 174 in East New York, Brooklyn, where only 19 percent of the students were able to read at grade level.
Page 22.
OFFICER SUSPENDED AFTER DRUG TEST
A Brooklyn police sergeant has been suspended after he tested positive for cocaine, and Internal Affairs investigators are looking into whether he shot himself in the hand to avoid an earlier drug test, the authorities said.
Page 23.
REVERSAL ON HOMELESS MAN'S RELEASE
A mentally ill man who was arrested for menacing in Central Park and ordered released by a judge from a psychiatric center despite his history of substance abuse and arrests was ordered back into custody.
Page 23.
Plan is reversed to join New York City with areas in New Jersey and Pennsylvania for the next census, official says.
Page 25.
REGION CABLEVISION TO DROP STATIONS
Cablevision, the cable television company that serves Fairfield County, announced plans to eliminate Connecticut's home-grown stations from its two systems, saying that they duplicated programming on New York stations and that the slots were needed for new channels.
Page 1.
COMPTROLLER'S JOB DRAWS RUSH OF NAMES
The list of candidates competing to fill the unexpired term of State Comptroller Edward V. Regan grew, with strong signs that H. Carl McCall, the president of the New York City Board of Education, would join the fray.
Page 24.
NEW YORK AND NEW JERSEY REVENUES RISE
New York and New Jersey reported substantial increases in tax receipts for December, with income-tax revenue in New Jersey rising almost 40 percent over the previous year.
The increase in New York was more than 20 percent.
Page 25.
Trenton police officer is acquitted on assault charges despite videotape. Page 25.
Summations continue in Glen Ridge, N.J., sex-assault case. Page 25.
About New York by Deborah Sontag 23


Adams Resources &amp; Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dow Up 19.99 but Falls 70.25 Points for Week
The stock market finished a dizzying week with a healthy bounce, gaining some extra spring from the expiration of options contracts.
About two-thirds of a 19.99-point gain in the Dow Jones industrial average yesterday came in the last 15 minutes of trading.
The Dow closed at 3,322.18, off 70.25 points, or 2.1 percent, for the week.


Titan Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Clinton Budget: Some Strategies to Help Ease the Pain
The dust storm kicked up by President Clinton's economic plan this week is unlikely to settle soon, leaving few clear signals for people seeking ways to lessen the impact of the Administration's deficit-cutting program on their personal finances.
Still, some things seem certain.
The wealthy will be hit hardest.
Investment decisions will become trickier.
And people should conserve energy -- the gasoline and home-heating kind -- as a way of easing the pain of the new energy tax.


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press in Business Day yesterday, about the settlement of Securities and Exchange Commission charges against Paine Webber Inc. for poor supervision of employees, misstated the number of offices that are subject to a 30-day ban on opening new accounts.
Four branch offices face the ban.
The office in Northbrook, Ill., was cited in the settlement but was not included in the ban because its violations were deemed less serious.


Q &amp; A
Choosing an Executor
Q What factors should I consider when naming an executor of my estate?
JOHN M. BURNS, MANHATTAN
A Executors are responsible for many things, including collecting the deceased person's property, paying debts and making the final distribution to beneficiaries.
"While an executor generally retains professionals to help in this, he or she should have enough financial experience to perform the tasks or supervise the professionals' performance," said Laurence Keiser, tax partner in Greenfield Eisenberg Stein &amp; Senior, a New York law firm.
"Executors have personal liability for losses caused by their improper acts."


Don't Let Bosnia Starve
The U.N.
Security Council resolved last August to undertake "all measures necessary" to deliver humanitarian aid to Bosnia.
President Bush vowed to deliver the supplies "no matter what it takes." And just 10 days ago Secretary of State Warren Christopher promised "determined steps" to keep Bosnia from being starved into submission.
Bold words.
And totally ignored by the U.N.
High Commissioner for Refugees, Sadako Ogata.
This week, to everyone's shock, Mrs.
Ogata suspended all shipments to Bosnia because she felt the risks to relief workers were too high.


For City Council: Jane Crotty
Carolyn Maloney's election to Congress has sparked a crowded race on Manhattan's East Side, with seven candidates fighting to complete her City Council term.
Jane Crotty makes the most persuasive candidate and we endorse her in next Tuesday's special election.
Ms.
Crotty, an elementary-school teacher and a member and former chairwoman of Community Board 6, is thoughtful and well informed about city and local issues.
She neither panders to momentary political whims nor ducks controversy, whether it's an unpopular homeless facility or a change in sanitation policy that has drawn the wrath of community residents.
Her opponents question her independence because she accepted support and modest contributions from several unions and Council Speaker Peter Vallone's political committee.
Ms.
Crotty may have to establish her independence if elected, but that should not be difficult; her record speaks to her integrity.


Stanhome Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


COMPANY NEWS;
Teledyne Inc., a leading maker of military electronics, has agreed to pay a $2.15 million fine to settle charges that it failed to perform tests on electronics components it sold to the military.
The settlement partly resolves a suit filed under the False Claims Act in June 1990 by Marianne D. Gendron, a former quality planning engineer at Teledyne Controls, the division responsible for the testing.


Devils Keep Up the Pace With Sabres
The presence of two newcomers from the minor leagues seemed to invigorate the Devils tonight, increased their speed in moving the puck a notch or two and allowed them to keep up with the fast-skating Buffalo Sabres.
Jon Morris and Brian Sullivan were the players promoted from the Devils' top affiliate, the Utica Devils of the American Hockey League, and they helped the Devils earn a 3-3 deadlock with the Sabres at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Smart &amp; Final Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3


CLINTON'S PROGRAM GETS ENDORSEMENT OF FED'S CHAIRMAN
President Clinton's hand in the coming budget struggle was strengthened today when the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, Alan Greenspan, who is a Republican and a staunch conservative, endorsed Mr.
Clinton's proposal to cut the budget deficit.
Testifying before the Senate Banking Committee, Mr.
Greenspan, who is widely respected on Wall Street, called the plan "serious" and "credible" and praised it for including detailed cuts, rather than relying on vague goals to cut the deficit.


So Far, So Good, but Check Back Later
One by one, first Dwight Gooden, then Bret Saberhagen, then John Franco, they climbed atop the mound, each carrying his own misgivings.
There were flashes of forced humor and routines of superstition and habit.
Then, there was silence.
Then, there were pitches.
The firing squad on the mound, while generating an atmosphere of fear, produced no victims.
Arms were in ice afterward, but not in slings.
This is progress in the fragile world of the New York Mets.


Historical Society Shuts Its Doors, but Still Hopes
After 188 years as New York City's archive and attic, the New-York Historical Society closed its massive bronze doors last night for what may have been the last time, struggling to find a way to reincarnate itself.
Just before the final closing, about 120 authors, scholars and historians gathered outside the low, gray granite temple on Central Park West both in protest and mourning.
Besides placards, some demonstrators brandished books that owed their existence to the society's collections.


11-Year-Old Is Shot Near Brooklyn Store
An 11-year-old boy walking to a corner store with a friend was shot and critically wounded in Brooklyn yesterday, apparently the unintended victim of neighborhood gunfire, the police said.
The youth, who was not identified because of his age, was believed to have been outside the store near his home in Bedford-Stuyvesant when the shooting occurred shortly after 4 P.M. near the corner of Marcy and Vernon Avenues.


Clinton, in Hyde Park Visit, Urges A Renewal of Roosevelt's Legacy
President Clinton paid homage to the memory of Franklin D. Roosevelt today and then, walking arm in arm with the grandson of the 32d President, laid a red rose on the grave of the statesman to whom he would like to link his policies and his political fortunes.
"I think of President Roosevelt in the depths of the Depression having gone through his personal journey to cope with his personal problems, summoning interior strength and reserve to lift the nation's vision," Mr.
Clinton said in a speech at the Haviland Middle School, which was built by Roosevelt's Works Progress Administration during the New Deal.


Don't Reward Angola With U.S. Recognition; Pretoria Aims for Peace
To the Editor:
"Time, at Last, to Recognize Angola" (editorial, Feb. 10) contains a gratuitous and unwarranted reference to South Africa: "If peace talks fail," you state, "the U.N. could reasonably post monitors along frontiers to check any arms-smuggling to Mr. Savimbi from South Africa."


2 Boys Held in Killing Of Toddler in Britain
The police in Liverpool said today that they were questioning two 10-year-old boys in connection with the killing last week of a 2-year-old who disappeared from a shopping center.
The killing of Jamie Bulger, whose mutilated body was found on a railroad embankment Sunday two miles from the shopping center, has horrified Britain and prompted a wave of concern about the safety of children and the prevalence of teen-age crime.


Administration Favoring a Plan To Airdrop Supplies Into Bosnia
The Clinton Administration is moving toward a plan to use American cargo planes to drop relief supplies to parts of Bosnia and Herzegovinanot being reached by United Nations aid deliveries, Administration officials said today.
Administration officials indicated that they had reached a decision in principle to make such airdrops, which would represent the first direct use of American military forces in the war-torn country.


Hitler Didn't Ride To Power on Inflation
To the Editor:
"The Urgency of Aiding Russia" (editorial, Jan. 27) warns that Russia could experience the kind of hyperinflation that helped bring forth Hitler.
While you may be correct on the need to aid Russia, you are wrong that inflation brought Hitler to power.


West Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Police Officer Is Suspended After Drug Test
A Brooklyn police sergeant has been suspended after he tested positive for cocaine, and Internal Affairs investigators are looking into whether he shot himself in the hand to avoid an earlier drug test, the authorities said yesterday.
Sgt.
Thomas Kennedy, 31 years old, who has been with the department for 11 years, was suspended on Thursday after department officials received results of the test, which was administered after he went to the hospital for his hand wound, said Lieut.
Raymond O'Donnell, a police spokesman.


CDI Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


After the Carnage of Summer; Recovering From 12 Shootings, a Bronx Street Is in Flux
Three months ago, Lydia Suarez scraped up what little money she had, and, more for survival than for upward mobility, followed the decades-old migration of families northward from the South Bronx.
In her new home, a rundown five-bedroom apartment in the Williamsbridge section of the borough, she pays $825 a month, $225 more than before, and there is often no heat or hot water and the doorknob to the apartment door falls off when turned.
But it is a relief to be there.


Insight; Buying Banks
Bank stocks bounded ahead yesterday, helped in general by lower interest rates and a slowdown in real estate losses.
Citicorp, the nation's largest bank, has the extra advantage of a successful cost-cutting program.
Yesterday, its stock advanced 1 1/2, to 26 1/4, as some analysts affirmed their buy recommendations.


Bowe, in Soweto, Says He's in A.N.C.'s Corner
The world heavyweight champion RIDDICK BOWE, who is visiting South Africa, toured the township of Soweto yesterday and proclaimed his support for the African National Congress.
Bowe addressed a fund-raising conference staged by the A.N.C., which previously waged an armed struggle against the white Government.


Bernard Feld, Who Led Scientists In Fighting Arms Race, Dies at 73
Bernard T. Feld, a physicist who helped Enrico Fermi develop the atomic bomb but then became so horrified by its destructive power that he spent much of his life working to end the arms race, died yesterday at his home in Brooklyn.
He was 73.
He had lymphoma, said his wife, Ellen Banks Feld, a painter.


Meeting Hope and Doubt Arm in Arm
The audiences hearing President Clinton's traveling salesman's pitch for his economic package have been friendly, even awe-struck, carefully stocked with Democrats and eager to be persuaded.
Yet beneath the ovations and the roars of approval, there has been a skepticism expressed by many who heard Mr.
Clinton's hard sell firsthand over the last two days.


Review/Music; A 'St. Matthew' Passion Leaves Echoes of Faith
When Kurt Masur led the final chorus of Bach's "St. Matthew" Passion at Avery Fisher Hall on Thursday night, the music had the breadth and warmth of a caress, coming after more than three hours of finely etched music making.
In its encyclopedic survey of religious feelings, Bach's work had imitated in its musical lines the lashes of a whip, the weeping of the faithful, the fury of a crowd, the mockery of nonbelievers; the music had followed the text of the passion, interpolated with the exquisite commentary of arias and chorales.
In the concluding moments, all the contrasts and trials of the story seemed a dream, leaving behind a gentle faith.
This was obviously not, for Mr.
Masur, a casual performance.
There is, of course, the geographic connection he has with the music: Bach's passion was composed and first heard in Leipzig, where Mr.
Masur has been music director of the Gewandhaus Orchestra since 1970.
But Mr.
Masur, in leading 24 members of the New York Philharmonic along with the Westminster Symphonic Choir in this work, also showed a close connection with its dramatic and religious meaning.
The strict orthodoxies of authenticity were put aside, without doing harm to the score itself.
There were times when matters became mundane, when there was too much stress, or too much exaggeration, but those were minor flaws in a performance that spoke of a deep love for this music and its powers. (It will be repeated tonight.)


G.O.P. SEEKS ALLIES AMONG DEMOCRATS
Although they are virtually united in criticizing the Clinton economic plan as the same old Democratic tax-and-spend policies, Congressional Republicans concede that when it comes to fighting it they are outnumbered and outgunned.
So they are looking for help from an unexpected source: Congressional Democrats.
The Democrats are unlikely to help them kill the plan, the Republicans reason, but it might be possible to seduce enough away from the party to modify the proposal along Republican lines, with more spending cuts and fewer tax increases.


Sex-Assault Trial Focuses On Mental Defectiveness
The young woman whom four former Glen Ridge football players are accused of sexually assaulting nearly four years ago was passive, dependent and "an easy target for sexual exploitation," a prosecutor argued today.
The prosecutor, Glenn D. Goldberg, told the jury that the woman was so eager for the friendship of the athletes that she was mentally incapable of resisting the sexual activities on March 1, 1989, involving a baseball bat, a broom handle and a stick.


Connecticut, New Jersey and New York Report Tax Revenue Increases
New York, New Jersey and Connecticut this week reported substantial increases in tax receipts for December, with income tax revenue in New Jersey and Connecticut rising almost 40 percent over the previous year.
The increase in New York was more than 20 percent.
The figures came within days of the release of a national study that found that growing economic activity had increased the sales tax and income tax receipts of most states in September, October and November.


Nets Eye Edwards Of the Heat
The Nets are taking a good hard look at acquiring Miami Heat guard Kevin Edwards to become a backup shooting guard, but as interested as they are, there could be a problem fitting him under the salary cap.
Willis Reed, the Nets' general manager, said last evening that the team was definitely interested in the 6-foot-3-inch Edwards.
He made the National Basketball Association's all-rookie second team in 1989 but hasn't seen much playing time recently because of the large number of guards on the Miami roster.
Should he join the Nets, he would probably back up Drazen Petrovic.


KN Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Europeans Giving Up Advanced-TV Project
The European Community has decided to abandon development of its technology for a new generation of televisions, acknowledging that more advanced systems under consideration in the United States will almost certainly become the worldwide standard.
In recommending on Thursday that the community drop its plan to impose a European-developed high-definition system on broadcasters and program producers later in the decade, Martin Bangemann, the community's Commissioner of Industry and Technology, acknowledged that there was no point supporting a technology that had already been overtaken in the race to provide super-sharp television pictures.
The Global Norm
European officials said they were not conceding to the United States the right to dictate a worldwide standard.
But they said they believed that some form of the technology being tested in the United States by the Federal Communications Commission would become the global norm.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Sherman Obando, outfielder, and Mike Olquist, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Agreed to terms with Jim Byrd, infielder, and Greg Blosser, outfielder, to one-year contracts.


General Binding (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the marketing of the documentary film "Brother's Keeper" misidentified a theater involved in a dispute with Walt Disney Pictures.
It is the Coolidge Corner Theater in Brookline, Mass.


Jones Medical Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Turner Broadcasting System Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A table on Thursday showing the effects of President Clinton's proposed energy tax misstated the effective date.
It would be July 1, 1994.
The chart also misstated the unit of measurement by which the tax was calculated for natural gas; it was thousands of cubic feet.
An expanded and corrected chart appears today on page 6.


Communications Satellite Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wintertime, and the Living Is Easy


Freed Man To Return To Custody
A mentally ill man released by a judge from a psychiatric center two weeks ago despite a history of substance abuse and arrests was ordered back into custody yesterday by an appellate court pending a full hearing on whether he is dangerous to himself or others.
In an unusual ruling that reversed one of its own judges, the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in Manhattan directed that Francis Stuart, 38 years old, be recommitted to the state's South Beach Psychiatric Center on Staten Island while evidence of his condition and the probable impact of his release are examined by the court.


CHRONICLE
With this year's Golden Globe award for best actor already under his belt and with a chance of winning Academy Awards for best actor and best supporting actor, AL PACINO does not want for public accolades.
But more will be accorded him tonight when he receives the annual award of the American Museum of the Moving Image, which is in Astoria, Queens.
The speakers are to include Ron Silver, Sidney Lumet, Brian De Palma, Garry Marshall, Ellen Barkin, Alan Arkin and ALEC BALDWIN.


Washington National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CII Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Don't Reward Angola With U.S. Recognition
To the Editor:
"Time, at Last, to Recognize Angola" (editorial, Feb. 10) is based on an inaccurate appraisal of the situation in Angola, before and after the elections.
Recognition of the Government is the Clinton Administration's most potent policy tool.
It should be used carefully to advance peace, economic reconstruction and democracy.


Poverty Tied To Failures In Hartford
The state's final witness in its defense against a lawsuit challenging segregated conditions in Hartford's schools testified today that integrating them with suburban schools would not raise the achievement of city children because their basic problem is poverty.
As happened so many times in this 10-week-old trial, the state drew opposite conclusions from the plaintiffs, who also blame poverty for the poor performance of Hartford's schools, but seek to overcome it by linking them with schools in 21 surrounding towns.
The suit was brought by a coalition of civil-rights groups on behalf of Milo Sheff, now a Hartford eighth-grader, and 18 other schoolchildren.


Transamerica Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


JUDGE CLEARS WAY FOR THE PURCHASE OF NEW YORK POST
A Federal bankruptcy judge removed the biggest hurdle keeping Steven Hoffenberg from becoming the owner of The New York Post in a court proceeding yesterday that was part high finance and part street theater.
In a hearing that included a surprise appearance by a rival bidder who was quickly rejected, Judge Burton R. Lif land approved the sale of The Post to Mr.
Hoffenberg, indicating there were no other options.


U.S. TO URGE ISRAEL OVER PALESTINIANS
In an effort to revive the stalled Middle East peace negotiations, Secretary of State Warren Christopher will urge Israel to use a judicial review process to speed up the return of a significant number of the 400 Palestinians it deported to Lebanon in December, senior Administration officials said today.
United States and Egyptian officials said that Egypt's President, Hosni Mubarak, and Foreign Minister Amr Moussa suggested the new approach to Mr.
Christopher in more than two hours of talks in Cairo today.
Mr.
Christopher is scheduled to arrive in Jerusalem on Monday after visiting Jordan, Syria, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait.


Pegasus Gold reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cohu Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


'Kids Week' No Picnic for New York Parents
For Erica Legagneur, Kids Week, the winter vacation created by Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez for the one million New York City schoolchildren, was a wonderful adventure.
Instead of attending her second-grade class at Public School 235 in Flatbush, Brooklyn, she took the shiny subway to Manhattan, rode up the elevator to her mother's office in the Department of Consumer Affairs, pecked at the computer, put crayons to paper and played with her dolls -- before running out of things to do about halfway through the day.


'Can I Get Forty, Give Me Fifty': Purchasing Furniture at Auction, Cheaply
Profile: When they were married, Barbara and Gregory Allard had a strong interest in the decorative arts but little room and little money for furniture.
They were busy saving for the "home of their dreams." In 1979 they found a Victorian house in Stony Brook, L.I., that fit their ambitionss, but it needed a lot of work.
So before they could begin buying fine pieces they wanted to live with, they had to invest their savings in repairs and remodeling.
That left them with a scant budget for furniture, but by teaching themselves how to shop at auctions, they found they could get good quality at low prices, and over the years they have completely furnished their house with auction buys, most of them bargains.
Their home has become a local showplace and is now a stop on historic house tours.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Chang and Mansdorf Upset in Pro Indoor Second-seeded Pete Sampras rallied in the deciding tiebreaker to beat Richey Reneberg, 4-6, 6-4, 7-6 (8-6), last night at the United States Pro Indoor tournament in Philadelphia.
Sampras barely avoided joining third-seeded Michael Chang and eighth-seeded Amos Mansdorf of Israel as upset victims in the quarterfinals.
Mark Woodforde of Australia defeated Chang, 6-3, 6-4, to advance to a semifinal against wild-card Derrick Rostagno.
Rostagno, who ousted top-seeded Jim Courier earlier in the tournament, beat Mansdorf, 6-4, 6-3.
Sampras will play fourth-seeded Ivan Lendl, who beat fifth-seeded MaliVai Washington, 7-5, 6-2. (AP)
Seles Moves into Semifinals: Top-seeded Monica Seles and second-seeded Martina Navratilova advanced to the semifinals of the Paris Women's Open with easy victories yesterday.
Seles beat Mary Pierce of France, 6-2, 6-2, in little more than an hour, and Navratilova defeated Julie Halard of France, 6-0, 6-2, in 53 minutes.
The third-seeded player, Conchita Martinez of Spain, beat unseeded Karin Kschwendt of Germany, 6-3, 5-7, 6-3, and Jana Novotna of the Czech Republic, seeded fourth, defeated fifth-seeded Nathalie Tauziat of France, 7-6 (7-2), 4-6, 6-2.
In the semifinals, Seles will face Martinez, and Navratilova will meet Novotna. (AP)


Mets and Saberhagen Talk
The Mets and Bret Saberhagen, still at least two weeks from serious talks, this week began initial negotiation on a contract extension for the star right-handed pitcher.
General Manager Al Harazin telephoned Saberhagen's agent, Dennis Gilbert, on Tuesday and discussed the length of the extension.
"They talked about three years; we talked about six," a smiling Saberhagen said today.
"I suppose we'll move from there."


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Federal Reserve chairman endorsed President Clinton's economic plan.
Alan Greenspan told the Senate Banking Committee that the plan would reduce inflation if it was enacted.
He also indicated that the Fed would consider lowering rates if the plan were to drag down economic growth.  [ Page 1. ]
The era of supply-side economics begun by Ronald Reagan could end with President Clinton's proposal raising income taxes and reviving many deductions.
Economic Analysis.  [ 33. ]


Allen Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


9-Year-Old Kills Sister, 7
A 9-year-old boy killed his 7-year-old sister last night in a shooting in Montclair, N.J., that appeared to be accidental, the police said.
The children's grandmother, who was in the kitchen, heard a shot in a bedroom about 7 P.M.
The children's mother, Deirdre Gammon, a corrections officer at the Essex County Corrections Center in Caldwell, N.J., was at work.
The gun used in the shooting was apparently hers, the police said.
The girl, Deirdre Coleman, was taken by police helicopter to University Hospital in Newark, where she was pronounced dead at 7:56 P.M.


Frank W. Mendyk Jr., Police Inspector, 63
Frank W. Mendyk Jr., a former New York City Police Department inspector, died on Thursday at Long Island Jewish Hospital in New Hyde Park.
He was 63 and lived in Albertson, L.I.
He had melanoma, said a son, Robert.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.81
2.98
3.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.91
2.87
3.92
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.00
2.98
4.03
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.72
5.71
7.07
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.00
7.02
7.94
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.85
7.90
9.00
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.02
6.04
6.80
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Classical Music in Review
Lorraine Hunt and Kurt Ollmann Mezzo-soprano and baritone New York Festival of Song Greenwich House Music School


The Gossip: She's 70
And so, Literacy Volunteers gives a party for Liz Smith, the columnist, on Feb. 16.


Paris Couture
It may be an anachronism.
Certainly, it is an exorbitant adventure.
Yet, when the collective efforts of a handful of gifted creators result in a season like this one, it's clear that haute couture has its reasons.
Whatever the specific intent -- artistic expression, customer satisfaction, product endorsement -- the spring couture delivered.
Each designer had his distinct way of stating the case, but the overall impression was one of drenchingly feminine fashion and softer, less structured style.
Everyone expects Karl Lagerfeld to blaze a trail with the collection he designs for Chanel.
And he did.
Having first set forth the long, willowy line a year ago, Lagerfeld now suggests it be softened with wisps of ankle-length chiffon dresses that are marvels of cuts and techniques not seen since the 1930's.
What makes these dresses of the moment are the beautifully made, seemingly knockabout tweed jackets that go with them. (As usual, this Chanel collection was laced with superb jackets in enough variations to suit everyone, from the most sedate customer to the fastest of faddists.) And then, there were all those Lagerfeld for Chanel details that will surely spawn imitation, like the fluttery trailing collars and cuffs and the needle-toed booties.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Fashions of The Times/Magazine Part 2


Cacophony Vs. Content
To the Editor:
For years, old-time lefties like me have been trying to dispel the lie that the media are infested with Commie liberals.
Every time
I
turn on the tube some boorish, not-too-bright, right-wing idealogue is shouting his bigotry and ignorance at me.
We do not have similar niches for, say, Bella Abzug, Noam Chomsky or Gloria Steinem.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Agreed to terms with Jose Valentin, shortstop, and Otis Green and Francisco Gamez, pitchers, on one-year contracts.
National League
CINCINNATI REDS -- Agreed to terms with Steve Foster, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
NEW YORK METS -- Agreed to terms with Anthony Young, pitcher, and Azron Ledesma, shortstop, on one-year contracts.
FOOTBALL National Football League  CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Released Rodney Holman, tight end.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Basking Ridge  $170,000
142 South Maple Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 45-year-old ranch; new furnace, eat-in-kitchen, h/w floors; taxes $2,544.
Edison  $187,500
15 Wood Acres Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 25-year-old split level; kitchen w/center island, security system, 0.50-acre lot; taxes $3,233.
Fords  $106,000
770 King George Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, over-50-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, possible commercial, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,644.
Metuchen  $272,000
2 Stonegate Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 12-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, c/a, central vacuum, sprinklers; taxes $6,021.
Middlesex  $134,000
66 Marlborough Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; new w/w carpeting, move-in condition, full basement; taxes $3,482.
Millington  $380,000
166 Skyline Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 21-year-old colonial; 2d-floor sitting room, c/a, w/w carpeting; taxes $6,322.
OTHER AREAS Peekskill, N.Y.  $152,000
92 McGuire Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 68-year-old colonial; enclosed porch, dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement; taxes $2,463.
Norwalk, Conn.  $183,000
109 Keller Avenue  4-bedroom, 2- bath, 26-year-old Cape Cod; new roof and furnace, freshly painted, 0.50 acre; taxes $3,754.
Glen Cove, L.I.  $290,000
5 Hickory Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 25-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, family room, 0.5 acre; taxes $7,000.


Laurie Loveland, Eric S. Kratz
October wedding plans have been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Gordon Loveland of Port Washington, L.I., for their daughter Laurie Jill Loveland and Eric Steven Kratz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Kratz of White Plains.
Miss Loveland, 27, is a senior account executive at Silverman, Warren/Kremer Inc., a public relations concern in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is a first vice president in New York for the Bank Leumi Trust Company.
Her mother, Patricia Loveland, is a secretary at the Manorhaven School in Port Washington and the Deputy Mayor of the Village of Port Washington North.


2 YOUTHS ACCUSED OF CHILD'S KILLING
Two 10-year-old boys were charged with murder and kidnapping today in the death of James Bulger, the 2-year-old whose brutal killing has left this English port city convulsed with grief and anger, the police said.
The youths were also charged with attempted abduction of another toddler in a separate incident.


Flight the Focus of Florida Museum
A museum in St.
Petersburg, Fla., showcasing the world's first passenger airline has reopened after a $1.2 million renovation and expansion.
The museum, the St.
Petersburg Historical and Flight One Museum, at 335 Second Avenue, N.E., closed in 1991 for a major overhaul and reopened late last month.
In one pavilion is the Benoist airboat, a copy of a biplane that became part of the St.
Petersburg-Tampa Airboat Line run by the pilot Tony Jannus for three months in 1914.
The line carried 1,200 customers across the bay, one at a time, in a plane with a wingspan of only 45 feet.
"And none of them was hurt," a spokeswoman added.


Soft Hands, a Big Smile and a Piercing Gaze; A President's Personal Touches Become the Stuff of Memories in Hyde Park
For Donna Stein, it all came down to the touch of Bill Clinton's hands.
"His hands were so soft," she recalled Friday evening, a few hours after she and her husband, Sheldon, elbowed their way to the front of the room to congratulate the President after his economic address at the Haviland Middle School here.


A Toast to Brotherhood
Glasses lifted Feb. 12 in Equitable Building atrium.


At Work; Infant Bonding and Guilty Mothers
Children should be fed on a schedule.
Children should be fed when they're hungry.
Infants should be picked up when they cry.
They should be left to cry and remain unspoiled.
New mothers should stay home for a year.
Mothers can feel confident about returning to work in six weeks.
Day care inhibits development.
Day care accelerates development.
There is a common thread among these apparently contradictory opinions.
Each at one time or another has been offered with utter confidence to its audience of new parents, mothers especially, as scientific truth.
Delivered by doctors, nurses, psychologists and other child-rearing professionals, such expert advice has guided and intimidated parents for generations.


Gay Officers Find Acceptance On New York's Police Force
Before agreeing to "partner up" in Manhattan's Sixth Precinct, Police Officer Emma Llaurado took her fellow officer Debra Martinez aside.
"Look, Debbie," she warned, "I came here as an open lesbian; you may get labeled."


Yanks' Gallego Takes Another Shot at Goal
If you had told Mike Gallego a year ago that his first flirtation with regular playing time in baseball would be so fleeting, it might have caused his knees to buckle.
Rewarded with his very own starting position for the first time in his eight-year major league career, Gallego saw his dream come true trampled before opening day by a debilitating foot injury.


Making a Difference; Future of a Software Gamester
HIS company may have captured a generous share of the best-ever Christmas sales for the video-game industry, but Robert Holmes isn't about to stand pat.
As president of Acclaim Entertainment Inc., based in Oyster Bay, L.I., he knows that to remain atop the video software business he has to keep a step ahead of the game players.
So the next generation of games, he says, will have to do what few manage to do so far: trigger emotional responses in players way beyond just "I won the game." The new games, he said, will evoke the kind of "willing suspension of disbelief" that causes the heart to miss a beat when reading a suspenseful book or watching an action movie.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
AMERICAN POPULISM A Social History, 1877-1898.
By Robert C. McMath Jr.
Hill &amp; Wang, $30.


Brutal Winter? Summer Rentals Warm the Brokers
WINTER winds may still be blowing along the East End of Long Island and the Jersey Shore, but the market for summer-home rentals has already started to warm up in most places, according to real estate brokers in the New York metropolitan region's most popular vacation areas.
Traditionally, the weekend around Valentine's Day and President's Day marks the time when prospective renters start trekking out to their favorite seaside or rural vacation towns in search of summer homes where they will spend a week, a month, weekends or the entire season.


IN SHORT: FICTION
ANOTHER COUNTRY By Karel Schoeman. Sinclair-Stevenson/Trafalgar Square, $24.95.


World Class, in More Ways Than One
SUPPOSE you are an American designer and the job is to work up a new and semi-pricey Japanese car.
Suppose further that you like the look of the old Jaguar sedans, and that you were always a bit taken with the lopped-off trailing edge of the Peugeot 504's trunk.
Suppose, too, that you intended all along to steal Maserati's jewel-like clock and make it the centerpiece of your dashboard.
When you get done with your sketches and models and blueprints, what do you have?
Well, you might have the camel that was a horse designed by committee.
To say the least, you probably would have a polyglot automobile that bespeaks America, Japan, England, France and Italy.


Mick Jagger Owns Up to His Long Past
When Mick Jagger laughs, his whole face scrunches up, like a boy's.
The eyes become crescent slits; the chin juts forth; the famous mouth opens so wide a lion could stick its head in.
Mr.
Jagger laughs a lot.
It has the wondrous effect of wiping years off his face.
Now that he is nearly 50 years old, it seems a remarkable achievement that he should so effortlessly be able to give an impression, however fleeting, of innocence.
When Mr.
Jagger arrives for a luncheon interview at Le Bernardin in midtown Manhattan, one of the first things he does is crack a joke.
He is running late, and by the time he arrives, it is nearly 3 o'clock.
The lunch crowd has completely thinned out; the place is hushed, as if in reverential anticipation.
"Sorry I'm late," he says, bursting through the doors.
"We'll just have to get a souvlaki at the corner."


Islanders' Turgeon Shows He's Special, Too
Perhaps, in 10 or 20 years, there will be another ceremony before an Islanders game in Nassau Coliseum.
They will show highlight films and give gifts and hoist a banner to the rafters to retire a uniform number.
The number might be the "77" currently worn by Pierre Turgeon, a young veteran who is quietly blossoming from "good" to "great" among the scorers of the National Hockey League.


No Headline
If you let your 5-year-old eat dessert before he eats his spinach, he'll never eat his spinach, and history indicates that we're dealing with a lot of 5-year-olds here.
SENATOR DAVID L. BOREN,  Democrat of Oklahoma, on voting for new spending before voting for new taxes.  [ 1:6. ]


Before We Give Up Night Altogether
To the Editor:
You report Feb. 5 on a Russian space mirror that reflects the light of the sun into the dark, a principle that could change night into twilight, save electricity costs and extend planting and harvesting.
But what will happen to the usual diurnal rounds?


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
CONVERGENCE A Reconciliation of Judaism and Christianity in the Life of One Woman.
By Judith Bruder.
Doubleday, $20.


Vance-Owen Plan Offers a Fair Bosnia Solution; Muslim Anger Grows
To the Editor:
The unjust plan being forced by Cyrus Vance and Lord Owen on the Bosnian Muslims has a parallel in the Berlin Treaty of 1878 and the events surrounding it.
The Russo-Turkish War of 1877-78 was triggered by an expansion-bent Serbian attack on Ottoman Turkey in 1876.
Serbia's subsequent defeat resulted in a Russian ultimatum, endless talks and conferences, and ultimately war, Ottoman defeat and the imposition of the treaty on the Turks.
During the war, according to the reports of Henry Layard, the British Ambassador in Istanbul, some 300,000 Muslims were killed and a million uprooted.


Homosexuals in Israeli Army: No Official Discrimination, but Keep It Secret
For 15 years, Prof.
Uzi Even had done top-secret research for the military.
In the 1967 and 1973 wars he was assigned as an intelligence officer with combat units in Sinai and on the Golan Heights.
Then, after a security check 10 years ago turned up that he was living with another man, he decided he would no longer hide his homosexuality.


Guys And Dolls To End
STOMP!
STOMP!
STOMP!
A barbarian horde is marching through Jean-Paul Gaultier's Paris show.
On the feet, hefty boots.
On the head, horned Viking helmet.
Around the torso, shaggy shearling vest.
At the knees, a Scottish kilt or wraparound pin-stripe skirt.
When Gaultier first sent out men in skirts nine years ago, there were cries of outrage.
But then back in 1984, the male model in his ankle-length skirt had walked down the runway patting his nose with a powder puff.
This season's skirts were so he-man they might have soothed even the United States military.


Clinics Try to Close the Gap in Health Care for the Disabled
FRUSTRATED with what they see as the failure of the medical establishment to provide adequate services for handicapped people, agencies for the disabled are developing new means of delivering the services.
Academics, doctors and parents of the disabled estimate that 12,000 handicapped people on Long Island lack access to comprehensive medical care, and that number, the critics say, is growing.


A Baby Bell Primed for the Big Fight
IT looks like any other brick colonial home in this Washington suburb.
But for Raymond W. Smith, chairman and chief executive of the Bell Atlantic Corporation, it is both a dream house and a castle to be defended.
Linked to the outside world by optical fibers, the unoccupied house was built recently by Bell Atlantic to show how a telephone company can deliver far more than talk.


Dig It: The Hot New Trends for Spring
BEFORE the planting season is full speed ahead, gardeners may like to know what some garden merchandising experts are saying about the coming season.
Gardening remains the top leisure activity in the United States.
Analysts note that the dollars spent on garden products are at an all-time high.
They seem to agree that this leisure activity will remain as popular in the coming years and even predict a 20 percent increase in sales.


The Spin on Paddle: More Players on Deck
"NOBODY knows who Dick Squires is," responded the hale 61-year-old author and athlete when asked by a sporting goods manufacturer to update the book on platform tennis that he had written 23 years ago.
Not true, according to the current demand for his revised classic, "How to Play Platform Tennis."


Fatty Patten's Last Stand
The temple is normally a quiet, dark place for burning joss sticks and praying to the Queen of Heaven, perhaps leaving a small bribe of a few oranges to win her good will.
But this afternoon a mob of photographers and reporters is swarming in the darkness of the temple, elbowing and clawing to get to the altar in a way that would annoy the gentle Chinese goddess.
In the center of the commotion is a 48-year-old man in a suit and tie, a British politician who probably never heard of the Queen of Heaven but knows a photo opportunity when he sees one.
Chris Patten, the 28th and probably last British Governor of Hong Kong, seems about to make a horrendous mistake.
He eyes a fruit bowl and appears about to help himself to an apple, displaying a politician's knack for rounding out the photo, when a Chinese aide whispers something to him.
Governor Patten draws back and leaves the offering to the goddess alone.
A public relations disaster, stealing from one of Hong Kong's favorite deities, is averted.


Peering Into Places That Mere Eyes Cannot See
It was in GReece in the fifth century B.C. that the universe was parceled out into the four elements of earth, air, fire, and water, and all the fancy footnotes written by scientists in the centuries since then have not succeeded in erasing this elegant formula from the Western mind.
The James Danziger Gallery in SoHo borrows this cosmological conceit for "New Work 1: Regarding the Elements," an exhibition of four new photographic projects on view through Saturday.
But if you look hard enough at this small show of 20 photographs, you may also catch hints of a much more up-to-date and provocative thesis: that photography has played a major role in expanding the field of vision available to ordinary people.


Devils Rally in Support of Niedermayer, a Speedster
Scott Niedermayer of the Devils displays such elegance with the puck that when he darts out of his zone to the other end of the ice he leaves hockey fans thinking that the price of admission is worth it.
Niedermayer was the third pick over all in the 1991 draft, after Eric Lindros and Pat Falloon, but he is in only in his first full season in the National Hockey League.


The Cult of the Object
I AM sitting at an oval table made from fallen cherry tree in the Tea Room and Art Space of Felissimo, a place where I am supposed to feel in harmony with myself and all of life.
It is lunchtime.
I am drinking my unstrained apple juice from pressed green apples, in a glass goblet that can be described only as perfection.
I am trying to experience renewal.
But I am experiencing fatigue instead.
Within these walls in this turn-of-the-century town house on West 56th Street, a building that has been converted into the next generation of department store, I am being haunted by the Ghosts of Styles Past.
Do my eyes deceive me, or is that undulating terra-cotta wall the Ghost of Zona, that aromatic, once-revolutionary emporium of Tuscan and Santa Fe style?
Is that soap cushion with the small pebbles sewn into stainless-steel mesh so fine it feels like fabric the Ghost of Sointu, or of Smith &amp; Hawken, or of all those froggy green oxidized metal objets we can't stand to look at anymore?
Is that spiky-shaped muslin pillow that looks like a starfish on hallucinogens the Ghost of Philippe Starck's Toothbrushes?
Do all the young and beautiful salespeople swathed in black come from the Royalton?
Or is it the Paramount?
They look happy here.
I want to be happy here.


THE HIGH COST OF LIVING
It is a tribute to Armando Dimas's independence of judgment that he was able to maintain his will to live in the face of the medical-choice questions that he correctly perceived were slanted toward getting him to "give up and die."


Janice Meagher, Gregory Trojan
Mr. and Mrs.
Henry C. Meagher of Hyde Park, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Janice Coupe Meagher to Gregory Alan Trojan, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Trojan of Fishkill, N.Y.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Meagher is a director of marketing for Pepsico in Irvine, Calif.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the Mechanical Construction Corporation, a general contractor in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
Her maternal grandfather, the late James Crimmins, was a senior partner in the New York law firm of Chadbourne, Parke, Whiteside &amp; Wolff.


Data Update
INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS
N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
Jan. 93
Dec. 92
Jan. 92
Rents
181.1
+1.8
+2.0
Homeowner's costs
181.6
+0.5
+4.4
Fuel and utilities
119.4
+0.1
+2.6
*4*Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex
Somerset and Passaic.
Indexes: 1982-84=100
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
7.99
7.99
8.84
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.14
5.17
5.98
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.84
7.84
8.75
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.03
5.04
5.84
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.84
7.89
8.78
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.72
4.77
5.85
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.09
8.06
8.96
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.61
5.64
6.43
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.45
3.41
4.19
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.53
7.53
8.25
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Measuring Schools And Dollars
In "Comparing School Spending and Taxes" you reported on a recent study regarding per-pupil expenditures and assessed valuation (ability to pay) for each Nassau County school district.
Unfortunately, this study failed to look at student performance in Nassau County school districts, nor did it attempt to correlate per-pupil expenditure and student performance.
Moreover, Drs.
Mathews and Weinstein suggested that these variances in school spending resulted in poorer education for those districts expending fewer dollars than those districts labeled "Arrivers." What an injustice -- to draw such conclusions without studying performance!


The Far Side of the Gas Tax
To the Editor:
In "A Tax That Does Double, Triple Duty" (Viewpoints, Jan. 31), Lee Schipper forgets the double-triple damage that a gasoline-B.T.U.-energy tax can cause.


Judge Extends Filing Deadline In Airline Suit
A Federal District Court judge in Atlanta has extended to June 1 the deadline for travelers to file to participate in the proposed settlement in a class-action lawsuit accusing nine domestic airlines of price fixing.
As of mid-February, the judge, Marvin H. Shoob, had yet to rule in the case.
The law firm for the plaintiffs, Carr, Tabb &amp; Pope, in Atlanta, has established a toll-free line, (800) 220-1580, to receive requests for application forms for the vouchers, which will be usable toward tickets, and to help people in filling out applications.
The line operates from 8 A.M. to 10 P.M.
Monday to Thursday; from 8 A.M. to 9 P.M. on Friday and from 10 A.M. to 2 P.M. on Saturday.


FEB. 14-20: A Furor Over Relief; Even a Weak Response To Bosnia Is Hard to Sustain
Last week could go down as emblematic of the hesitation, half-fulfilled promises and confusion that have characterized the world's response to the Bosnian war.
The week began with the Bosnian Government refusing to accept United Nations relief shipments for Sarajevo, the capital, until officials succeeded in overcoming Serbian obstacles to the delivery of relief to besieged Muslims in eastern Bosnia.
In response, Sadako Ogata, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, halted virtually the entire relief operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, criticizing all sides in the conflict for "mixing politics with humanitarian relief."


Candice Solomon, Louis Michel Doyon
AS guests arrived at Louis Michel Doyon and Candice Solomon's wedding last Sunday evening, the big question was, what would the bride be wearing?
Ms.
Solomon, who owns a bright red Harley-Davidson motorcycle and has cropped blond hair, is a wedding-dress designer.
Her tiny pink shop in SoHo, One of a Kind Bride, on Thompson Street, is filled with dresses inspired by Christian Dior ball gowns from the 1950's, ballerina costumes and the wardrobe of Glenda the Good Witch.


CLOSING THE FILES
Fifty years ago, K.G.B. photographers recorded the final stares at history of these innocent people: doomed citizens caught in the punctilious bureaucracy's final tolling, glimpse after glimpse, only hours before Joseph Stalin's terror police took them to a forest south of Moscow and, in the massive, grisly routine of that time, summarily shot them to death.
There was more mercy and justice in the death of the Soviet Government a few years ago than that system ever allowed these, its citizens, so vaguely, maliciously accused and shot as "counterrevolutionaries" to satiate the paranoid delusions of Stalin.
Memorial, the Russian group dedicated to unearthing the history of the millions of innocents slain in the domestic reign of terror, has slowly been granted access to some of the top-secret dossiers of the K.G.B. -- finding hundreds of thousands of workers and scholars, peasants and intellectuals staring forth.
At least some of the victims' stares can now be requited.


A Mystery Haunts The Ages
When Richard Gere drunkenly asks Jodie Foster, "So who do you think I am?," he seems to be posing the crucial question in "Sommersby." The plot, after all, revolves around whether Mr.
Gere is a Civil War veteran named Jack Sommersby or a clever imposter returned from six years of war to claim Sommersby's house, land and wife.
But the question he so recklessly flings at his (possible) wife is immediately followed by one that matters more: "Whoever you think I am, do you love me?"
That frisson of uncertainty, that hint of forbidden passion and of a dangerous secret acted out in public is at the heart of "Sommersby" and of the endlessly alluring story that inspired it.
Behind "Sommersby" is the 1982 French film "The Return of Martin Guerre," and behind
that
film is the historical Martin Guerre, a 16th-century French peasant who lived a life so enigmatic that three centuries' worth of history and psychology have not cleared up its ambiguities.


THE HIGH COST OF LIVING
The story of Armando Dimas illustrates the difference between two value systems: that of the doctors and nurses who kept asking, "Who would want to live like that?" and that of Dimas, who answered that he could still enjoy his family.


Competitions Search For Young Performers
THE Eastern Connecticut Symphony invites the public to attend without charge its 34th annual Young Artist Competition this afternoon.
Starting at 1 o'clock in Dana Hall on the Connecticut College campus, the 10 finalists will vie for cash awards and a guest appearance as soloist with the orchestra next season.
For more details, or a list of the laureates, call the symphony office tomorrow at 443-2876.
The Greenwich Symphony Orchestra Guild is seeking a recipient of its 32d annual Dorothy Gluckmann Music Award, the $1,000 prize to be awarded in April to a student instrumentalist from Fairfield County (or Port Chester and Rye in Westchester County).
An audition tape must be submitted by March 1, however, so interested players should call 637-1680 or 869-2664 to get details and an application form.


Reading Test Questioned After Big Drop in Scores
Something went awry with the basic-skills test given to New Jersey's 80,000 eighth-graders last March: reading scores dropped sharply.
But why it happened, and how, has still not been fully explained, even as the State Education Department prepares to administer this year's round of exams next month.
The startling nature of the results on the test, which was apparently revised to make it harder for 1992, came to the attention of the new Education Commissioner, Mary Lee Fitzgerald, after she took office Jan. 4.
Two weeks ago, she told a state Board of Education meeting that she had doubts about the validity of the cutoff score imposed by the test makers.


Update; Man Arrested in Slaying Of 80-Year-Old Is Arraigned
Christopher Battiste, who was arrested in January in the fatal bludgeoning of an 80-year-old woman on the front steps of her Bronx church, was formally arraigned last week on charges of murder, robbery and criminal possession of a weapon, a piece of pipe.
Mr.
Battiste, in the same sweater and slacks he was wearing when arrested, stood silently before Justice Burton G. Hecht of Bronx Supreme Court as his court-appointed lawyer, Alvin C. Morris, requested a psychiatric examination for him to determine whether he was competent to stand trial.


New Lodges, Night and Day
The Northwestern United States has two new timber lodges with a rustic flavor, one for overnight guests and the other for day visitors.
Skamania Lodge, in Stevenson, Wash., 45 miles east of Portland, Ore., is scheduled to open Friday.
Built on a hill overlooking the Columbia River Gorge and the Cascade Mountains, the 195-room lodge is built of heavy timber and adorned with huge stone fireplaces and American Indian art.
Some of the rooms have fireplaces and almost all have king-sized beds wrapped in Pendleton wool blankets.
The lodge will also house a United States Forest Service Information Center.


Elizabeth Brack, Mark Mullen
Mr. and Mrs.
Reginald K. Brack Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Mulveyhill Brack, to Mark Edward Mullen, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold Mullen of New Orleans.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Brack, 27, is a freelance reporter for television and magazines in San Francisco.
She graduated from Vanderbilt University.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive officer of Time Inc. in New York, and the chairman of the National Urban League.


Another Way Around Stage Fright
To the Editor:
At 40,000 feet on Super Sunday I read "Speaking for Myself . . . I'd Really Rather Not" (Executive Life, Jan. 31) about public speaking and its value to all.


Charlotte Firth And Ian Walsh
First Lieut.
Charlotte Virginia Firth and First Lieut.
Ian Kennard Walsh, both of the United States Marine Corps, were married yesterday at the University of Virginia Chapel in Charlottesville, Va.
The Rev.
Daniel Burke, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Walsh, 25, is an aviation maintenance control officer stationed in Cherry Point, N.C.
She graduated from the University of Virginia.
She is a daughter of John M. Firth of Milwaukee and Edith B. Firth of Charlottesville.
Her father is the special-education teacher at North Division High School in Milwaukee.
Her mother is a teacher at Johnson Elementary School in Charlottesville.


Talking: Mortgages; New Ways To Provide Services
SOME interesting new mortgage opportunities are emerging this spring.
But borrowers should be cautious since the compelling nature of the selling strategies may hide the drawbacks.
One change is due to liberalization of Government regulations.
Another will permit a borrower to pledge securities in place of the customary down payment.


FAREWELL, HUCK
I don't know if I was more saddened that a police sergeant whipped a 12-year-old with a belt or that the victim, now an adult, recalled the beating with so much admiration for the officer who administered it (About Men: "Farewell, Huck," by Lloyd Van Brunt, Jan. 24).


Patricia Wagstaff, Mr. Dohrmann
Patricia Dignus Wagstaff, an insurance broker in Stockholm for Marsh &amp; McLennan, was married yesterday to Carl Olov Christian Dohrmann, a managing director of the company and the chief executive of the Stockholm office.
The Rev.
Ken MacKinney performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Hameau Chapel in Verbier, Switzerland.
Mrs.
Dohrmann, 27, graduated from Colby College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Wagstaff 3d of Oyster Bay, L.I.
Her father is a management consultant there.


Graffiti
To the Editor:
Reflecting on your Talking Graffiti column on Jan. 17, I recall some 45 years ago, as a little boy growing up in Venice, seeing graffiti and thinking of it as art.


THE REFORMATION OF A STREET PREACHER
You can give him the respectable family and house in Englewood, and some famous new friends, but Al Sharpton remains the self-promoting troublemaker whose ego and love for the news media has set race relations back many years.
He remains a calculating menace whose only motives are to further himself and to play more devastating pranks on the public.
Keep Reverend Al in his pulpit, if he has one, and out of serious politics.
I am in shock that you saw fit to put him on your cover S. LEVINE
North Brunswick, N.J.


Toast to Breakfast
To the Editor: William Weaver's article, "A Toast to Breakfast," (Jan. 17) recalled an experience of many years ago when I traveled to Budapest.
I stayed with my great-aunt, a wonderful lady who had been widowed during the war and who regarded this first visit by an American relative as nothing short of a royal occasion.
I am not a breakfast person but was looking forward to eating some of the traditional cured Hungarian bacons, eaten with chunks of bread.
Back home, my dad would occasionally make an early morning run into the Hungarian shops of Manhattan in Yorkville, where he would buy these treats for our Sunday breakfast.


Foreign Affairs; Bill Did Good
This column is to praise President Clinton for his stunningly honest and realistic economic speech last week and to point out that leaders abroad are hailing it left and right.
I am very annoyed at myself for attacking the speech for scanting foreign policy issues without first making clear the pride I felt in a President talking to the American people as adults.
Who knows if his plan for revitalizing the economy will work, but it was pure pleasure to hear a Presidential address on the economy that seemed to make sense and wasn't riddled with baloney.


Kendall Stevinson, Joseph Margiotta
Dr.
Kendall Lee Stevinson, a resident in obstetrics and gynecology at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Joseph Anthony Margiotta, a resident in anesthesiology at the hospital.
Msgr.
John F. Corr performed the ceremony at the Church of Christ the King in New Vernon, N.J.
The bride, 29, graduated from Bryn Mawr College and received her medical degree from the University of Rochester.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley R. Stevinson of Morristown, N.J.
The bride's father is an assistant general counsel at the Allied Signal Corporation in Morristown.


Does Anyone Care Who Killed Malcolm X?
Malcolm X was shot to death 28 years ago today at the Audubon Ballroom in upper Manhattan.
Five men from the Nation of Islam's Temple No. 25 in Newark made up the assassination squad.
The only one arrested at the scene was 23-year-old Talmadge Hayer, who was shot in the leg by one of Malcolm's bodyguards.
The other four fled and were never pursued for the murder.
Overlooked in the publicity avalanche that accompanied Spike Lee's film "Malcolm X" was the significant contribution that a companion book written by Mr.
Lee (with Ralph Wiley) made toward a historical resolution of Malcolm's death.


Sonia Flanders, Richard McArdle
Sonia Simone Flanders, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James W. Flanders Jr. of Washington, was married there yesterday to Richard FX McArdle, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard McArdle of Naples, Fla.
The Rev.
James Adams performed the ceremony at St.
Mark's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
McArdle, 29, is a senior women's design product manager for Polo Ralph Lauren Corporation in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father is a voice teacher in Washington.
Her mother, Claire Flanders, is a photographer there.


Judge Gerhard Gesell Dies at 82; Oversaw Big Cases
Gerhard A. Gesell, a Federal judge who presided over momentous cases in the Watergate scandals, the release of the secret Pentagon Papers, the Iran-contra affair and the legalization of abortion, died on Friday at his home in Washington.
He was 82.
The cause of death was liver cancer, his family said.


Clinton's Economic Opus: A Thousand Lines of Type
The Highlights President Clinton proposed an ambitious plan to remake the American economy, raising taxes on energy, business and the rich, making deep cuts in the military, the Federal bureaucracy and health care payments, and trimming the budget deficit.
As Republicans dug in their heels, Mr.
Clinton and his aides began a cross-country campaign to sell the program to the American people.
DEFICIT REDUCTION Over the next four years, the plan would have the Government take in $246 billion in new taxes and spend $247 billion less than planned in present budgets.
It would increase other spending on "stimulus and investment" by $169 billion.
The net reduction in the deficit over those four years would be $325 billion.
But deficit reduction would not begin until next year, because an extra $30 billion would be spent this year to stimulate the economy. (1) (see The Fine Print at right)


Toast to Breakfast
To the Editor: William Weaver's entertaining article brought to mind our own experience.
Some years ago we visited Wiesbaden, Germany, and took breakfast in a well-appointed hotel dining room.
A generous platter of meats, cheeses and bread was served.
We were nearly finished when the waiter appeared with boiled eggs.
We politely declined, whereupon he drew himself up and barked, "Egg is included!" He stood over us indignantly and watched until we had consumed every unwelcome morsel.


Joanne Barbara, K. L. Friedman
Joanne Barbara, a lawyer, was married last evening to Kenneth L. Friedman, a consultant.
Rabbi Jeffrey K. Salkin performed the ceremony at the Central Synagogue of Nassau in Rockville Centre, L.I.
Mrs.
Friedman is a partner in Barbara &amp; Barbara, a law firm in Garden City, L.I.
A graduate of New York University, she received her law degree from St.
John's University.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Dominick A. Barbara of Highland Beach, Fla.
Her father, now retired, was a psychiatrist in New York and is the author of several books on speech and hearing problems.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


A Child Star Who Grew Up, Sans Angst
Diane Lane is describing how she went on her first audition, at the age of 6: "There was an ad in The Village Voice asking for a girl, age 7 to 11, to play one of the children in the La Mama production of 'Medea.' My dad said, 'You want to be in a play?' I didn't know what a play was. I didn't even see movies. It was cartoons and 'Romper Room' for me."
Her father took her to the audition.
"I lied about my age," she says.
"I said I was 7. They asked me to say some words backward -- 'What's "car" backward?' 'Rack?' Gee, what a genius!' I got the part. We did the play in Greek. I still know my lines. But I was completely disconnected to
performance
as a word. And
career
was a lifetime away as a thought."


Helping the Retarded Help Themselves
SUPPORT, not supervision, is the watchword of the Community Living Corporation in Mount Kisco, an agency that maintains 3 group homes and 20 apartments for 100 people with developmental disabilities.
The concept that mentally retarded people can successfully live in the community if they receive some support was radical in 1966 when the first community-residence program was started, said John J. Signorelli, the executive director of the nonprofit agency.


The Far Side of the Gas Tax
To the Editor:
Mr.
Schipper wants the American public to accept a gasoline price of $3.15 a gallon, a price boosted that high by a vastly increased Federal motor fuel tax.


For 3-Way Switches, Test Voltage and Continuity
A PAIR of wall switches that control a single outlet like a ceiling light are called three-way switches.
When such an outlet does not work because of a faulty switch, testing is required.
That minor task and replacing the bad switch are easy to do.
To test the switches, use a continuity tester, which costs about $3.
Testers resemble oversize fountain pens, contain batteries and have pointed probes at one end.
At the other end are a small light bulb and a wire with an alligator clip.
For all household electrical repairs, you will also need a voltage tester.
That consists of a light bulb and two wire probes, but not batteries.
Voltage testers usually cost less than continuity testers.


Hello, Jung Lovers
LOVE'S STORY TOLD
A Life of Henry A. Murray.
By Forrest G. Robinson.
Illustrated. 459 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.:  Harvard University Press. $29.95.


Jersey Shore Journal; Whale-Watching Cruises Take a Northerly Turn
WHALE-WATCHING excursions, a staple of the Cape May area, have arrived along the northern Jersey Shore as two companies there have started regular winter weekend voyages.
Since Dec. 26, TNT Hydrolines Inc. has been sending out a whale-watching cruise each Saturday and Sunday from Highlands, just south of Sandy Hook.
Each trip attracts about 150 people on the boat's three decks.


Time to Set One's Sights On the Outhouse Shot
I have yet to master the art of shooting geese from an outhouse.
This shortcoming became obvious after David Tilton invited me to hunt for Canada geese with him during the late season, Jan. 1 - Feb. 5, for the birds in coastal Massachusetts.
David has a hunting rights arrangement with Arnold Fisher, a farmer on Martha's Vineyard whose holdings are much-frequented by the birds.


Can America Endure Kicking A Deficit Habit?
ECONOMISTS tend to assume that every economic cycle will be like the previous ones.
That is why nearly all were stunned by how long it took the economy to begin a significant recovery after the 1990-91 recession.
And it is why President Clinton's economic plan is provoking talk of a new recession.
Underlying such talk is the fear that this economy is like a heroin addict, able to function only with a massive injection of fiscal stimulus.
Addicts know that the drugs are likely to lead to death, but they crave the immediate high and fear the pain that would come from withdrawal symptoms.


Awash in Pain, Sarajevo Is Sinking Into Despair
Early one morning last week, long before the sun burned the mists out of the mountain-ringed bowl in which Sarajevo sits, a lone figure emerged from an apartment building high above the city center and set out on crutches for the one-mile walk to work.
Mirza Hadzanovic, a 35-year-old police officer, was the only pedestrian on Mose Pijade Street at 6:45 A.M., and his progress, on the one leg left to him after he was hit by a mortar shell last summer, was painful to watch.
It was also dangerous: his journey was punctuated by the whistle of shells fired from the mountains and by huge blasts as they exploded into apartments, the Kosevo Hospital complex and other buildings.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
East Islip  $745,000
10 The Moor  5-bedroom, 4-bath, 21-year-old ranch; dining room, den, maid's room, Florida room, 3-car garage, 1 acre; taxes $14,100.
East Northport  $225,000
24 Autumn Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 28-year-old ranch; family room, fireplace, 0.5 acre, 2-car garage; taxes $5,200.
Glen Cove  $290,000
5 Hickory Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 25-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, 0.5 acre; taxes $7,000.
Hauppauge  $188,000
8 Capitol Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 25-year-old colonial; dining room, den, fireplace, finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $6,000.
Head of Harbor  $309,000
1 Valleywood Court West  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; dining room, family room, den, library, 2-car garage, 2 acres; taxes $7,200.
Nesconset  $159,800
115 Sheppard Lane  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 22-year-old ranch; dining room, family room, fireplace, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $5,400.
OTHER AREAS Peekskill, N.Y.  $152,000
92 McGuire Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 68-year-old colonial; enclosed porch, dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement; taxes $2,463.
Norwalk, Conn.  $183,000
109 Keller Avenue  4-bedroom, 2- bath, 26-year-old Cape Cod; new roof and furnace, freshly painted, 0.50 acre; taxes $3,754.
Basking Ridge, N.J.  $170,000
142 South Maple Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 45-year-old ranch; new furnace, h/w floors; taxes $2,544.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Black History
FREEDOM'S CHILDREN
Young Civil Rights Activists Tell Their Own Stories.
By Ellen Levine.
Illustrated. 167 pp.
New York:  G.P.
Putnam's Sons. $16.95. (Ages 12 and up)
MISSISSIPPI CHALLENGE
By Mildred Pitts Walter.
Illustrated. 205 pp.
New York: Bradbury Press. $18.95. (Ages 11 and up)


Customs Agents Confront New Crowds at Newark
SOME 200 people, just arrived at Newark International Airport from Jamaica, were milling about the baggage carousel one recent evening when Edward Morera, a 34-year-old senior inspector, strolled over to talk to a young couple with a baby.
"Hi," he greeted them. "Did you have good weather in Jamaica?"


Dye Tie?
To the Editor:
By alerting Bill Clinton to the hazards of hair dye, has Rush Limbaugh unwittingly shed light on the cause of the hideous embarrassment that was the Reagan Presidency?
PATRIK HORNAK-STOLZ Seattle


Giving the Salon Concert A New Style and Purpose
Each month, Anne Ratner, who will soon turn 88, visits Copake, in upstate New York, and walks along country paths with her 36-year-old granddaughter Abby or another resident of Camphill Village.
Founded on the principles of Rudolf Steiner, an Austrian philosopher and educator, Camphill is a community in which mentally handicapped adults and dedicated workers share life on an equal basis, with everyone, at whatever level of ability, contributing to the well-being of the whole.
When Mrs.
Ratner returns to Manhattan, Camphill is never far from her mind.
For three decades she has organized concerts in her home, in which fine musicians, many of international renown, donate their services to raise funds for the mentally handicapped.
In substance and style, her "Famed Benefit Concert Series" is unique.


Can Tourists Learn to Tread Lightly?
EVERY year, thousands of people pay up to $5,000 a week for the right to snap pictures of Kodiak brown bears on their home turf, savagely beautiful Kodiak Island in the Gulf of Alaska.
The problem, from the bears' point of view, is that there are not a lot of places left in the world where they can gulp huge quantities of king salmon without human interference.
If too many spectators line the swollen rivers of the island, the bears will start to change their behavior, maybe even directing their appetite toward tourists.
That is the conundrum facing modern tourism in distant and unscarred lands.
More and more, people who travel are clamoring for places where the culture is untouched by MTV, and the land is yet to be burdened with warehouse shopping centers.
But visitors can change the character of a place.


Clinton Takes Questions From a Young Audience


The Etiquette of Wearing Nearly Nothing
Few things should come between a woman and her fashion, but some are essential.
Here's how to bare down without baring all.


When Teachers Share Their Dreams
Aladdin plus a genie equals magic.
The stuff of dreams?
True, but not necessarily a Disney production.
Scott McVay, executive director of the Geraldine R. Dodge Foundation, grants wishes (New Jersey Q &amp; A, "The Ingenuity of the Dodge Foundation," Jan. 24).
Each year the teachers of Morris County are invited to dream.
These dreams become inspirations that, when shared with the Dodge Foundation and judged by our peers, grant us the opportunity to become true educators.


'Pearls': The Nightlife
Sexy and sassy.
Shiny and sheer.
Some are mad.
Some even a little bad.
But almost all cost less than $500.


Of Portraits Small and Big
DUANE MICHALS, the 61-year-old photographer who possesses the wit of a sage and the enthusiasm of a young man in love, set up a temporary studio in the lobby of Sotheby's on Monday night.
He and three other esteemed photographers were taking 8-by-10 Polaroid portraits of guests for $750 each at a photography auction to benefit Friends in Deed, a support organization for the terminally ill.
While a crowd was milling about, drinking cocktails and viewing the photographs to be sold, Mr.
Michals was getting ready to take a picture of a father and son, a subject he favors the way Renaissance painters favored the Madonna and child.


The Things That Haunt Them
THE ORACLE AT STONELEIGH COURT
Stories. By Peter Taylor. 324 pp. New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $22.


For Spring, the Latest in Fashion
FASHION can be as cruel to a flower as to the paisley tie: as soon as it's in, it's out.
Just as the spring winds blow, and skirts go up and down, so go the fates of flowers.
Take the day lily, for instance, that humble orange lily so familiar to country roadsides.


Tracing History Through Quilts
Re: "Quilt Discovery Days: And Now for the Payoff" (Jan. 17):
The exhibition described, "New Jersey Quilts 1777 to 1950: Contributions to an American Tradition," at the Morris Museum, features one of my grandmother's quilts: "Mexican Feathers," by Elizabeth Moravek.
Both the artistry of the quilts displayed and the astute documentation in the accompanying catalogue (entitled the same as the exhibition) have evoked many fond memories for me, and they have sparked the sharing of warm reminiscences among my family members.


Haitian Ferry Sinks and Hundreds Die


Death in a Jailhouse: The Ruling, A Suicide; The Fear, a Lynching
They found the body of Andre Jones hanging in a dank jailhouse shower stall, a black lace from his gray Air Jordan sneakers forming a noose around his neck, a day before he was supposed to start college at Alcorn State University.
State and Federal officials have ruled it a suicide, committed, they say, by a young man who was probably despondent about being caught driving a stolen vehicle and facing the prospect of going to prison.
His family and supporters call it a lynching disguised as a suicide.


Miss Scarbrough, Bernee Dunson
Charlotte Page-Scarbrough of Teaneck, N.J., has announced the engagement of her daughter, Inez Hillary Scarbrough, to Dr.
Bernee C. Dunson, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
C.
Kenneth Dunson of Albany, Ga.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Scarbrough, who is known as Hillary, graduated from Howard University.
She is a candidate for an M.B.A. at Clark Atlanta University.
Her father, the late Thomas J. Scarbrough, was a cost auditor for the Atomic Energy Commission in New York.
Her mother, who is retired, was a reading specialist at Teaneck High School.


'Twentysomethings' Can Give to Society
As a "twentysomething" male who recently returned to his parents' empty nest, I certainly relate to the young people featured in " 'Twentysomething' and Home Again on L.I."  [ Jan. 31 ] .
But I wonder whether the comfort and economic security of returning home need be accompanied by a sedate social life.
After all, there is plenty for twentysomethings to do on Long Island.
Long Island's political and social causes, as well as charitable business and civic groups, need energetic and enthusiastic young people.
And given our uncertain, economic future, what better way to shape our own destiny.


Vance-Owen Plan Offers a Fair Bosnia Solution; What Cato Said
To the Editor:
The beginning of Leslie H. Gelb's excellent Feb. 7 column from Sarajevo is unhappily flawed: "Sarajevo delenda est. Sarajevo is destroyed." Delenda is not the past participle deleta, but a future passive participle or gerundive, and the meaning is, "Sarajevo is to be destroyed."


Scarsdale Agent Finds Publisher and $2 Million for a 1st Novel
THE scene is a luxurious hotel room overlooking the Caribbean Sea.
A man in a dripping wet bathing suit is talking on the phone while the rug he is standing on gets soaked.
He has been on the phone with clients for most of the day, but this is the conversation that counts: He has just clinched a deal that makes book-publishing history.
If a film were to be made about a literary agent, this would be a climactic moment.
And although Aaron M. Priest, a self-effacing man, would probably not play himself in the film, he tells the story with a cinematic flourish:


A Little Thaw (With Maybe a Lot to Be Gained)
THE parole of a student who led the 1989 Tiananmen Square demonstrations and the release of three other political prisoners last week seem to reflect an effort by the Chinese Government to reduce criticism of its human rights violations and to send an olive branch to President Clinton.
The Government is now enjoying remarkable economic achievements, and these may have given the leadership new confidence in its political strength.
Moreover, China wants to be host to the Olympics in the year 2000, and its leaders apparently hope that releasing the four will improve its image abroad.


Manaus
With the vogue in ecotourism, this remote city 1,000 miles up the Amazon River system has suddenly become the first port of call for thousands of Americans visiting Brazil.
Manaus is served by one of Brazil's most modern airports, and arriving at the heart of the Amazon has lost a little of the palm-trees-and-propellors charm it once had.
Traveling on Varig flights from Miami and Los Angeles or on an increasing number of oceangoing cruise ships, Americans now account for 20 percent of foreign tourists visiting Manaus.
Most visitors come to explore the sea of Amazon forest that laps at the edges of this city of one million people.
At first glance, Manaus seems to be a nondescript collection of moldy high-rises improbably wedded to a frenetic street life created by a free-trade zone.
But, with a little discrimination, a visitor can discover stimulating diversions well worth exploring on both ends of a rain-forest tour.
In getting around, it makes little sense to rent a car.
Cabs will get you throughout the city and most roads stop once they reach one of the rivers in the Amazon system.
Sightseeing
Remnants of Manaus's belle epoque can be seen on a two-hour walking tour.
Sparked by a turn-of-the century rubber boom, the city was the first in South America to install streetcars and the second in Brazil to install electricity.
Although Manaus is markedly safer than Rio, it is best to stroll with discretion and to avoid flashing valuables in public.


THE HIGH COST OF LIVING
After reading the article about Armando Dimas, I felt (as a taxpayer) as if I were being raped by him and his family.
Dimas says that he worries about a power failure.
He should worry more that my husband and I continue to be employed so that we can pay our ever-increasing tax bill.
You fail to mention, in the article, why Armando was shot.
Maybe the person who shot him could assist in his medical costs?
Or maybe the answer would just anger me more.
CYNTHIA GOTTLIEB
Vestal, N.Y.


Q and A
Unequal Assessment Question: Just recently, the board of directors in my co-op voted for a $1,000 assessment on a per-shareholder, rather than on a per-share, basis.
This favors two board members with larger-than-average holdings and discriminates against a handful of us who have small spaces and fewer shares.
The vast majority of the co-op is unaffected by this decision.


First, Forget the Slides . . .
ANYONE can tell a bad travel story.
That turbulent flight from L.A. when the flight attendant spilled fettuccine on Willa's lap.
The time Uncle Harry had his wallet stolen in Nairobi even though he'd taken the precaution of sewing shut his pockets.
How Howie once dropped his camera in the Grand Canal and the gondolier offered to fish it out again for 100,000 lire and Howie refused, absolutely
refused
to pay.
We've all suffered patiently through these, wishing whoever is telling it would get to the point, then realizing, as the story drones on, that there is no point.
The normal misadventures and indignities of travel become inflated, back at home, into tragedies of the highest order, accompanied, at best, by much gesticulation and lament, at worst, with slides.
And yet a
good
travel story, properly told, can be one of the distinguishing marks of the world-class traveler, providing the subtle boost needed in the unspoken game of one-upmanship that most travel stories, good or bad, rely on for their effect.
In this spirit, I would like to offer some concise rules and suggestions for travel-story telling, accompanied by an illustration from my own modest repertory.


THE HIGH COST OF LIVING
Quoting Chinese proverbs about responsibility for a saved life is good literary style, but it is a terrible basis for policy.
Today, health-care institutions that accept large numbers of uninsured patients face difficulty recouping those losses from other revenue streams.
If we enact an abstract notion of responsibility into policy, the consequences will not be as intended.
Hospitals either will avoid such patients or shoulder the burden until they go out of business.
Either way, such patients will die by default.
As a practical matter, society as a whole must pay for this care if it is to be given.
CLYDE B. SCHECHTER, M.D.
Assistant Professor of Community Medicine, The Mount Sinai Medical Center
New York, N.Y.


Amanda Miller and David Einhorn
Jacqueline Anderson of Houston has announced June wedding plans for her daughter Amanda Lynn Miller and David Charles Einhorn, the son of Madeline Glick of New York and the late Bernard W. Einhorn.
Ms.
Miller, 28, is an acquisitions editor at Van Nostrand Reinhold, a publishing company in New York.
She graduated from Hollins College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her late father, Lawrence N. Miller, was an engineering consultant at Unistrut-Toledo Inc., a metals engineering concern in Toledo, Ohio.
Her mother is an assistant for Hewitt Associates, an employee-benefits consulting company in the Woodlands, Tex.
Ms.
Miller's stepfather, Ronald Anderson, is an energy consultant in the Woodlands.


Little Scrutiny in an Industry That Moves Mountains of Money
The undoing of Revere Armored Inc. reflects the vulnerabilities in an industry that is fraught with cutthroat competition and faces little scrutiny except by insurance companies, industry experts say.
Revere, founded on Long Island in 1979 by Robert J. and Susanna M. Scaretta, is one of more than 200 armored car services that have gone into business since the late 1970's, when a series of antitrust court decisions forced what were then the industry's predominant companies, Brink's and Wells Fargo Armored Service, to sell off some of their fleets and give up some of their markets.
"We shouldn't be too surprised by what happened here," said Robert McCrie, a professor of security management at the John Jay College of Criminal Justice in New York City.
The collapse of Revere, he said, came at a time when hundreds of small armored car companies have sprung up across the nation, and banks have failed to check their competence or integrity.
No New Regulations
"It is the greater fools' approach to security," he said.
"The banks may know something is amiss with an armored car company, but they also know it is insured."
But while the court decisions reorganized the industry, neither Congress nor state legislatures stepped in with any new regulations covering who could run -- or even work for -- an armored-car company.
"About all it takes is a truck, a warehouse and a big table to count the cash," Mr.
McCrie said.
There is one other practical requirement -- insurance.
As the number of armored-car companies has expanded, and the industry has become more competitive, the experts say one major insurer, Lloyd's of London, has emerged not only as the dominant underwriter of armored-car companies, but the only serious watchdog over their operations.
Insurer Undecided
In the Revere case, the authorities say that the Scarettas and their employees may have absconded with as much as $40 million from their clients, including Citibank and the National Westminster Bank.
Although Lloyd's covered Revere against losses, lawyers for the insurer said this week that it had not yet decided whether to honor all claims.
Whether Lloyd's fully compensates Revere's clients, analysts say the case serves as a reminder of the need for greater scrutiny -- and perhaps greater regulation -- of the armored car industry.
"A lot of banks have got to do a lot better job with their security," said Ira A. Lipman, president of Guardsmark, a major security consulting concern in Memphis.
A Costly Lesson
In Revere's case, "the banks end up with egg on their face," said Mr.
McCrie.
Even if Lloyd's reimburses them for what has been found missing from Revere's warehouse, "their investigatory and legal fees in this case are going to cost them a lot, and maybe teach them a lesson."
The owner of one armored-car company said the banks have sacrificed security for low costs.
"The banks may say they want the best company, but what they really want is the lowest rate," he said.
"In the end, banks are more worried about who collects their trash than who they hire as an armored car carrier."


Measuring Schools And Dollars
In "Comparing School Spending and Taxes" you reported on a recent study regarding per-pupil expenditures and assessed valuation (ability to pay) for each Nassau County school district.
Unfortunately, this study failed to look at student performance in Nassau County school districts, nor did it attempt to correlate per-pupil expenditure and student performance.
Moreover, Drs.
Mathews and Weinstein suggested that these variances in school spending resulted in poorer education for those districts expending fewer dollars than those districts labeled "Arrivers." What an injustice -- to draw such conclusions without studying performance!


FEB. 14-20: $40 Million Missing; This Armored-Car Heist Is Called a Huge Inside Job
For all of its advertised security measures -- armed guards, alarm systems and surveillance cameras -- Revere Armored Inc., one of the nation's largest armored car companies, was not invulnerable.
Federal authorities say the company's owners looted it of millions.
The F.B.I. said last week that an estimated $40 million, much of it from banks, was missing from Revere's warehouse and headquarters in Bohemia, N.Y., in what may be the largest robbery ever.


Airlines Start Europe Pass
Four European airlines have joined to offer a Euro Flyer Pass for travel among more than 100 points in Europe.
Good on the European route networks of Air France, Air Inter (a subsidiary of Air France), Czechoslovak Airlines and Sabena, the pass is sold as a coupon book.
Passengers buy between three and nine coupons, each of which costs $120 and is the equivalent of a one-way ticket between two European points served by the airlines.


Musical Miracle


Catherine Caan, John Mayher
Mr. and Mrs.
Glenn W. Caan of Milwaukee have announced the engagement of their daughter Catherine Kinsella Caan to John William Strieder Mayher, the son of Alison T. Strieder of Brookline, Mass., and Dr.
John S. Mayher of New York.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Caan, 29, is the manager of the A/X Armani Exchange boutique in Boston.
She graduated from Wheaton College.
Her father is an investment-fund manager in Milwaukee.


Celebrating Black Culture
There are still plenty of opportunities to celebrate African-American culture and heritage in these final days of Black History Month.
Across the United States, museums and community centers are staging a variety of events, including the following:
*
In Washington, the Smithsonian Institution is holding lectures on the 1920's and 30's Harlem renaissance; the final lecture is on Tuesday at 6:30 P.M., in Room 3037, S. Dillon Ripley Center, 1100 Jefferson Drive, S.W., (202) 357-3030; admission, $10.


Ferry Disaster Underlines Haiti's Everyday Needs
As bodies began washing up by the dozens on beaches near Port-au-Prince, Haiti, after one of the world's worst maritime disasters, attention quickly turned to the responsibility of Haiti's Government in providing ordinary services for its people.
Along with the wailing, anguished cries of relatives of the hundreds lost on the Neptune, the rusty and badly overloaded ferry that was carrying as many as 1,500 people when it sank early Wednesday, radio stations carried outraged demands for accountability.
Today, Haitian authorities estimated there were about 300 survivors.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
1700'S LETTERS
The Pound Ridge Historical Society has acquired four Revolutionary War documents that will be presented at its meeting on Friday at 7:30 P.M. in the Hiram Halle Library at 271 Westchester Avenue (Route 124).
The meeting is open to the public for a charge of $2.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Love Was in (on?) the Air
IN honor of romance, 31 mature couples stood together and reaffirmed their wedding vows.
In honor of television, they reaffirmed their vows at 7 o'clock in the morning.


Twice-Worn Suits
To the Editor:
One paragraph of "Hillary Clinton's New Home: Broccoli's In, Smoking's Out" (front page, Feb. 2) describes the First Lady as "wearing the muted plaid suit she wore on inauguration day."


Uncertainty Over Parade Has Merchants Worried
In the past, the St.
Patrick's Day Parade has meant bulging cash registers at businesses like Tommy Makem's Irish Pavilion, a midtown restaurant and bar on East 57th Street.
But this year, merchants dependent on the parade say uncertainty over the event is already casting a pall over their businesses.
The March 17 parade up Fifth Avenue from 44th Street to 86th Street usually draws about two million people, who, whether hailing a cab or hoisting a Guinness stout, pump between $15 million and $20 million into the city's economy, said Debra Pucci, director of European-American affairs in the Mayor's office.


UConn's Women Draw Full House but Are Losers
The Connecticut-Stanford women's basketball game here this afternoon will be best remembered for what happened in the counting house rather than on the court.
This game drew a capacity crowd of 8,241 at Gampel Pavilion, the first sellout for a women's sports event at Connecticut and a record for a contest involving a Big East women's basketball team.
The live national telecast, by CBS, was another first for the Huskies.


Film Festival Is Planned for the Hamptons
The United Artists Cinema on Main Street in East Hampton, L.I., may soon become known for more than just its long lines.
Plans are under way for the first Hamptons International Film Festival, from Oct. 20 to 24.
"I've always loved film festivals and thought, my goodness, how come we don't have one out here," said the organizer, Joyce Robinson, a former Hollywood casting director who moved to East Hampton two and a half years ago.
"We will be using several other venues, but primarily the East Hampton Cinema. We are in such a perfect place for one."


Data Bank/February 21, 1993


The Donn Comes Up Pistols And Roses
The third season of the $6.3 million American Championship Racing Series got off to a theatrical start today when Pistols and Roses, the 44-to-1 long shot in a field of nine of thoroughbred racing's senior stars, ended a losing streak at seven races and snatched the Donn Handicap by the length of his head.
This was a horse who hadn't won anything since he won the Blue Grass Stakes in Kentucky by the length of his neck last April.
Three weeks later, he ran 16th in the Kentucky Derby, and by then the gray colt was tumbling into a losing streak.


New &amp; Noteworthy
PRODIGAL SON: Dancing for Balanchine in a World of Pain and Magic, by Edward Villella with Larry Kaplan. (Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $13.) George Balanchine helped make Edward Villella's dance career, and Mr.
Villella helped make Balanchine's ballet: the son of working-class Italian immigrants, he brought an American rebelliousness and vigor to the classical tradition Balanchine was reshaping.
This autobiography chronicles the men's fruitful and sometimes bitter relationship.
"In some measure," Joan Acocella said here last year, Mr.
Villella "has become Balanchine."
HIGH COTTON, by Darryl Pinckney. (Penguin, $11.) The narrator is a young black man who does not feel at home among whites or among his own Southern relatives.
Throughout the novel he struggles to find his identity by trying out different roles, from aloof intellectual to militant separatist.
Last year our reviewer, Edmund White, said: "At a time in our history when a puerile 'political correctness' imposes hypocrisy on most writers dealing with sensitive topics, Darryl Pinckney has dared to treat his theme with excruciating honesty and the total freedom from restraint that Schiller said we find nowhere else but in authentic works of art."


World Markets;   Eastern Europe's Promise Fades
WHEN the Berlin wall fell in 1989, the major countries of Eastern Europe were viewed as interesting prospects for fund managers watching emerging markets.
But after the initial enthusiasm, the last three years have been disappointing.
Two closed-end mutual funds were floated in Europe in 1990 that specialized in Hungary: the Austro-Hungary Fund and the Hungarian Investment Fund.
Last August, a closed-end fund that concentrated its portfolio in Czechoslovakia, the Czechoslovakia Investment Corporation, was introduced on the London exchange.


Sports of The Times; Exile Over, The Big Man Daydreams
MARCH 1. That's all they said. March 1. But they didn't give a time.
I could do it like the basketball coaches.
Rick Pitino fills up the Rupp Arena at midnight for the start of fall practice.
Midnight Madness.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
118.30
120.65
133.85
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6380
1.6580
1.6714
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2595
1.2545
1.1985
per U.S. Dollar
1.4540
1.4220
1.7130
U.S. Dollar
per British Pound
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Saratoga Barn Time Is Cut
Budget cuts of $5.5 million were ordered yesterday by the New York Racing Association, including the closing of the barns and training facilities at the Saratoga Race Course when that track is not open for its summertime season.
The training area, known to horsemen as the Oklahoma center at Saratoga, has remained open year-round to provide stables for about 300 horses.
It will be closed now until shortly before the five-week Saratoga meeting opens in late July.
The racing association said the closing would save $660,000.


The Softer Touch
WHETHER INSPIRED BY THE 1960's, the 70's or the just plain 90's, the hair and makeup looks for spring are a wake-up call: Radically feminine is in fashion.
Like the sheer, floaty styles that skim the body, hair is light and loose.
And makeup is soft and easy -- revealing, rather than concealing, especially around the eyes.
"The single most important thing that every woman can do to open up the eye is to curl the lashes," says the makeup artist Kevyn Aucoin.
"If the top lashes curve downward, the eye looks smaller." The doe-eyed gaze of waifish models like Kristen McMenamy, Lucie de la Falaise, Kate Moss and Patricia Hartmann is framed by thin, manicured brows and fringed with spiky false lashes or lots of mascara. (Watch for colored mascara -- it's back.) Eyelids are awash in watercolor pastels, stroked on for a delicate ripple of color, or layered for greater depth.
The season's juicy shades of apricot, peach, mango -- even pink, green and baby blue -- are flattering to most women.
Blush, too, is making a comeback.
"Apply blush on the apple of the cheek with a big, big brush," suggests Aucoin.
"That way it's very soft." On the lips, a fresh, fruity slice of orange or a slick of cotton-candy pink can pass muster, day or night.
So can sandy, earthy tones.


Two's Company


Woodforde and Lendl Top Self-Destructing Foes
It was an argumentative day at the Comcast United States Indoor Championships, a day when both losing semifinalists, with their composure in tatters and protocol forsaken, stalked from the court without shaking the hand of the chair umpire.
This afternoon's loser, Derrick Rostagno, slammed a ball into the side of the umpire's chair.
Pete Sampras, the evening loser, plastered a ball into the Spectrum rafters.
Both blamed poor line calls, and their poor response to them, for their losses.


From Comrade to Critic in Five Years
INSIDE GORBACHEV'S KREMLIN
The Memoirs of Yegor Ligachev.
Translated by Catherine A. Fitzpatrick,  Michele A. Berdy and Dobrochna Dyrcz-Freeman.
Introduction by Stephen F. Cohen.
Illustrated. 369 pp.
New York: Pantheon Books. $27.50.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Feb. 6  MANHATTAN  Chelsea  $290,000
117 West 17th Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. condo in a loft building; elevator, breakfast nook, south exposure; common charge $204, 100% tax-abated (Broker: Delson/Ginsberg Real Estate)  Greenwich Village  $595,000
622 Greenwich Street (Morton St.)  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,150-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, fireplace, 700-sq.-ft. terrace, 3 exposures, Hudson River view; maintenance $2,500, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  TriBeCa  $406,000
138 Watts Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 3,000-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, darkroom, 10 1/2-ft. ceilings, 2 exposures; maintenance $252, no tax deduction (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)  Upper West Side  $1.253 million
300 Central Park West (90th St.)  3-bedroom, 4-bath, 2,700-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned elevator, dining room, Central Park view; maintenance $2,000, 35% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Upper West Side  $202,000
301 West 108th Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,350-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, 10-ft. ceilings, Hudson River view; maintenance $769, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Hunt/Kennedy, Inc.)  BRONX  Riverdale (Spuyten Duyvil)  $45,000
2575 Palisade Avenue  520-sq.-ft. postwar studio-co-op; part-time doorman, dressing area, terrace; maintenance $442, 52% tax-deductible (Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates)  Riverdale (West of Pkwy)  $900,000
27 Sigma Place  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, one-family contemporary; dining room, library, den, playroom, roof terrace, cathedral ceilings, rear deck, c/a, 1-car garage, Hudson River view, 0.5-acre lot, taxes $7,000 (Broker: ERA/ Susan Goldy &amp; Co. Realtors)  BROOKLYN  Park Slope  $732,500
561 1st Street  2-family, 5-story brownstone; 4 bedrooms, 2 1/2 baths, eat-in kitchen in primary triplex; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths in other; dining room in each; 22- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $3,000 (Broker: Joseph Berman Realty)  Sheepshead Bay  $196,500
2037 East 18th Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family detached frame side-hall colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, family room, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,123 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  Windsor Terrace  $245,000
43 Howard Place  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family attached brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 18- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $900 (Broker: Frederick Palmer Real Estate)  QUEENS  Astoria  $225,000
31-49 32d Street  2-family attached brick house; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room in each unit; finished basement, 1-car garage, 18- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Century 21/Tri-Boro Terrace Realty)  Forest Hills  $250,000
91-14 68th Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family semiattached Tudor; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2 fireplaces, full basement, 1-car garage, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Century 21/F.H.)  STATEN ISLAND  Rossville  $93,000
667-A Correll Avenue  (Fawn Ridge)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. condo in a 6-year-old building; dinette, rear deck, wall-to-wall carpet, pool and tennis club; common charge $136, taxes $675 (Broker: RE-MAX Preferred)  Willowbrook  $140,000
132 Bradley Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, one-family semiattached brick and wood-frame house; dining area, eat-in kitchen, hospitality suite on ground floor, 27- by 111-ft. lot; taxes $1,384 (Broker: Century 21/Papp Real Estate)


POSTINGS: Restoration Off Union Square; Bright Cover for a Colorful History
Call it karma, or simply location, but 7 East 15th Street, which first opened as a branch of the Young Women's Christian Association in 1887, has often housed groups with a vision for improving the world.
The building, originally costing $125,000, was funded by John Jacob Astor, Margaret Louise Shepard and other well-to-do New Yorkers.
Classes provided women with skills for the turn-of-the-century job market, such as curling feathers, bookkeeping and typewriting.
The structure also housed the city's first circulating library for women, with 20,000 volumes.


Rethinking the Need to Avoid Cream
THE concern about fat and cholesterol has taken cream off the menu.
Cooks who might have added a spoonful of heavy cream to smooth or thicken a sauce now do without.
Whipped cream on the austere fruit dessert is out of the question.
Or is it?
What is often being used in place of cream is olive oil or some other vegetable oil.
Unlike these oils, cream does contain some cholesterol, but it is not significant in a small amount of cream, only about 25 milligrams in a tablespoon.
More important, the total amount of fat in a tablespoon of cream is about half that in a comparable quantity of oil.


Mexico Is Finding Free Trade Has Political Barriers
THE technocrats who run Mexico, powerful young men with American economics degrees and abiding faith in free trade, could see little to impugn in the purpose of the AmeriMex Maquiladora Fund L.P.
The investment fund, a private partnership headquartered in Delaware, was constituted last year to buy small American manufacturing firms and move them to Mexico, where labor is cheaper.
Mexican economic policies have tried to encourage that sort of movement for more than 20 years.
Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri saw grand larceny.
That the Mexican Government's main development bank had put $3.75 million into AmeriMex, the House Majority leader wrote to President Carlos Salinas de Gortari last week, amounted in his eyes to official collusion in "stealing American jobs."


Research, Promotion and Profits: Spotlight Is on the Drug Industry
While drug companies say they need high prices to support innovative research, health economists say that more and more of the companies' revenues are going to increasingly elaborate promotions.
They include gifts for patients who take their drugs, payments to doctors as consultants and large donations to nonprofit hospitals.
And much of the research by drug companies is aimed not at innovation but at developing medicines that have the same function as similar drugs made by rivals, academics who study the drug industry have said in interviews and in testimony before Congress.
Officials at the Food and Drug Administration say that of the 90 new drugs approved last year, only about 40 percent were a significant advance over medicines already available.
Debating Obscured Figures
Drug costs have soared in recent years, and President Clinton lambasted the drug industry this month for its hefty prices and profits, contending that it spends $1 billion more on promotion than it spends on research and development.


Clubs Get Ready for a New Type of M.V.P. Awards
For National Football League general managers and player personnel directors, there is a lot of coveting going on right now.
They have one eye on the free agents of the other 27 teams to see who fits their needs, and the other eye on their own rosters to determine which of their free agents they can least afford to lose.
The dawning of true free agency in the N.F.L. has not only prompted teams to look more closely at their competitors' rosters, but has forced teams to more carefully examine their own rosters.
Players with five years or more of N.F.L. experience whose contracts expired on Feb. 1 can negotiate with any N.F.L. team, including their own, from March 1 through July 15.


Harlem Art In Midtown
Sixty works from Studio Museum at Paine Webber gallery, Feb. 18 to May 14.


For U.S., Aid To Terrorists Is Hard To Define
THE very idea that terrorist operations could be orchestrated from within the United States is alien to an American sensibility that regards terrorism as a thankfully foreign phenomenon.
Yet that is the image some Israeli officials are now seeking to imprint in the American consciousness.
Sharing findings gained from the interrogation of an Arab-American prisoner, they asserted last week that command and control over Hamas, the Palestinian terrorist group, is exercised not from the West Bank or Teheran but from a headquarters in suburban Virginia.


War Bleeds Ex-Soviet Land at Central Asia's Heart
Along the southbound road from Dushanbe to Kuibyshev, fields of rotting cotton alternate with villages of burned-out huts, as if some medieval plague had suddenly swept through.
At the "Tajikistan" state farm, a lone Russian emerged from the devastation.
The old man has lived here long enough to adopt the multicolored kaftan and embroidered skullcap of the Tajiks, but not long enough to understand their blood feuds.


How Right He Is
To the Editor:
I suggest that listeners and viewers regard Rush Limbaugh with the same affection (and sympathy) heretofore accorded the now-absent Archie Bunker.
As a conscious, dedicated agent of the international liberal conspiracy, I urge all co-conspirators to realize that since we don't have Archie Bunker to love anymore, a benevolent Providence has given us Rush Limbaugh -- to love, to smile upon and to whom we can say, over and over, "Yes, yes, Rush -- you are so
right!
"  JACK SAWYER HARRIS New York


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Navratilova-Seles Final Monica Seles and Martina Navratilova reached the final of the Paris Women's Open with easy victories yesterday.
The second-seeded Navratilova beat Jana Novotna of the Czech Republic, 6-1, 6-2, before the top-seeded Seles downed Conchita Martinez of Spain, 6-1, 6-1.
Last week, Seles beat Navratilova in three sets at Chicago.
Navratilova has lost only four times since losing in the second round of the United States Open in September.
She has won two tournaments and lost in four finals, three to Seles.
Against Novotna, Navratilova won for the seventh time in seven meetings. (AP)
Becker Withdraws: Richard Krajicek earned a berth in the final of the $2.25 million Eurocard Open in Stuttgart, Germany, when top-seeded Boris Becker pulled out because of a viral infection.
Krajicek will meet Michael Stich, who beat Wally Masur of Australia, 6-7 (9-7), 6-2, 6-2, for the title. (AP)
Garrison-Jackson Back in Final: Third-seeded Zina Garrison-Jackson, the defending champion, defeated Nicole Provis, 6-4, 6-3, to reach the final of the IGA Tennis Classic in Oklahoma City.
Garrison-Jackson will face seventh-seeded Patty Fendick, who defeated Tami Whitlinger, 5-7, 6-3, 6-3, in another semifinal. (AP)
Roberman and Li Advance: Top-seeded Alex Roberman of Brooklyn, and second-seeded Bruce Li of West Hempstead, L.I., scored semifinal victories yesterday in the 26th annual Concord Hotel Junior Invitational tennis tournament.
Roberman downed Kunj Majmudar of Staten Island, 6-0, 6-0.
Li defeated beat Albert Park of Great Neck, L.I., 7-5, 6-4.
The favorites also reached the final of the girls' division, as No. 1 Julie Kotler of East Larchmont, N.Y., beat the 1992 finalist, Lara Afanassiev of Morganville, N.J., 6-2, 7-6 (7-4), and defending champion and second-seeded Gina Majmudar ousted Jennifer Boylan, 6-0, 6-0, in a battle of Staten Island players.
GOLF Penalty Aids Rummells  Payne Stewart surrendered the lead on a two-shot penalty yesterday and let Dave Rummells move into the top spot after three rounds of the Buick Invitational in La Jolla, Calif.
"It never even entered my mind," that he had violated the rules, Stewart said of the incident on the fourth hole at Torrey Pines.
Stewart, seeking an end to a non-winning streak that began after his 1991 United States Open victory, put his drive to the right on the fourth hole and took a drop from a cart path.
In taking his stance, however, he got his right foot on the paved path -- a violation of the rules.
He got a ruling from an official on the ninth hole and was assessed a two-shot penalty that enabled Rummells to vault into the lead.
He shot a 71 and will take a 212 total and a one-stroke advantage into today's final round.
Stewart slipped to a 75 and was tied for second, a stroke back at 213. (AP)
Gilbert Holds One-Stroke Lead: Gibby Gilbert shot a five-under-par 66 yesterday to take a one-stroke lead over Jim Albus into the final round of the Senior Suncoast Classic at the Tournament Players Club in Tampa, Fla.
Gilbert has a two-round total of seven-under-par 135.
Two strokes out of the lead are Bob Charles (71-66) and Miller Barber (69-68). (AP)
Lopez Starts Strong: Nancy Lopez, showing no signs of a five-month layoff, shot a five-under-par 67 to take a one-stroke lead over defending champion Lisa Walters after two rounds of the Hawaiian Ladies Open in Honolulu.
Lopez had a two-round total of nine-under 135 as she turned in a bogey-free card. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD McClancy Takes Title  Msgr.
McClancy of Queens captured its first boys indoor Catholic High Schools Athletic Association title yesterday and St.
Francis Prep, also of Queens, gained its fifth straight girls crown in the league's intersectional track and field championships at Manhattan College in the Bronx.
McClancy clinched a victory with a fourth-place finish in the last event, the 800-meter relay, giving it a 33-29 final edge over Chaminade of Mineola, L.I.
St.
Francis, in contrast, breezed to a 32-point triumph, tallying 63 points to 31 by runner-up St.
Anthony's of Smithtown, L.I.
McClancy had two winners in Mike Hamilton in the 55-meter hurdles in 7.9 seconds and the 1,600-meter relay in 3 minutes 30 seconds.
St.
Francis was led by Karolyn Hicks, who set a meet mark in the high jump at 5 feet 5 inches and took the 55-meter hurdles in 9.0 seconds.
The individual star of the meet, however, was Thomas Thompson of St.
John the Baptist, West Islip, L.I.
The 18-year-old senior, who is headed for Ohio State, erased the meet's long-jump mark by more than 10 inches with a winning effort of 22 feet 10 1/4 inches and tied his own meet record in the high jump at 6 feet 9 inches.


Business Diary/February 14-19
THE ECONOMY Clinton, Fighting Deficit, Seeks Broad Tax Increases


Lisa Nathanson, Jeffrey Rosen
Dr. and Mrs.
Noel Nathanson of Great Neck, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lisa Beth Nathanson to Jeffrey Edward Rosen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hal Rosen of Wheatley Heights, L.I.
A fall 1994 wedding is planned.


In Comptroller Race, Cuomo Sees Chance for Black Official
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo offered high praise yesterday for three candidates to fill the unexpired term of State Comptroller Edward V. Regan, but said that H. Carl McCall, the president of New York City's Board of Education, represented an opportunity for New York to have its first black statewide official.
Mr.
Cuomo emphasized that he was not endorsing Mr.
McCall or the others he praised, former New York City Council President Carol Bellamy and Assemblyman Alan G. Hevesi of Queens, all fellow Democrats.
He called all of them "extremely well-qualified" to replace Mr.
Regan, a Republican who said on Thursday that he would resign at the end of April from the $110,000 post he has held since 1979.


A Maze Threaded With Deadpan Humor
THAT Louise Bourgeois is a distinguish sculptor and the Fabric Workshop here is a hotbed of experiment did not prevent a meeting of minds.
Nor, for that matter, did the disparity in their ages -- Ms.
Bourgeois is 81 and the workshop a mere 15.
On the contrary, the slightly perverse idea of the sculptor's masterminding a performance and leaving its residue, including the costumes worn by the performers, as an exhibition appealed to both parties, despite the year of to-ing and fro-ing it took to pull the whole thing together -- under the title "She Lost It."


BEST SELLERS: February 21, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
28
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
2
5
DRAGON TEARS, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $22.95.) Two police detectives try to cope with a demonic serial killer in southern California.
3
3
4
DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Knopf, $23.) The case of a woman journalist charged with killing an eminent novelist.
4
4
4
CLOSE COMBAT, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Putnam, $22.95.) There are new challenges for the Marines all over the Pacific in World War II.
5
11
25
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
6
6
3
ALONG CAME A SPIDER, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) Detective Alex Cross on the trail of a psychopathic serial killer in Washington.
7
5
4
DEVIL'S WALTZ, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware investigates the strange series of illnesses that befalls a small child. (LP)
8
8
33
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
9
13
14
THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $21.95.) The investigation of the murder of an officer, a general's daughter.
10
10
19
SABINE'S NOTEBOOK, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Continuing the epistolary romance begun in "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
11
1
EINSTEIN'S DREAMS, by Alan Lightman. (Pantheon, $17.) A series of fantasies said to be dreamed by Albert Einstein in 1905, when he was a young clerk in a Swiss patent office.
12
12
13
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) The adventures of a 16-year-old vaquero from Texas in the Mexico of 1950.
13
9
12
DOLORES CLAIBORNE, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) After being accused of murdering her employer, a woman tells of killing her husband almost 30 years earlier and of her life ever since.
14
1
DAMIA'S CHILDREN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Ace/ Putnam, $22.95.) The third generation of the Rowan family meets aliens from outer space in one more encounter.
15
1
DISNEY'S ALADDIN, adapted by Don Ferguson. (Mouse Works/Penguin USA, $6.98.) An illustrated retelling of the ancient story of a street boy and a genie who provides unexpected experiences.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
23
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
2
2
28
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
3
3
14
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The authors predict the collapse of America under Government debt and suggest ways to cope with it.
4
1
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) Conversations with physicians, scientists, therapists and patients about the relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
5
4
36
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
6
7
22
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
7
15
3
MAKING THE MUMMIES DANCE, by Thomas Hoving. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The reminiscences of the former director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
8
8
5
NOBODY NOWHERE, by Donna Williams. (Times Books/Random House, $21.) The autobiography of an autistic woman.
9
5
20
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Linda Grey/ Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the general.
10
9
10
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $20.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
11
13
3
THE WIVES OF HENRY VIII, by Antonia Fraser. (Knopf, $25.) The lives of the six spouses of the 16th-century English monarch.
12
10
36
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
13 *
1
AROUND THE CRAGGED HILL, by George F. Kennan. (Norton, $22.95.) Philosophical meditations on the world and its future by the foreign affairs expert.
14
6
5
LIBERATION MANAGEMENT, by Tom Peters. (Knopf, $27.50.) How American industry is reorganizing to deal with the problems wrought by changing times.
15
11
11
JFK: Reckless Youth, by Nigel Hamilton. (Random House, $30.) The first 29 years of the 35th President.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
4
50
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual advice for married couples.
2
1
5
EXCESS BAGGAGE, by Judith Sills. (Viking, $21.) A psychologist's counsel about conquering character traits that make one's life harder.
3
2
50
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice by a Florida entrepreneur.
4
10
ARE YOU THE ONE FOR ME? by Barbara De Angelis. (Delacorte, $21.) How to choose and keep the right partner in love and marriage.
5 *
3
32
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf by a legendary teacher.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
PREPARING FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY, by Paul Kennedy. (Random House, $25.) The author of "The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers" undertakes to examine the probable consequences of the world's present conduct.
No nation will be unscathed, he argues; many will be miserable; ours will decline, more than some but less than the most unfortunate.
SHADOW PLAY, by Charles Baxter. (Norton, $21.95.) Mr.
Baxter's confident second novel concerns primarily Wyatt Palmer, a bright boy who grows up into a dull job and an atmosphere of compromise in a town where evil is both profound and boring.
DAKOTA: A Spiritual Geography, by Kathleen Norris. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $19.95.) A deeply moving book that is itself an act of devotion by a poet who is a married Protestant and also a lay member of a Benedictine community on the Great Plains.
AT THE HIGHEST LEVELS: The Inside Story of the End of the Cold War, by Michael R. Beschloss and Strobe Talbott. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A useful and readable account of events of great magnitude by two keen observers who enjoyed unusual access.
WRITTEN ON THE BODY, by Jeanette Winterson. (Knopf, $20.) This ambitious work is both a love story and a meditation on the body as our literal embodiment, the part of us that really loves.
UNTIL YOUR HEART STOPS, by T. M. McNally. (Villard, $20.) A harrowing first novel of suburban Arizona, in which violence, from personal through cosmic, is visited on nearly everyone; though not especially wicked, they all seem to deserve it.
MARLENE DIETRICH, by Maria Riva. (Knopf, $27.50.) Dietrich's only child's startling book confirms and completes much we thought we knew about the disciplined, hard-working movie star.


A Quick Brush-Up On Avoiding Repair
THERE is a place where great photographers and simple amateurs stand humble and equal: the counter of New York's Professional Camera Repair Service, at 37 West 47th Street.
The shop's proprietors, Rick Rankin and Herb Zimmerman, say constant use is not the primary cause of camera breakdowns.
Instead, most cameras are damaged through neglect.


To Save Lives, Raise Funds and Cut the Deficit: Tax Tobacco; Please Don't Exhale
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen has it wrong in "Please Don't Inhale" (column, Feb. 3).
Smokers have every right to inhale in the White House (or elsewhere).
It does not affect others, and their body is theirs to abuse.
However, they should be forbidden to exhale, in the White House or any other public place, as that impinges negatively on others.
Hillary Rodham Clinton should be commended for setting a national example in heeding recommendations of the Surgeon General and Environmental Protection Agency reports.
JACQUES PADAWER Bronx, Feb. 15, 1993


FEB. 14-20: South Africa; To End Oppression Peacefully, A Compromise With Oppressors
For South Africa's blacks, and probably the outside world, the real end of apartheid is imagined in a single image: the inauguration of Nelson Mandela as the country's next president.
The thought that President Mandela's Cabinet might include the likes of his white predecessor, F.W. de Klerk, and the petulant Zulu conservative, Mangosuthu Buthelezi, is a new and jarring addition to the picture.
The prospect is real.
Mr.
Mandela's African National Congress last week endorsed a five-year "government of national unity" in which any party proving 5 percent support at the polls would win not only parliamentary seats, but a voice in the executive branch.


Bosnia Links End of Ban to Relief for Eastern City
The Bosnian Government told the United Nations today that it would seek an end to the ban on United Nations relief supplies it announced last week if the organization succeeds in delivering aid to a besieged city in eastern Bosnia.
Although Sarajevo city officials were nominally responsible for the refusal to accept United Nations aid, the move was urged by the Muslim-led Bosnian Government in the hope of prodding the United Nations to step up efforts to deliver aid to an estimated 200,000 Muslims in eastern Bosnia.


Perot Is Back Running Hard; The Question Is, 'For What?'
Ross Perot is back on the hustings, trying to hold President Clinton's feet to the fires of fiscal responsibility but mainly stoking a few political fires of his own.
He will not say whether he plans another Presidential run in 1996, after his strong showing last year, when he captured 19 percent of the vote.


Tech Notes; A Scintillating Search Finds Diamonds in the Rough
WITH his X-ray vision, Superman might spot diamonds with ease.
But for mere mortals the task is labor intensive, for the stones are only one in a million.
So the Argyle Mine, the world's largest producer of diamonds, in the Top End of Western Australia, a bumpy bus ride from Kununurra, the nearest town, has developed its own X-ray vision system to recover them.
Round-the-clock shifts at Argyle produce six million tons of diamond-bearing lamproite ore each year to produce six tons, or 30 million carats, of diamonds.


Head of School-Improvement Group Resigns
The president and chief executive of the New American Schools Development Corporation, a nonpartisan body created by President George Bush to finance new kinds of public schools, resigned Friday.
The official, former Secretary of Labor Ann D. McLaughlin, said she was leaving because she had found the job too demanding in light of other responsibilities.
Ms.
McLaughlin, who serves on several corporate boards, said the group required the "full-time, undivided attention" of its top executive.
She had been chief executive of the organization since July.


In East Side Race, Both Phones and Parties Are Unlisted
In the old days, a seat vacated by a resigning City Council member would have been quietly filled with a back-room appointment by party bosses.
But owing to the potent mix of new campaign rules and the gilded folkways of the Upper East Side, the vacancy created by Carolyn Maloney's election to Congress last fall has touched off a political free-for-all that has bewildered voters and may produce, by the time ballots are cast on Tuesday, one of the costliest City Council elections in history.


Classical Grammys Sing the Blues
Of the millions who tune in to the Grammys on Wednesday evening to see how many of Eric Clapton's nine nominations turn into awards, few will notice whether the leading Grammy winner of all time amasses more.
Sir Georg Solti, with 29 awards as conductor and pianist, is the reigning champion, and he may very well add one or two to his total with his recording of Richard Strauss's opera "Die Frau ohne Schatten."
But those are the "other" Grammys, a k a the classical Grammys.
The announcement of classical winners will be brief and unobtrusive (though probably rife with mispronunciations), so that pop revelers can quickly return to the main business of the evening.


What's Good For the Goose . . .
To the Editor:
I must take exception to Walter Goodman's mischaracterization of Rush Limbaugh's philosophy and, by implication, that of conservatism in general  [ "On the Talkies, a Cruder Face of Conservatism," Jan. 24 ] .


Eagles File Complaint Against Oilers' Ryan
With the dawn of free agency about to break on the National Football League, the Philadelphia Eagles have made clear they won't give up their All-Pro defensive end REGGIE WHITE without a fight -- not to the Houston Oilers, anyway.
In a formal complaint to the league, the Eagles accused the Oilers' new defensive coordinator, BUDDY RYAN, a former Eagles head coach, of making improper advances to White before he becomes a free agent on March 1.


Japanese Computer Giants See the Danger of Following I.B.M.
JAPAN'S industrial policy for building a computer industry has been shaped for 30 years by the goal of catching up to the International Business Machines Corporation.
Now, Japan's computer giants are in danger of following I.B.M. right over the cliff.
Fujitsu Ltd. and Hitachi Ltd. -- together with the Amdahl Corporation, a Fujitsu affiliate based in Sunnyvale, Calif. -- have emerged as the world's major competitors to I.B.M. in mainframe computers.
Their machines are considered superior to those of Big Blue in some cases and they have been gaining market share, contributing to I.B.M.'s problems.


Creature Comforts Came First
Robustly woven ash-splint laundry baskets line one wall of shelves.
Another is covered with wooden berry pails, painted brilliant yellow, red and blue.
And nearby, in an arresting display of shovels and buckets, are the thin tin pipes that an inventive Shaker devised a century ago to cool beehives.
Henry Clay Blinn, who engineered the bees' air-conditioning system, was one of the giants of the communal religious sect, whose works are documented in "Receiving the Faith: The Shakers of Canterbury, N. H." at the Museum of Our National Heritage here.
The exhibition of 700 examples of furnishings, tools, graphics and clothing was organized by the museum in association with the Canterbury Shaker Village to mark the community's bicentennial, which was last year.
The show remains through May 16.


In the Region: Westchester; Recent Sales
Peekskill, N.Y.  $152,000
92 McGuire Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 68-year-old colonial; enclosed porch, dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement; taxes $2,463.
Yonkers, N.Y.  $320,000
63 Boulder Trail  3-bedroom, 2 1/2 bath, 58-year-old colonial; foyer, fireplace, terrace, family room, office; taxes $6,344.
New Castle, N.Y.  $275,000
301 Millwood Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 39-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, 2-car garage, full basement, 1.7 acres; taxes $7,967.
Norwalk, Conn.  $183,000
109 Keller Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 26-year-old Cape Cod; new roof and furnace, freshly painted, .5 acre; taxes $3,754.
Wallingford, Conn.  $162,000
20 Clearview Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, new raised ranch; 2-car attached garage, full basement, vinyl siding; taxes not yet assessed.
West Haven, Conn.  $129,000
5 Linda Street  3-bedroom, 2- bath, new raised ranch; formal dining room, 1-car garage, 7,000-square-foot lot; taxes not yet assessed.
OTHER AREAS Edison, N.J.  $187,500
15 Wood Acres Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 25-year-old split level; kitchen w/center island, security system, half-acre lot; taxes $3,233.
Middlesex, N.J.  $134,000
6 Marlborough Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; new w/w carpeting, move-in condition, full basement; taxes $3,482.
Glen Cove, L.I.  $290,000
5 Hickory Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 25-year-old ranch; family room, fireplace, 0.5 acre; taxes $7,000.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about the "Dateline NBC" report that prompted a defamation lawsuit from General Motors referred incorrectly in some editions to NBC's investigation of the report.
It was the network, not its news division, that hired two outside lawyers to investigate.


Lowlife: It's a Life
LUC SANTE reveals the Lower East Side.
As he roams the area, one of New York's oldest neighborhoods, buildings, doorways and details that would usually go unnoticed suddenly come into clear focus; a strange and vibrant life shows itself beneath the grime and residue of time.
Mr.
Sante's two books, "Low Life" and "Evidence," bring this world to the page.
On a gray weekday afternoon, the writer walks, unhurried, down Orchard Street.
His attire is innocuous: dark shirt and jacket, dark jeans and shoes are camouflage amid pavement and sidewalk, tenement and sky.
His frame is unassertive: he is of medium height and build, with dark, thinning hair and round-rimmed glasses that would look intellectual on some but bestow on him an old-fashioned, hard-working air.
Mr.
Sante strives to be invisible.
It is part of his trade.
The less he intrudes on a place, the more it will show itself for what it is.


A Time-Honored Weapon
To the Editor:
Walter Goodman's characteriza tion of Rush Limbaugh's audience as the "raving right" exposes him as one who "just doesn't get it."


He Is Dangerous, but She Is Invulnerable
HELLO DOWN THERE
By Michael Parker. 273 pp. New York:  Charles Scribner's Sons. $20.


Mets Gain a Mystic of the Southpaw Sect
Left-handers, the fraternity of the weird.
They are as close to a legal cult as exists in baseball.
Otherworldly powers are attributed to them.
Idiosyncrasies of intrigue are ascribed to them.
Large, often disproportionate dollars are paid to them.
And the Mets, when they signed Frank Tanana, hired one of the strange sect's great mystics.
The left-hander has 19 years in the major leagues.
He has 233 triumphs on record.
He has nearly 4,000 innings in his arm and brain.


Sound Bytes; In a Niche, With a Predatory Eye
GOING against a rival that owns up to 70 percent of a market may seem fruitless.
But not to Banyan Systems Inc.
In the network operating software market dominated by Novell Inc., Banyan, based in Westboro, Mass., has carved out a lucrative niche (and about 8 percent of the market).
Novell built its fortune on networks of 10 to 15 personal computers, whereas Banyan, with its Vines software, targets corporations seeking to tie hundreds of PC's into a network.
David C. Mahoney, a co-founder and currently chairman and chief executive, spent 1992 guiding Banyan through its initial public offering.
The stock, offered at $10.50 in August, hit a high of $24.50 on the over-the-counter market before easing to a current range of about $18.50.
At the end of last year, Banyan $500,000 into the Beyond Corporation in Cambridge, a maker of electronic-mail software.
Question: You have a very tough competitor in Novell. How do you win?


Polly Hefferan, Kevin Maroni
Polly Porteous Hefferan, a daughter of George B. Hefferan Jr. of Cape Elizabeth, Me., and Polly H. Larned of Prouts Neck, Me., was married yesterday to Kevin J. Maroni, the son of Jacques E. and Linette P. Maroni of Lincoln, Mass.
The Rev.
James Fletcher performed the ceremony at the State Street Presbyterian Church in Portland, Me.
Mrs.
Maroni, 28, is a legal assistant at the Washington law firm of Steptoe &amp; Johnson.
She graduated from the University of Michigan, as did her husband.


Indian Heroin Smugglers Turn to New Cargo
Indian drug smugglers, who for years have carried heroin to drug rings in the West, are now contributing to the production of heroin by drug cartels in Pakistan, Afghanistan and Myanmar by supplying them with large amounts of a chemical used in manufacturing the drug.
Indian intelligence officials and anti-drug campaigners say that thousands of gallons of the chemical, acetic anhydride, are shipped on camelback across the Thar Desert every year to Pakistan, the main recipient.
Some of it is then sold to drug traffickers in Afghanistan.
Smaller amounts reach Myanmar, formerly Burma, through India's eastern border.


Old World Maestro With New World Energy
KURT MASUR, formerly of Leipzig, Germany, has just celebrated his first anniversary in Harrison.
The music director of the New York Philharmonic lives with his wife, Tomoko Sakurai, and their teen-age son, Ken David, in the natural surroundings he loves, where he can see the seasons change and enjoy the wildlife that shares his yard.
It is an unexpected pleasure to hear Mr.
Masur, an imposing 65-year-old whose gaze makes timpani thunder, speak softly about the "newborn rabbits, squirrels and chipmunks" that scamper about his property.
He said he had chosen Harrison as his home for a simple reason: it was close to the German School of New York in White Plains, where Ken David is in the ninth grade.


In Defense of Mr. Gaidar
To the Editor:
Vladimir Kvint ("A Healthy Realism for the Russians," Viewpoints, Jan. 24) is both rude and wrong in his evaluation of Yegor T. Gaidar, the economic reformer and former Prime Minister of Russia.


Start Worrying, Feel Better
Two things about the President's economic program are clear.
One, it cannot be done.
Two, but it better be.
It cannot be done because it is both too much and too little, too much to pass and too little to solve our multiple problems.
It tries to address everything, which is a prescription for addressing nothing.
It equals in urgency some war measures, yet there is no war.
All that, on one side of the ledger, says "impossible." But there is even more to be said on the "absolutely necessary" side of the books.


Sharon Cohen, Kenneth Wolk
Sharon Lynn Cohen, the daughter of Janet and Michael Cohen of Old Westbury, L.I., was married last evening to Kenneth Marshall Wolk, the son of Patricia and Frank Wolk of Franklin Square, L.I.
Rabbi Eric Lankin performed the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
Cohen Wolk, 32, is a doctoral candidate in educational psychology at Fordham University.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College and received a master's degree in developmental psychology from Columbia University.
Her father is a vice president and director of Forstmann-Leff Associates Inc., an investment management company in New York.


Cooling Off


Allison Bailey, F. G. MacEachron
Allison Frances Bailey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis W. Bailey of Fairfield, Conn., was married yesterday to Frederick Grant MacEachron, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
F.
Grant MacEachron of Grandville, Mich.
The Rev.
Charles Amstein performed the ceremony at the Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
MacEachron is a vice president and management supervisor at Grey Advertising in New York.
She graduated from Wheaton College.


Clinton Classmate May Head I.N.S.
Bruce A. Morrison, the former Congressman from Connecticut and the Democratic Party's nominee for governor in 1990, is being prominently mentioned on the list of candidates to be the next director of the Immigration and Naturalization Service, officials in Washington and Connecticut say.
Mr.
Morrison is no stranger either to immigration law or to President Clinton.
In Congress, he was the chairman of the House Judiciary subcommittee on Immigration, Refugees and International Law, and he wrote much of the overhaul of Federal immigration law that took effect in 1990.
He also worked with Hillary Rodham Clinton in the 1970's when he was director of New Haven Legal Services and she was chairwoman of the board of the national Legal Services Corporation.
Last but not least, he was in Mr.
Clinton's 1973 graduating class at Yale University Law School.


Clinton's Economic Opus: A Thousand Lines of Type
The Highlights President Clinton proposed an ambitious plan to remake the American economy, raising taxes on energy, business and the rich, making deep cuts in the military, the Federal bureaucracy and health care payments, and trimming the budget deficit.
As Republicans dug in their heels, Mr.
Clinton and his aides began a cross-country campaign to sell the program to the American people.
DEFICIT REDUCTION Over the next four years, the plan would have the Government take in $246 billion in new taxes and spend $247 billion less than planned in present budgets.
It would increase other spending on "stimulus and investment" by $169 billion.
The net reduction in the deficit over those four years would be $325 billion.
But deficit reduction would not begin until next year, because an extra $30 billion would be spent this year to stimulate the economy. (1) (see The Fine Print at right)


Toast to Breakfast
To the Editor: "A Toast to Breakfast" made me smile as I remembered a breakfast in a cafeteria in Budva, Yugoslavia, where we observed workers eating huge bowls of beef stew as their start-of-the day meal.
When it happened, over 20 years ago, it gave us permission to rethink the concept of breakfast.
Nowadays we sometimes have leftover broiled salmon, with salad, as well as other foods left from the last day or two . . . not enough for another dinner, but more than adequate for breakfast.
PEARL GREENBERG New York, N.Y.


Project to Use Reefs to Halt Beach Erosion
The State of New Jersey hopes it has found a novel way of taming the coastal storms that have inflicted hundreds of millions of dollars in property damage along its coastline.
It is working with a private company to submerge a series of artificial reefs to soften the ocean's assault on Jersey shores.
A reef that cushioned the blow of waves on vulnerable beaches and kept sand from washing away would be a bonanza, not only for its developer but also for taxpayers, who pick up the growing costs of replenishing vulnerable beaches with sand that can vanish with the next major storm.


POSTINGS: East Side Conversion; From Parking Cars To Pumping Iron
In a borough where garage space can seem to cost more per inch than many apartments cost per foot,
you'd think that no one would convert a garage to anything else. You'd think wrong.
Town Sports International, a Manhattan-based operator of health clubs, has signed a 20-year lease on a four-story garage at 349 East 76th Street.
As soon as the Board of Standards and Appeals gives it the green light, -- an approval the company expects to get by August -- it will begin converting the 68-year-old building into an 18,000-square-foot health club.
Target opening date: January 1994.


Making the Most Of a Concierge
IF nothing else ever made you want to stay in a top-drawer hotel, the services of a senior concierge might do it.
If they are good at their jobs, they know how to get tickets to the hottest plays, what the newest restaurant is and how to get a good table.
As one historically minded concierge said, he and his colleagues have come to embody the core of a hotel's efforts to serve in a day when the inn is so large that the innkeeper can no longer personally attend to each guest.


On Language; Save Our Zoo From Language Predators
THE GREENS, LANguage snobs and political-correctness prescriptivists have gone too far this time.
Lovers of short and simple words were shocked this month by a story properly given front-page attention by The New York Times: William Conway, president of the New York Zoological Society, announced with savage glee that he and the other elitists of his board of directors had banned the word
zoo
from such institutions as the Bronx Zoo and the Central Park Zoo.
Henceforth, the elephants therein will have to memorize the name "Wildlife Conservation Park."


Jennifer Webber, Jerome Walther
Dr. and Mrs.
Ross A. Webber of Haddonfield, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Louise Webber to Jerome Hearne Walther, a son of Jo Ann Walther of Pennington, N.J., and John H. Walther of Yardley, Pa.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Webber, 28, is the international travel trade manager for the New Jersey Division of Travel and Tourism in Trenton.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a professor and chairman of the management department at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania.


U.S. Pushing to Get Bosnia Leader Back to Talks
Administration officials said today that a proposal for United States military planes to drop relief supplies in eastern Bosnia was designed in part to persuade the Bosnian Government to rejoin peace talks in New York.
Alija Izetbegovic, the President of the republic and leader of the Bosnian Muslims, refused to take part in the last negotiations at the United Nations.
The Muslims and Serbs have rejected the peace agreement put forth by the mediators, Cyrus R. Vance, former Secretary of State, representing the United Nations and Lord Owen representing the European Community.
Only the Croats, the third party in the Balkan fighting, fully accepted the the plan for the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina as it was proposed by Mr.
Vance and Lord Owen.


Track Events In the Skydome
Some 600 athletes from 80 countries will compete March 12 to 14 in the 1993 World Indoor Track and Field Championships in Toronto's Skydome.
Confirmed participants include two who won gold medals in the Barcelona Olympics, the Canadian hurdler Mark McKoy and the decathlete Robert Zmelnik of the Czech Republic.


Amy Sittler, Devin Kimble
Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen Sittler of Chicago have announced the engagement of their daughter, Amy Elizabeth Sittler, to Devin O. Kimble, a son of Sidney Kimble of Clovis, Calif., and Philip Kimble of Fresno, Calif.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Sittler, 29, is a research analyst in the fund-raising office of the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
She graduated from the University of Wisconsin at Madison.


In the Region: Westchester; Hotels Sprucing Up for Old and New Clients
IN the face of one of the worst business declines in memory, hoteliers in Westchester have been spending millions of dollars on renovation and construction projects in an attempt to hold onto an eroding clientele or, in some cases, to attract an entirely new kind of customer.
With occupancy rates around 62 percent, down from 70 percent in the late 1980's, the competition for business has become brutal.
As soon as one hotel announces a sprucing up, others feel compelled to follow suit.
As a result, almost all of Westchester's major hotels are either now undergoing or have just completed a major renovation.
At least one is gearing its redesign to an entirely new market.


Uruguayans Resisting Call For Changes
There is a political slogan painted on a wall not far from the office of President Luis Alberto Lacalle.
"Little, but ours," it says.
The three words may explain why Uruguay, a relatively small nation sandwiched between Brazil and Argentina, continues to foil Mr.
Lacalle's attempts to modernize the economy.


CAT'S CREDO
'Millie's Lament" (in response to "Cat's Credo," by Garrison Keillor, Jan. 17):
I'm Millie the dog,  And one thing's for sure:  The White House is not  My abode anymore.
The brand new tenant  Is an ole black cat.
My folks got evicted.
Imagine that!!!!!
The press will now write about  "Socks, the First Cat."  Mention "Millie the Dog"  And they'll wonder, "Who's that?"  I guess I have George,  Not Barbara, to blame;  George lost the election,  I lost my domain!!!!!
LOIS WILKERSON
Rosedale, Queens


Where East And West Do Not Meet
The novelist Philip Roth, who has had a longstanding interest in the literature of Eastern Europe, once noted ruefully that, over there, "nothing goes and everything matters," while in the United States "everything goes and nothing matters." Listening to the Polish composer Witold Lutoslawski conduct the Los Angeles Philharmonic in the premiere of his Fourth Symphony recently in Los Angeles, I was reminded of Mr.
Roth's distinction.
In music, the situation may not be clear: musical censorship in the former Soviet bloc was much more intricate and less literal than in literature; meanings are harder to discern and styles harder to define.
And that world has been transformed so violently that it is hard to know what cultural forces will hold sway.
But the fact is, in music here, anything does go, while in the music of Mr.
Lutoslawski and several of his Eastern European and Russian colleagues, much more seems to matter.
During the last 40 years, in circumstances hardly hospitable to free expression, the repertory that has emerged from these countries has been remarkably powerful.


Laura Thornton, David Pellegrino
Mr. and Mrs.
John V. Thornton of Bronxville, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Laura McNiece Thornton to David Guy Pellegrino, a son of Pamela B. Pellegrino of Fort Salonga, N.Y., and Louis A. Pellegrino of Patchogue, L.I.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Thornton is a financial operations coordinator with the Women's International Professional Tennis Council in New York.
She graduated from Colby College.
Her father, a retired vice chairman of the Consolidated Edison Company, is counsel to Whitman &amp; Ransom, a law firm in New York.
Her mother, Edna L. Thornton, is a lawyer in Bronxville.


Man, 21, Charged With Murder In Death of 4-Month-Old Son
A Brooklyn man was arrested and charged with murder last night in the death of his 4-month-old son, the police said.
The father, Alton Alexander, 21, frustrated that his four-month-old child would not stop crying on Friday evening, apparently slapped the baby so hard that he died the following morning, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.


Malone as King of the Road
There is no riding, or sitting, in Karl Malone's truck.
Can't touch it either.
The man in the yellow windbreaker guarding what is officially known as the Mailman's Truck, a 72-foot-long, 34,000-pound 18-wheeler, requests that you stand behind the barrier ropes and absorb this ostentatious wonder of the highway from a nice, safe distance.
Once, Malone offered his good buddy, Charles Barkley, a chance to watch him delight in the operation of the 13-speed transmission from the passenger seat in the cab.
Barkley remembers his response being something like, "I can't fit my big butt in there."


Missing: $40 Million/A special report.; An Armored-Car Business and a Looter's Paradise
Almost everything in Robert J. and Susanna M. Scaretta's driven life seemed to enlarge with the passage of time.
Their family grew bigger as four children were born.
Their house grew bigger, practically doubling in size the last few years.
And their business grew bigger.
Just four years ago, Revere Armored Inc., the armored-car company they owned in this working class community, had sales of about $1 million.
Last year, revenues swelled to $20 million, and further growth beckoned.


Measuring Schools And Dollars
"Comparing School Spending and Taxes"  [ Jan. 31 ]  makes the unfortunate and all-too-common error of confusing property-tax rates with property taxes paid.
High property taxes are generated by a low tax rate on highly assessed property as surely as by a high tax rate on more reasonably assessed property.
The heterogeneity that marks other aspects of Long Island school districts is also manifested in real-property assessment.
Another misleading assumption of the article is that dollars-spent-per-child is an automatic indicator of educational quality.
Based on New York State Education Department statistics measuring student performance by such instruments as standardized test scores and numbers of Regents-accredited high school diplomas earned by local graduates, denoting successful completion of an academically rigorous curriculum, the high price paid by the taxpayers of the Oyster Bay school district does not translate into superior education for its students.
Instead, it supports a highly paid, excessively numerous administrative and teaching staff most notable for its insistence that mediocre student achievement is really "excellence."


Big Money for Johnson
The way the Dallas Cowboys' owner, JERRY JONES, sees it, a coach who wins a Super Bowl deserves a super salary.
According to The Dallas Morning News, the base salary of Coach JIMMY JOHNSON will nearly double for the last six years of his contract, rising from $550,000 last season to $1 million for 1993.
The move by Jones, who also gave raises and longer contracts to Johnson's assistants, puts Johnson among the five highest-paid coaches in the N.F.L., behind Miami's DON SHULA ($1.7 million), Washington's JOE GIBBS ($1.4 million) and New England's BILL PARCELLS ($1.2 million), and even with the Giants' DAN REEVES.(AP)


Better Card Design Is in Eye of Bidder
EACH baby, in the view of William Schwenck Gilbert's Private Willis, is "either a little Liberal, or else a little Conservative." Nowadays, when it comes to conventions, liberals are quite common among Democrats but quite rare among bridge players.
The conservative attitude is even more pronounced in the design of playing cards.
The standard double-headed card with indices in two corners, so that it can be read conveniently from either end, has been in use since the late 1870's.
Until then a player had to look at the full card, and hold it right side up, to identify it.


INSIDE
AIDS: New Hope, Old Fears
For many with H.I.V., the most recent report of a potentially promising new strategy against the virus was the latest swoop in an all-too-familiar roller coaster of emotions.
Page 29.
In Sarajevo, Gloom Deepens
With no relief supplies for more than a week, even residents of the Bosnian capital who were once grimly upbeat seem to be nearing despair.
Page 16.
Two Prominent Judges Die
David Bazelon, who wrote landmark opinions expanding individual rights, and Gerhard Gesell, who presided in Watergate and Iran-contra cases, both died in Washington.
Pages 38-39.
Will Jackson Have New Role?
Benjamin Hooks issued his last report as N.A.A.C.P. chief, amid indications that Jesse Jackson was among the finalists to succeed him.
Page 24.


The World Moves on Somalia; the Warlords Move Faster
THERE is a Somali saying that goes, "If a camel enters your living room, go and sit under the tree." Wisdom holds that eventually the camel will return to the sand, and homeowner to home.
Now, the Somalis have Americans in their living rooms, hunting for weapons as they try, with mixed success, to disarm the country.
Soon, those marines will return to the sands of California military bases -- and things may be as before.
Since their arrival in December, the Americans have seized several large weapons caches each week.
Two weeks ago, one warlord volunteered to hand over 30 "technicals," the heavily armed pickup trucks that have come to symbolize the country's collapse into chaos.
On Friday, American forces seized what was described as the single biggest weapons system, six Soviet-made surface-to-air missiles in Mogadishu.


Shared Sacrifice, or Sacrifice the Elderly?; Social Security Raids
To the Editor:
"Press Harder on Deficit Reduction" (editorial, Feb. 5) states that the Clinton Administration is on the right track "in debating ways to control the costs of Social Security."


Warhol Pops Up in Carpathia
ANDY WARHOL never set foot in Mikova, the remote village in the far eastern corner of Slovakia where his mother and father were born.
But in September 1991, four years after his death (and 70 years after his parents emigrated to America), a museum dedicated to the Pop artist's work, his family history and avant-garde art in general opened in the nearby little town of Medzilaborce.
Medzilaborce lies in the rugged wooded foothills of the Carpathian mountains about six miles from the border with Poland and 30 miles from Ukraine.


Now Arriving: Costliest Plans For Commuter Lines Since 1970
ANYONE who sits idling in traffic on Interstate 95 has dreamed of a less painful way of getting to work.
Highways choked with traffic and a shortage of parking are pushing people to search for a better way to get from one place to another.
Now, two railroad construction projects underway in the state are expected to keep commuter trains closer to their schedules as well as reducing travel time between Boston and New York.
The improvements are meant to get people out of their cars, off the plane and onto the train.


Some Absences Make Hearts Grow Fainter
Last Wednesday morning at 6:30, Zina Garrison-Jackson left Chicago, where she was contractually obligated to play singles and doubles at a $375,00 Kraft Tour event, and took an early flight to Richmond, to attend Arthur Ashe's funeral.
Yes, the trip was an inconvenience; yes, it was the right thing to do.
But when she and her husband, Willard, arrived at the service and looked around for their peer group, they instead experienced the shock of nonrecognition.
Zina Garrison was the only active player there.


Roll Over, Orpheus
Strategically parked across the street from the Meridien Copacabana hotel, the Scotch Bar flashes its red lights nightly, beckoning tourists to come on over.
On a recent evening, American rap music pounded, imported whisky flowed, strobe lights bounced off mirrors and red vinyl upholstery, and fevered hands reached out to dancers peeling down to their black net underwear.


Ms. Dumschat, Richard Olson
Claudia E. Dumschat, the daughter of Paul and Lisbeth Dumschat of Toms River, N.J., was married in New York yesterday to Richard Arthur Olson, the son of the late Ralph and Helen Olson.
The Rev.
John Goerss, a Lutheran minister, performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University, where the bride is the associate organist.
Ms.
Dumschat, 30, is keeping her name.
She is also the director of music at Trinity Evangelical Lutheran Church and at Broadway United Church of Christ, both in Manhattan.
She graduated from and received a master's degree in music from Manhattan School of Music, where she is a candidate for a doctorate in musical arts.


Where Everybody Knows Your Job
NETWORKS TEND TO NAME TV series after jobs: "Nurses," "Coach," "The Commish," "Dr. Quinn, Medicine Woman." If the tube accurately reflected real life, most Americans would work as attorneys, physicians, policemen, proud restaurant owners and neurotic entertainers instead of the cosmetics saleswomen, teachers and truck drivers they are.


RECORD BRIEFS
Jimmy Giuffre 3: 'Flight, Bremen 1961' Hat Art 6071; CD only.


Foster Keeps Going And Going and Going
For a hurdler, Greg Foster sure has a lot of endurance.
Sixteen years after his career began, Foster is still here and Renaldo Nehemiah is not, which means Foster -- in an inglorious way -- has finally one-upped his archrival.
"No, can't say that," said Foster tonight.
"Renaldo chose to go to football. He missed five years. Not like he was forced out of this."


BATHED IN GLORY
All three of the sunken tubs featured in Joan Duncan Oliver's Design article "Bathed in Glory" (Jan. 24) had slippery decks, sharp corners and no grab bars in sight.
Shouldn't good design have safety as the foremost consideration?
As a plumber, I find the sight of a tub surrounded by sharp-cornered marble, set in the middle of a room, less inviting than menacing.
MICHAEL LIPSEY
San Francisco


The Battle to Keep Retail Dollars at Home
THEY are a loyal group of cus tomers followers of the latest fashion trends with dollars to spend.
Typical is Julia Yodice of Ardsley, a former account executive for a cosmetics company and now a homemaker.
"In my heart of hearts," she said while shopping the Presidents' Day sales last weekend, "I'm a true-blue Bloomie's customer who just loves this place; they have everything I need."
For Mrs.
Yodice and other customers who regularly scan the aisles of Bloomingdale's here, the chain is about to build a larger playground.


A 7-3 Roadblock Too Tall for St. John's to Surmount
Brian Mahoney peered at his stat sheet for only a few moments.
Then the St.
John's basketball coach looked up, satisfied that he had gleaned the difference in the Redmen's game tonight against the University of Miami.
"The difference is Popa," said Mahoney, referring to the 7-foot-3-inch Miami center Constantin Popa, who played just 20 minutes because of foul trouble in the Hurricanes' pulsating 82-77 victory but had a team-high 21 points.


Lawsuit Threatens Driver Point System
A LAWSUIT against the Division of Motor Vehicles has challenged the way motor vehicle points are assessed on drivers' licenses.
If the plaintiffs win -- and some legal experts believe they will -- it could lead more motorists to plead not guilty to traffic violations and even inspire a large-scale effort by drivers to have existing points removed from their licenses.
As it now stands, when a motorist is found guilty in a municipal court, the judge sends a record of the conviction to the Division of Motor Vehicles.
The division automatically assesses the appropriate number of points against the motorist's license.
The judge typically does not discuss the number of points a particular violation calls for.
Nor does he tell the motorist the size of the auto insurance surcharge that these points will generate.


China, the Conglomerate, Seeks a New Unifying Principle
AFTER holding China together for four decades, Communism is like a yellowing, cracking layer of glue, slowly losing its grip.
The ideology and -- when that wasn't enough -- the fear that Mao used to keep distant provinces in the orbit of Beijing are no longer sufficient, and Chinese leaders are searching for a new unifying force, a new adhesive, to keep the empire together.
"In Russia, there's no state, but there is a society," said a prominent Chinese journalist.
"Here it's more like the reverse. In Russia, people still line up even if there's no bread on the shelves, while here it'd be chaos in that kind of situation. There's nothing to hold us together. It's only a question of time before everything falls apart."


Foreign Accent


Is This the End for New York's Attic?
On the verge of bankruptcy and dissolution, the New-York Historical Society shut its doors to the public this month.
One thing is clear about the 189-year-old institution: if it is to emerge from its latest crisis, it must finally become a different, and probably leaner, institution.
Different from what, you might ask.
For much of its history it was run so like a private club that few people had the slightest idea what was housed within its somber limestone walls on Central Park West.
Not much has changed even during the last few years, when the society, reeling from its last near-death encounter, has tried to attract a wider public.
Yet while millions of people each year streamed into the American Museum of Natural History across the street, at its peak in 1992 the society drew only 93,000 visitors.


Attacking the Drug Problem
To the Editor:
In his review of "Reckoning: Drugs, the Cities, and the American Future" (Jan. 24), Michael Massing cites Elliott Currie's proposals for ending the poverty in which drug addiction is rooted: a national employment policy, an increase in the minimum wage, an expansion of the Job Corps, increased health care for the poor, paid family leave, affordable housing and an overall reduction in social inequality.
Mr.
Massing then dismisses this modest liberal agenda as so "utopian" as to amount to "a prescription for doing nothing."
Why did I bother to vote?  BARBARA EHRENREICH Syosset, L.I.


The Executive Computer; Behind Next's Sea Change, a Lesson About Market Niches
WHEN Next Inc. withdrew from the hardware business earlier this month, a message was delivered to all companies that would build a better mousetrap without first identifying its market niche.
The second corporate child of Steven P. Jobs, who co-founded Apple Computer Inc., Next burned through $200 million of capital from Mr.
Jobs, Canon Ltd. and Ross Perot before deciding it would really be better off as a software company.
Next's machine was always impressive, from its sleek black magnesium housing to its integral CD-ROM, the first in a desktop computer.
And in terms of user friendliness, it went a step beyond Mr.
Jobs's Macintosh.
But if its features were stunning, it never became clear just what the machine was, and who its customers might be.
Was it a personal computer or a work station?
Was it for students, managers or engineers?


Rameau Returns, In Excellent Voice
A few weeks ago, at the Opera-Comique after a performance of Rameau's opera-ballet "Les Indes Galantes," the American conductor William Christie was inducted into the French Legion of Honor.
Mr.
Christie spoke glowingly of "your beautiful country," to which he has dedicated the last two decades of his life.
But the French encomiums to him and his work were equally deserved.
France has had a long history of welcoming foreigners who return the favor by fostering and developing French culture.
Mr.
Christie is the latest distinguished example.
Now, in time for the appearances by Mr.
Christie and his early-music ensemble, Les Arts Florissants, at the Brooklyn Academy of Music next weekend, Harmonia Mundi France has rushed his recording of Rameau's opera "Castor et Pollux" into print (HMC 901435/7; three CD's), even prior to its French release.
This may be his best recording, and given the quality of his previous releases, that says a lot.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Black History; Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
WORKING COTTON.
By Sherley Anne Williams.
Illustrated by Carole Byard.
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $14.95. (Ages 4 to 8) All the children help Mamma and Daddy pick cotton.
A 1993 Caldecott Honor Book.


Jeffrey Jacobson and Shari Kellner
Dr. and Mrs.
Irwin L. Kellner of Port Washington, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Shari Lynn Kellner to Jeffrey Howard Jacobson, a son of Dr.
Donald Jacobson and Susan Jacobson, both of Woodbury, L.I.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kellner, 24, is an assistant treasurer at the Bankers Trust Company in New York.
She graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y.
Her father is the chief economist at the Chemical Banking Corporation in New York.


Just What Does Michael Jackson's Story Add Up To?
First, make a decision: believe Michael Jackson or don't.
And then forget your decision, because it doesn't matter in the triumphant return of the prodigal star to the fold.
Mr.
Jackson's television testimony 10 days ago, which reached 62 million viewers, ranged from the shocking (he's fighting a skin disease) to the expected (yes, his father beat him) to the trivial (no, he didn't fake the moonwalk).
You've probably spent some time debating which of his claims to accept and which to deride.
What matters is that Mr.
Jackson was there, for his fans, for every hungry consumer of celebrity who couldn't make a sensible story from all the rumors, the brief appearances and the music that seems so distant from the man.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Black History
MANY THOUSAND GONE
African Americans From Slavery to Freedom.
By Virginia Hamilton.
Illustrated by Leo Dillon and Diane Dillon. 151 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $16. (Ages 8 and up)


Boston Rivals Hartford With Old State House
I enjoyed your article on the Old State House in Hartford ("A Landmark Is Prepared With Care for Its Latest Incarnation," Feb. 7, 1993), but I may not be the first to point out to you that the statement that the building is "believed to be the oldest legislative building in the country" is misleading in the extreme.
It may be believed to be that, but at least one other such building known well to us Bostonians -- the Old State House, sometimes called the Old British State House, in Boston -- is considerably older.


Clinton's Bold Plan Sets Social Policy His Way
FOR all its sweep and potential economic impact, the budget proposal that President Clinton delivered last week is far more than an ambitious plan to recharge the economy and reduce the deficit.
It is a blueprint for one of the most profound changes in social policy in this century.
The budget
is
the policy, as the architects of Ronald Reagan's military buildup in the 1980's well knew.
Mr.
Clinton's budget would, in effect, transfer a great share of power from that bureaucracy, the followers of former Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger, to the disciples of Marian Wright Edelman, the crusader for children, who has long been a source of inspiration for Hillary and Bill Clinton.


An Envelope's History Lies in the Fine Print
POSTAL history is often called the study of routes and rates because it tries to puzzle out from the markings on an envelope who mailed a letter, when it was mailed, to whom and at what cost, and what route the letter took.
For 20th-century mail, this is pretty straightforward.
The letters bear addresses, the stamps show the cost and the postmarks provide the dates.


Rethinking the Need to Avoid Cream
THE concern about fat and cholesterol has taken cream off the menu.
Cooks who might have added a spoonful of heavy cream to smooth or thicken a sauce now do without.
Whipped cream on the austere fruit dessert is out of the question.
Or is it?
What is often being used in place of cream is olive oil or some other vegetable oil.
Unlike these oils, cream does contain some cholesterol, but it is not significant in a small amount of cream, only about 25 milligrams in a tablespoon.
More important, the total amount of fat in a tablespoon of cream is about half that in a comparable quantity of oil.


CRIME
"Look at me," says Frank (Cully) Cullen, the hero of Timothy Watts's dark and dirty crime novel, CONS (Soho, $19.95).
"I'm 36 years old. I know how to do, what, fix cars a little bit?" Cully, who just finished doing five at the Raiford pen for armed robbery, has assessed the alternative job opportunities in Beaufort, S.C., and doesn't see much chance for getting out of his old line of work.
Considering the local crime wave that he sets off when he takes a chauffeur's job with a rich, mean farmer and his young, bored wife, Cully has good reason to feel he's in a rut.
Not so the author, an auto mechanic from Paoli, Pa., whose precision-tuned first novel purrs with professionalism.
Readers who share Mr. Watts's fondness for Elmore Leonard and earlier
noir
models might be tempted to anticipate the drift once the boss's wife, Michelle, seduces Cully into betraying and robbing her husband. (Haven't we all seen this movie before?) But the author has many more plot curves and character bends to execute before getting this baby home to the garage.
There's no predicting the nastiness that Michelle's psychotic former husband is capable of, and you'll never guess the stunt that her sister pulls during a bank holdup.
Although Mr.
Watts delivers all the sleazy sex, slick con games and fatalistic acts of violence that define the opaque
noir
vision, he writes with enough originality to map out his own route.


Susan L. Kean, Dino Cattaneo
Joan Eddy of Wilmette, Ill., and John Kean of Vero Beach, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan Livingston Kean to Dino Guido Cattaneo, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Franco Cattaneo of Milan, Italy.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Kean, 28, is a writer and a producer in the promotions department of WPIX-TV in New York.
She graduated from Pomona College.
Her father is the president of the NUI Corporation, a utilities holding company in Bedminster, N.J.
Her great-grandfather the late Hamilton F. Kean was a Republican Senator from New Jersey.
She is a stepdaughter of Pamela Kean and of the late Morris R. Eddy 2d.


Where the Ecotours Are
WALRUSES basking on ice floes in Hudson Bay, sea turtles laying eggs on remote beaches, howler monkeys in Brazil's flooded forests.
These are a few of the sights being offered this year to the thousands of American tourists who are more interested in sampling a taste of unspoiled nature than lying on crowded beaches sipping margaritas.
The more than 300 United States tour operators who are devising these environmentally themed tours include large, well-established adventure-travel companies, nonprofit organizations and small ecology-conscious entrepreneurs whose brochures, printed on recycled paper, describe seven or eight well-planned itineraries.
The tours themselves range from relaxing "soft adventure" expeditions such as Tread Lightly's wildlife-viewing trips in Newfoundland to rigorous, hands-on involvement in forest-conservation efforts promoted by organizations like Earthwatch.
All of these so-called "ecotours" are designed to promote a lasting appreciation of the natural world.
The concept of ecotourism, a term that entered popular usage in the late 80's, implies that tourism -- one of the world's largest industries, and often regarded as the spoiler of exotic cultures and locales -- might very well be the best conservation tool around.


Making a Difference; Edgarizing The S.E.C.
THE Securities and Exchange Commission requires a lot of paperwork from corporations, which file more than 10 million pages of documents a year.
But even Washington bureaucracies can change, and so starting this year the S.E.C. is gradually converting to an electronic filing system.
The new electronic data gathering analysis and retrieval system is being called Edgar for short.
A pilot program has been operating since 1984 and Edgar is to go into full swing in April with the first mandatory electronic filings.
By year-end, 2,500 corporations and 800 investment management companies are expected to be using Edgar.
The S.E.C. expects all filers to be phased in by mid-1996.


Dig It: The Hot New Trends for Spring
BEFORE the planting season is full speed ahead, gardeners may like to know what some garden merchandising experts are saying about the coming season.
Gardening remains the top leisure activity in the United States.
Analysts note that the dollars spent on garden products are at an all-time high.
They seem to agree that this leisure activity will remain as popular in the coming years and even predict a 20 percent increase in sales.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Monday
January budget deficit, billions of dollars
38.9
23.5
Tuesday
February consumer confidence, in percent
77.0
76.5
Wednesday
Jan. durable goods, in percent
+8.7
-2.5
Friday
Fourth-quarter real G.D.P. in percent
3.8
3.8
Tuesday: Johnson Redbook survey released  Wednesday: John Major meets with President Clinton *
Treasury five-year note auction  Friday: Chancellor Helmut Kohl visits Japan  Friday: Industrial production.


Let Japan Choose Peace
The world's chief diplomat spent the last week in Tokyo trying to extricate himself from an undiplomatic gaffe.
U.N.
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali roiled Japanese politics and alarmed half of Asia when he urged Tokyo to change its Constitution to permit more forceful military actions under the U.N. flag.
Americans scarcely noticed.
But the U.S. has an interest in leaving Japan's "peace Constitution" intact.
A more active Japanese contribution to world affairs is desirable, but need not involve lowering inhibitions about the use of military force.


FEB. 14-20: Challenging Convention; A Medical Student Offers Hope in the AIDS Battle
Before last week Yung-Kang Chow was just another grad student sweating out the rigors of Harvard Medical School.
Now the 31-year-old is a sensation, born of the hope that just maybe he has come upon an effective weapon against AIDS.
Mr.
Chow, who left his native Taiwan at the age of 14, has devised a drug strategy that eliminates the AIDS virus from human cells grown in a test tube.
It was described last week in the British scientific journal Nature.


Grosjean Holds On in the Slalom
The wind started howling and the light turned flat five seconds before Matt Grosjean, of Steamboat Springs, Colo., the defending national Alpine slalom champion, leaped out of the starting gate for his second run this afternoon.
He had a lot riding on the run, not only the slalom title in the Subaru United States Alpine championships here, but also the good name of the United States ski team.


Walking With Rhinoceroses
BULLFIGHTERS may dignify their showdown with the bull as a moment of truth, but when I met the first two-ton rhinoceros advancing through the African bush, my gut instinct was to run.
There wasn't much doubt who was the interloper.
But Norman Galli, the ranger guiding our party, quipped that he would shoot the first person who bolted.
"To urban people who've never been put under pressure, the first instinct is to run," he said.
"It's simple fear."
"If you enter a white rhino's space, he'll charge you," Mr.
Galli said before we set off walking through the heart of rhinoceros country in Natal province, on the eastern coast of South Africa.
Trying to outrun a charging rhinoceros was far riskier than standing still or dodging behind a tree, he said.
The white rhinoceros had such poor eyesight and was so clumsy that it was likely to run right past, unlike the smaller but more aggressive black rhinoceros.


'You Must Be Dreaming'
To the Editor:
Without wishing to spoil the story, as the law professor who undertook the malpractice suit of Barbara Noel against the psychiatrist Jules Masserman, I feel an obligation to correct an inaccuracy in "You Must Be Dreaming" that was reiterated in your review of the book (Jan. 10).
This is the statement that no peer could be found to testify in the suit against this "world-renowned psychiatrist" whom Ms.
Noel accused of rape.


Bosworth Case to Jury
With as much as $7 million in insurance benefits riding on its decision, a Federal jury began deliberations in Seattle on Friday on whether BRIAN BOSWORTH's permanent disability was caused by the shoulder injury that ended his career as a linebacker with the Seahawks in 1989 or by arthritis.
In his closing agrument, a lawyer for Lloyd's of London said that arthritis, not the injury, caused the disability and that Bosworth, accordingly, was due no proceeds from injury policies. (AP)


THE SQUARE ROOT
Since I'm old enough to be her father (perhaps, grandfather), I'll spare Molly O'Neill the discomfort and not write to her directly about how I've flipped over her.
Anyone who can write so poetically and seductively about the turnip has got to be pretty extraordinary.
CONSTANTINE KARVONIDES
Biddeford, Me.


Corrections
The introduction to a directory of cruises on Feb. 7 misstated the passenger capacity of the proposed ship Phoenix World City and referred incorrectly to anticipated financial arrangements.
The ship, to be built in the United States, is to carry 5,600 passengers (plus the crew of 2,400), and its backers are seeking loan guarantees, not government loans, from the United States Government.


Coping With Life When Its Wounds Never Seem to Heal
IF she could live her life over again, Bonnie Foreshaw said, she would have left Connecticut long ago, moved to Jamaica with her children and opened a guesthouse for tourists.
There, under the soothing sun she would have lived a quiet, spiritual life.
As she sat and spun images of what might have been, Ms.
Foreshaw, 45 years old, laced her fingers over her knees and rocked back and forth.
Her eyes had a dreamy, faraway look but within seconds her expression turned to sadness.
"Yet instead I sit here day after day dealing with all of these wounds inside my head," she said while sitting inside a softly lighted room at the Connecticut Correctional Institution in Niantic, "the kind of wounds that never heal."


New for New York: Readable Tax Notices
PROPERTY owners have been getting something unexpected from New York City -- tax assessment notices that they can understand.
"Dear Taxpayer: The Department of Finance estimates the value of your property as follows," the notice begins.
What follows are not only the assessed value and an estimate of the tax bite for the coming fiscal year, but the market value that city assessors have placed on the property.


THE REFORMATION OF A STREET PREACHER
Early in the article, Sharpton is quoted as preaching: "There is nothing hip or slick about being ignorant. And there is nothing hip or slick about going around killing each other for no good reason." Such a casual reference to murder as being "unhip"!
And does he mean that, if someone believes there is "a good reason," killing is O.K.?


Wall Street; The Clinton Effect Drives Drug Stocks Down
IT is no fun to be nominated as the No. 1 villain in what the President proclaims to be a national crisis.
That is what has happened to the pharmaceutical industry.
For many years, drug stocks were among the best performers on Wall Street.
But last year they began to stumble, and now, with President Clinton professing shock at the level of some drug prices, they appear to be very sick.


Orlando Discounts
To The Editor: In "What's Doing in Orlando" (Jan. 3), I was sorry to see no mention of the Orlando Magicard discount card offered by the Orlando Convention and Visitors Bureau.
The card provides discounts of 10 to 50 percent at tourist attractions, hotels, restaurants, stores and car rental outlets.
The three main Disney parks are not included, but Typhoon Lagoon and Pleasure Island are.
The free card is available at the visitor information center at Mercado Mediterranean Shopping Village, 8445 International Drive.
GARY KAZIN Rockaway, N.J.
John Rutherford, director of
public relations for the Orlando/Orange County Convention &amp; Visitors Bureau Inc.,
adds:
The Magicard may also be obtained free by calling (800) 551-0181.
It will be sent by mail.
Allow 10 working days for arrival.


'He Often Makes Good Sense'
To the Editor:
I was dismayed that Walter Goodman's essay was so pro-liberal.
Why not present both sides of the situation?
The new liberal wave is engulfing our blessed country, and people like Mr.
Goodman always give conservatives a black eye because we stand for certain principles.


POSTINGS: Arts and Crafts Construction; Back to Stickley in Columbia County
Renewed interest in the Arts and Crafts esthetic of the early 20th century has already led to a revival of furniture designed by Gustav Stickley, the architect who was in the forefront of that movement.
So it should not be too suprising that a developer in Columbia County is offering new houses adapted from plans published in Stickley's Craftsman magazine from 1904 to 1910.
The house plans are intended for three lots owned by the developer, John Lynn Jones, in Hillsdale, N.Y.
Choices include a 24- by 40-foot shingled farmhouse and a 30-by 44-foot, two-story bungalow, both from 1909, and a 36- by 46-foot, U-shaped courtyard bungalow that was designed in 1904.
The lots range from 5.3 to 9.3 acres and the prices from $235,000 to $325,000.


A la Carte
DINERS who want to squeeze every dollar for maximum value would not be prone to think about Poco Loco, a Mexican cafe in Roslyn.
A quick glance at the menu reveals entrees that cost up to $17.95 and appetizers priced as high as $7.50.
But the rustic restaurant at 1431 Old Northern Boulevard (621-5626) proves that it is possible to go to an eating place that is not a budget spot and still obtain a bargain meal.


Neil Gever and Laura Beth Kies
Dr.
Emily Kies Folpe of Larchmont, N.Y., and David M. Kies of London and Mamaroneck, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Laura Beth Kies to Neil Charles Gever, the son of Drs.
Benson and Sally Gever of Mechanicsville, Pa.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kies, 24, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, as did her fiance.
She received a master's degree in education from the University of Michigan, where the prospective bridegroom is a third-year law student.


'Falling Down' Takes Its Cues From the Headlines
The last thing one expects of a major Hollywood studio is a $30 million movie that might have been torn from the ugliest of newspaper headlines about divorced fathers who murder their children or tormented men who shoot up fast-food restaurants.
Hollywood, leery of reality, usually channels apocalyptic rage into fantasies like "Die Hard" and "Lethal Weapon." "Falling Down," a Warner Brothers movie opening on Friday, tells of an ordinary man, played by Michael Douglas, who breaks down one hot Los Angeles morning in a freeway traffic jam and blazes a trail of violence across the city.
It is a movie filled with fury, human scum and hatred in the metaphorical urban sewer that the city of the angels has become.


A COLD WAR ICON COMES UNDER SIEGE
Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty, two icons of the cold war, are to be shut down under President Clinton's deficit-reduction plan, according to Administration officials and officials with the two broadcasting operations.
Among the cuts outlined in the President's economic plan are a $60 million savings in the fiscal year that begins Oct. 1 and $644 million savings over five years for the Board for International Broadcasting, which oversees the foreign-language broadcasts.


Next To The Body
Pretty lingerie is no longer under wraps.
With spring's styles so sheer, it's clear that what's beneath is just as important as what's on top.
These choices complement the new fashions.


David Bazelon Dies at 83; Jurist Had Wide Influence
David L. Bazelon, who as a Federal appeals court judge for three decades wrote landmark opinions extending the rights of the individual and expanding the rights of criminal defendants, died on Friday at his home in Washington.
He was 83.
Judge Bazelon stepped down from the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia in 1985, saying he was having problems with his memory.
In his last years, he suffered from what was believed to be Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases, his family said.


From Head to Toes
Romantic hats, shoes that dance.
Spring ushers in sweeping brims, jaunty berets, soft slippers, delicately turned beads.


THE HIGH COST OF LIVING
As a ventilator user, I was frightened and angered by Lisa Belkin's article.
My life is fulfilling and precious to me and those who care about me.
I am a psychotherapist, a writer, a taxpayer, a community volunteer, a husband and a son.
Yet, like Armando Dimas, I face the possibility that, someday, some bureaucrat will put a dollar value on my life and threaten me with death, when the cost of my health care exceeds that limit.


Technology; The A B C's Come to Life
Educational software is growing rapidly, thanks to new technology sophisticated enough to produce the animated images and realistic voices that can delight young children while teaching them.
According to the Software Publishers Association, a Washington-based trade group, parents spent $81.5 million on educational software for school-age children during the first nine months of 1992, up 39.3 percent from $58.5 million a year earlier.
Overall spending on all types of software increased only about 18 percent in the period, said David H. Tremblay, research director.


For an Oscar Nominee, Plenty of Fashion Advice
The secret of "The Crying Game" began to unravel on Wednesday when Jaye Davidson, right, a star of the film, was nominated for an Oscar as best supporting actor.
There is now some hope that Jaye Davidson might, in the spirit of the film's character, show up at the awards ceremony in something other than black tie.
Given that possibility, some experts on dressing offered the following advice:


Nancy Rosenberg, Gary Low
Nancy Beth Rosenberg, the daughter of Steven and Fran Rosenberg of Harrison, N.Y., was married last evening to Gary Marshall Low, a son of Robert and Frieda Low of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Avi Magid performed the ceremony at the Hyatt Regency in Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Low, 28, is the director of retail sales at the F 1 Marketing Group Inc. in Mamaroneck, N.Y., a marketer of licensed auto-racing team merchandise.
Her husband is the president and founder of the company.
She graduated from Tulane University.
Her father is a real-estate investor in New York.
Her mother is a travel consultant at the U Name It Travel agency in Harrison.


BENEFITS
New York Mardi Gras
MONDAY -- Melba Moore will perform at a Mardi Gras party to raise funds for Steps to End Family Violence, which helps victimized women and their families, from 6 to 9 P.M. at the Surrogate's Court, 31 Chambers Street, at Centre Street.
Buffet dinner and open bar.
Tickets, $85, from (212) 689-9629 or at the door.


Fitting Tribute


Women's Work -- It Doesn't Pay
To the Editor:
Lawrence E. Harrison's comments ("If Domestic Work Paid Well . . .," Viewpoints, Jan. 31) that the presence of illegal immigrants drives down the wages of domestic workers are so far off base that they would be funny, if the truth weren't so pathetic.


Grosjean Holds On in the Slalom
The wind started howling and the light turned flat five seconds before Matt Grosjean, of Steamboat Springs, Colo., the defending national Alpine slalom champion, leaped out of the starting gate for his second run this afternoon.
He had a lot riding on the run, not only the slalom title in the Subaru United States Alpine championships here, but also the good name of the United States ski team.


RECORD BRIEFS
Bach: The Well-Tempered Clavier, Book I Mieczyslaw Horszowski, pianist.
Vanguard Classics OVC 8046/7; two CD's.


Insuring Women Receive Effective Mammograms
When women go for a mammogram, they often assume that the doctors and technicians are trained and the equipment is capable of taking pictures that will detect cancers.
After all, in many cases they have been sent by their personal physicians.
But the assumption is not always a safe one.
For example, Nassau County health officials say more than 200 women on Long Island were given poor-quality mammograms from a machine giving off radiation exceeding the legal limit.
The doctor who performed the mammograms, Padma Ram of Floral Park, was charged in 1991 with providing substandard breast X-rays.
Dr.
Ram has denied any wrongdoing and the case is expected to be decided next month.


Sarah H. Harding, Michael Glickman
Mr. and Mrs.
W.
Alan Harding of Wolfeboro, N.H., have announced the engagement of their daughter Sarah Harrison Harding to Michael Ronald Glickman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ivan M. Glickman of Rye, N.Y.
A June wedding is planned.


Simone Berk, Jared Silverman
Mr. and Mrs.
Israel Berk of Beachwood, Ohio, have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Simone Berk and Jared Adam Silverman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert B. Silverman of West Long Branch, N.J.
Ms.
Berk, 26, is an instructional aide in the Hebrew-English bilingual program at the Heath School in Brookline, Mass.
She graduated from Emerson College and received a master's degree in middle-school language arts from Simmons College.


Wall Street; Will Clinton's Gamble Pay Off?
"If there's anything that this program is directed at, it's interest rates."
Robert E. Rubin,  chairman of President Clinton's  National Economic Council.
WALL STREET's bond traders can be forgiven for feeling more than a little bit used upon hearing Robert E. Rubin's comment about the importance of the credit markets to the Clinton Administration's economic plan.


Vance-Owen Plan Offers a Fair Bosnia Solution
To the Editor:
In "Lord Owen's Googly" (editorial, Feb. 4), you criticize the Vance-Owen United Nations peace proposals for the former Yugoslavia and attack Lord Owen as "not infallible in his political judgment" because of the defeat of his Alliance parties in the 1987 British election.


Injured Graf Pulls Out
A pulled stomach muscle has forced STEFFI GRAF to withdraw from the Evert Cup, beginning tomorrow in Indian Wells, Calif.
The 56-player field will include TRACY AUSTIN, who accepted a wild-card entry to play in her first event in nearly four years. (AP)


Nancy Kolodny, Ralph Lieberman
Drs.
Edwin and Roselyn Kolodny of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Nancy Kolodny to Ralph Mark Lieberman, a son of Jay and Joan Lieberman of Milwaukee.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kolodny, 30, is an environmental consultant for Arthur D. Little Inc., a management and technology consulting company, in Cambridge, Mass.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, as did her fiance, and received a master's degree in environmental engineering from Johns Hopkins University.
Her father is the chairman of the department of neurology at New York University Medical School, where her mother is an assistant professor of pediatrics.


Japan's Satellite to Peer at Far Corner of Universe
Japan launched a satellite today that is expected to peer with unprecedented acuity into the farthest reaches of the universe, giving scientists a new vision of stars formed in the first few hundred million years after the Big Bang, considered by many to have created the universe.
The launching seems likely to be the latest success for Japan's Institute of Space and Astronautical Science, a little known agency that operates on a shoestring but, to the envy of some Americans, has managed to launch 15 scientific satellites in two decades.


Miss Montgomery, Nicholas Moore
Mr. and Mrs.
Clark T. Montgomery of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Allison Montgomery, to Nicholas Connell Moore, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George C. Moore of New York.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Montgomery, 27, is the account coordinator at the advertising agency of Foote Cone Belding in Philadelphia.
She is also an animal portraitist.
She graduated from Kenyon College, as did her fiance.
Her father is an executive vice president of Grey Advertising in New York.
Her mother, Prudence K. Montgomery, is a piano instructor in Westchester County.


A Gallery of Friends
An auction of photographs helps the seriously ill. Sotheby's, Feb. 15.


Q and A
Puerto Rican Inns
Q.
We plan to drive around Puerto Rico
. Are there
inns, rather than big resorts, where we can stay? -- Mar
ita B. Hannigan, Westfield, Mass.


For 3-Way Switches, Test Voltage and Continuity
A PAIR of wall switches that control a single outlet like a ceiling light are called three-way switches.
When such an outlet does not work because of a faulty switch, testing is required.
That minor task and replacing the bad switch are easy to do.
To test the switches, use a continuity tester, which costs about $3.
Testers resemble oversize fountain pens, contain batteries and have pointed probes at one end.
At the other end are a small light bulb and a wire with an alligator clip.
For all household electrical repairs, you will also need a voltage tester.
That consists of a light bulb and two wire probes, but not batteries.
Voltage testers usually cost less than continuity testers.


In 'Miss Julie,' Sexual and Class Warfare
IN its merciless zigzagging between two combating perspectives, his and hers, "Miss Julie," at 105, makes an incontestable statement about sexual harassment, both ways.
Those who find little of beauty or salvation in Strindberg's no-win battle of the sexes, which is fortified by class war so it's all the more futile, may not go with the merciful interpretation by Emily Mann, the director, at the McCarter Theater.


Attacking the Drug Problem
To the Editor:
I'm pleased that Michael Massing finds my book "provocative" and my analysis of the root causes of drug abuse in America's cities "convincing." Unfortunately, Mr.
Massing also seriously misrepresents what the book has to say about strategies for
dealing
with the drug problem.


Marsalis's Paean To Life in the City
The sprawl of the American experience incites artists to respond in equally large ways.
Duke Ellington's "Black, Brown and Beige," William Carlos Williams's "Paterson" and John Dos Passos's "U.S.A.," just to name three modernist works, each tries to capture some of the intensity and size of what has happened in this country.
And each does it by piecing together scraps of information, as if the only logical way to mirror the velocity of change in America during the 20th century is by assembling a mosaic of images.
Wynton Marsalis's 132-minute "Citi Movement" (Columbia C2k 53324; two CD's or cassettes) is firmly in the epic tradition, not only in its length but also in its themes and historical fervor.
It is Marsalis's most complete declaration of intention yet, and it is brilliant.


Wanted: Those High-Tech Jobs for Retrained Workers
WHAT American workers need are a lot more high-wage, high-skilled "quality" jobs, as President Clinton called them last week.
Find those jobs and train people to do them, and the Government, the schools, industry and the labor unions will build a prosperous middle class and the mighty American economy of the 21st century.
"We need an aggressive attempt to create the high-tech jobs of the future," the President said.
That was just a thematic salvo to the jobs plan the Administration will eventually put together.
But the planners might have to do some heavy thinking about one dimension: just what are those high-tech jobs?


Public &amp; Private; Cut To the Cuts
Bill Clinton's speeches have often sounded like the kind of careful, correct, rather stiff compositions an A student produces when he wants to protect his grade point average.
But his speech to Congress on the economy was about as good a speech as I have ever heard him deliver.
It was also dangerous.


Winning Was Like A Day at The Beach
Four men. A volleyball. Some sand between the toes.
So simple.
So summery.
But for James Arnemann, vice president of production for Madison Square Garden, the Evian Indoor Beach Volleyball Challenge yesterday was anything but a stroll on the boardwalk.


The County Will Keep Its 3-Day-a-Year Waste Plan
WESTCHESTER officials have ruled out establishing a permanent collection site with frequent turn-in days for potentially hazardous household chemical products, choosing instead to continue collecting the chemicals only three days a year at temporary sites in Rye, Valhalla and Peekskill.
Household Chemical Clean-Up Days, which began in 1985 with 136 participating families, now draw toxic waste contributions from about 2,000 households a year, still less than 1 percent of the county's 336,000 families.
This makes the program expensive, averaging $284 a family.


Avoiding the Arbitrator Turns Out to Be Lucrative
With all 118 baseball salary-arbitration cases heard or settled, players who negotiated contracts set a record for the collective percentage their salaries rose from last year.
One hundred players who filed for arbitration but didn't reach the hearing stage had their salaries increase by 110 percent, eclipsing the 109-percent increase in 1981.
Two years ago, players who negotiated their salaries received a collective 107 percent raise; last year it was 98 percent.


Mad. Ave. Gets Three New Snippers
There's big hair news on Madison Avenue in the 60's.
Two hot hair stylists have set up shop there, and a third is on the way.
In December, Kevin Mancuso, in left photo, quit Pierre Michel for the Peter Coppola Salon, at 61st Street.
He took with him his supermodel client Naomi Campbell, whose hair he has shorn.


Mints, Combs and Palate Pleasers, Too
AT a time when Long Island restaurants are cutting back, Tre Bambini Ristorante in Lynbrook is bucking the trend.
The five-year-old restaurant recently moved into larger quarters.
Its new home boasts a cozy, attractive bar, elegant dining room and sunny atrium.
Tre Bambini, with its sparkling good looks, white tablecloths, crystal chandelier and fresh flowers, is obviously a special-occasion spot.
That is confirmed by the number of times "Happy Birthday" is heard in the dining room.


A World of Her Own
NOBODY NOWHERE
The Extraordinary Autobiography of an Autistic.
By Donna Williams.
Illustrated. 219 pp.
New York: Times Books/Random House. $21.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Bristol, Pa.; Redeveloping The Old Mill
THE redevelopment of a four-building mill complex has given its main tenant a new lease on life and provided a new source of office, warehouse and distribution space for this former industrial town.
Over the last 10 years, Fred Baumgarten has renovated portions of the Grundy Industrial Complex, a 335,000-square-foot former woolen mill.
He bought the four buildings for $295,000 in 1982 rather than relocate his Majestic Mills, which has rented 120,000 square feet since the 1960's.
The company processes fabrics, packaging them for clothing manufacturers.


When Gods Become All Too Human
The myths and deities of Asia and antiquity have long attracted dancers and choreographers in the West.
Before Robert Joffrey's savvy update on the universal fertility goddess in his 1967 rock ballet "Astarte," there was Ruth St.
Denis as the Babylonian version of the same figure in her 1924 pageant "Ishtar of the Seven Gates."
Audiences found it just as unsurprising to see St.
Denis in her Indian incarnations: in the title role of her 1906 solo "Radha," she offered a self-absorbed interpretation as the lover of the Hindu god Krishna.
A few years later, with Orientalism back in vogue, it was just as natural to come across Vaslav Nijinsky as Krishna himself in "Le Dieu Bleu," a 1912 ballet by Michel Fokine.


Lana Wolkonsky, N. C. Forstmann
Lana Wolkonsky, the daughter of Elena Wolkonsky of New York and the late Prince Andre Gregorivich Wolkonsky , was married Friday to Nicholas C. Forstmann, a son of Dorothy Sammis of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Julius Forstmann, of the wool manufacturing family.
The Rev.
George Kallaur, a Russian Orthodox priest, performed the ceremony at Our Lady of the Sign Cathedral in New York.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is a pianist and composer in New York.
She graduated from the Juilliard School, where her mother, a concert pianist, teaches piano and composition.
The bride's father, who emigrated from Russia, was a vice president at Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York.


Real Political Reform Can't Wait
"We must begin again to make Government work for ordinary taxpayers, not simply for organized interest groups and that beginning must start with real political reform," President Clinton said midway through his economic address on Wednesday.
"Believe me," he improvised after the applause died down, "they were cheering that last section at home."
The television offered a richly symbolic image at that moment.
Visible over the President's left shoulder was the genial face of House Speaker Thomas Foley.
It was not possible to tell from his expression what Mr.
Foley thought of this remark, but Mr.
Foley did seem to be clapping his hands.
Now he needs to use them to open up the legislative throttle if the country is to get the campaign finance and lobbying laws that are needed to clean up Congress.


A Post-Industrial Didi and Gogo On the Open Road
If you were to take two of Samuel Beckett's tramps, give them Mother Courage's cart and set them loose in Bosnia-Herzegovina, you might come up with "On the Open Road," Steve Tesich's new play about survival and other desperate acts.
The first thing you see, when the lights go up on the post-industrial wasteland that serves as the set, is the tramp named Angel, his neck in a noose, just hoping no one will come along and kick the striped sawhorse from under his feet.
The last thing you see, before the lights go out forever, is Angel and Al, his accidental companion in misery, each strapped to a cross and no longer hoping for much of anything.
In between, their fortunes don't improve a whole helluva lot either.
Although they come face to face with Jesus Christ, who has chosen this particularly bleak time and place for the Second Coming, He doesn't represent salvation -- merely more complicating circumstances -- and has to be done away with all over again.


Excerpts From Exchanges On Program With Children
Following are excerpts from exchanges at the White House today between President Clinton and Peter Jennings of ABC News and children chosen to ask him questions for a two-hour television program.
The transcript was provided by the Federal News Service.
Q.
I would like to ask, if we start health care programs, when we start them, who is going to pay for them?


New York Swings
Long and layered.
Fragile and feminine.
Slouchy, sheer, sophisticated.
A bohemian spirit from a bygone era liberates spring fashions.


End Baseball's Privileged Status
To the Sports Editor:
I was distressed to read Clark Griffith's extensive apologia for Major League Baseball's antitrust exemption ("Good Reason for Baseball's Antitrust Exemption," The Times, Jan. 17).
In my opinion, it is filled with inaccuracies and faulty judgments that can only mislead fans and public policymakers anxious to rectify the woefully errant course of our national pastime.


Ready for Change
No, no - la mode has not quite come to this: a mere sheer bodysuit sprinkled with sequins.
But you can see clear through many of the new spring fashions.
Designers have unleashed a froth of feminine transparent styles that reveal rather than conceal the body.
The results can be startling, yet are invigorating for fashion.
These looks will not replace sensible dressing, but using bits and pieces will recharge a conventional wardrobe.
It's worth a try.


A Talent To Offend
To the Editor:
I agree with Walter Goodman's essay about the crude face of conservatism.
If the radical rightists get enough public exposure and as reasonable people begin to see Rush Limbaugh and others like him for the hatemongers they are, people will turn away in droves, just as they did in Houston when the right wing spewed its venom on television.


It's Midseason and Time to Take Stock
WHEN a show comes to New York, Connecticut theatergoers often say they saw it first.
Some may say it twice come April when "Blood Brothers" and "Ain't Broadway Grand" open on Broadway, just one week apart.
The first, a long-running English musical drama, now in the fifth year of its second London production, played at the Downtown Cabaret Theater in Bridgeport in 1988.
The second is the show about Mike Todd that had a bumpy tryout run at the beleaguered Candlewood Playhouse in New Fairfield last year.
That turned out to be one of those only-in-show-business tales.
The theater closed before the show was supposed to.
The Broadway version, however, will retain much of the off and onstage Candlewood talent, including Mike Burstyn in the leading role.


Corrections
An answer to a Travel Trivia question in the Travel Watch column on Jan. 31 misstated the affiliation of the Rev.
Louis Hennepin, a missionary who was the first European to write about Niagara Falls.
He was a Franciscan Recollect, not a Jesuit.


Mobutu Visits France for Medical Treatment
President Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire, who is under strong Western pressure to resign, arrived Friday evening on the French Riviera for medical treatment and is expected to stay there for two or three days, the French Foreign Ministry announced today.
A ministry spokesman said Mr.
Mobutu was given a visa to enter France for a short private visit and added that he knew of no plans to make official contact with the Zairian ruler to reinforce Western demands that he yield to democracy.


Clinton Talks to Children, But Addresses Everybody
Pursuing his public relations campaign to pressure Congress to support his economic agenda, President Clinton appeared on television today to answer questions from 40 polite and admiring children.
The two-hour ABC News special, "President Clinton Answering Children's Questions," was another small triumph in the White House's continuing effort to advertise the President and his plans.


Keeping Pressure On Unicef To Move
UNDAUNTED by reports that Unicef plans to remain in Manhattan, city officials in New Rochelle last week said they would continue their effort to convince the international agency to move to their city on Long Island Sound.
"We are in a very good position," Mayor Timothy C. Idoni insisted, adding, "We are continuing to lobby the ambassadors" who serve on the international organization's 41-member executive board.
That board will make its final decision when it meets in New York in late April.


Insurance Point System Proves a Costly Puzzle for Motorists
ASK drivers whether they have motor vehicle points, and the chances are they'll know what you're talking about: if you accumulate 12 motor vehicle points, you lose your license.
But ask them about "insurance eligibility points," and you're likely to be greeted by bewildered stares.
And the announcement that even a single insurance eligibility point can cost a driver as much as $654 over a three-year period produces nothing but confusion.


Reds to Clear the Air
Cincinnati Reds General Manager JIM BOWDEN says he plans to lead a clubhouse meeting Wednesday to let players discuss their concerns about the club's owner, MARGE SCHOTT.
Baseball's executive council has suspended Schott for a year starting March 1 and fined her $25,000, citing slurs against blacks, Jews and Asians.


Lisa Ridgik, Charles Hooker
Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph Ridgik of San Diego have announced the engagement of their daughter Lisa Carol Ridgik to Charles Daimon Hooker, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Hooker of Cocoa Beach, Fla.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Ridgik, 28, is a national accounts manager in New York for the MCI Telecommunications Corporation, the long-distance telephone company.
She graduated cum laude from Pepperdine University.
Her father is an obstetrician and gynecologist in San Diego.


Lectures and Liaisons
To the Editor:
Perry Meisel's appreciative review of "Freud, Jung, and Hall the King-Maker: The Historic Expedition to America (1909)" (Jan. 24) reflects the structure as well as the content of my book.


U.S. CONSIDERS AID ON LONG-TERM CARE
The Clinton Administration is considering a new Government-subsidized program to provide long-term care to people with chronic illnesses or disabilities.
Elderly people have long sought Federal help with the cost of long-term care, one of their biggest health expenses.


'Pearls' At A Price
From bold stripes to sleek, chic shapes, the styles of spring don't have to cost as much as strands of genuine pearls.
On these pages are some real gems at down-to-earth prices.


Putting It Together
Weeks before he took office, Bill Clinton realized that the economic plan that would define his young Presidency would do two things that any politician would abhor: break promises and raise taxes.
In interviews, senior aides told how he and his advisers assembled the plan -- and the plan to sell it.
Article, page 20.


For 3-Way Switches, Test Voltage and Continuity
A PAIR of wall switches that control a single outlet like a ceiling light are called three-way switches.
When such an outlet does not work because of a faulty switch, testing is required.
That minor task and replacing the bad switch are easy to do.
To test the switches, use a continuity tester, which costs about $3.
Testers resemble oversize fountain pens, contain batteries and have pointed probes at one end.
At the other end are a small light bulb and a wire with an alligator clip.
For all household electrical repairs, you will also need a voltage tester.
That consists of a light bulb and two wire probes, but not batteries.
Voltage testers usually cost less than continuity testers.


For 3-Way Switches, Test Voltage and Continuity
A PAIR of wall switches that control a single outlet like a ceiling light are called three-way switches.
When such an outlet does not work because of a faulty switch, testing is required.
That minor task and replacing the bad switch are easy to do.
To test the switches, use a continuity tester, which costs about $3.
Testers resemble oversize fountain pens, contain batteries and have pointed probes at one end.
At the other end are a small light bulb and a wire with an alligator clip.
For all household electrical repairs, you will also need a voltage tester.
That consists of a light bulb and two wire probes, but not batteries.
Voltage testers usually cost less than continuity testers.


Paris Diaphanous Day
The trend is transparent.
Filmy and feminine.
Gossamer and guaze.
Clouds of silk.
Eye-catching eyelet.
Fabrics light as cobweb.
Bare backs.
Pretty pastels.
Lace lingering everywhere.
Limbs peeking out.
Influenced by lingerie, the styles are softly seductive.


SURFACING
MUSIC --
Bizarre hip-hop subsets:
As the music goes mainstream, it seems anyone can join in -- from the N.B.A.'s newest superstar, Shaquille O'Neal, who recently signed a performance contract, to Snow, a white Canadian who sounds like he's a Jamaican when he raps.
RECREATION --
Faux Sumo wrestling:
Stomachs go bump in the night at Perfect Tommy's, a Manhattan bar, where customers, wearing inflatable sumo suits and headgear with fake ponytails, take on the ancient Japanese sport.
MAGAZINES --
Two-model magazine covers:
Call it the refashioned Doublemint look.
The March covers of Mademoiselle and Harper's Bazaar feature look-alike models in poses at once innocent and erotic.


Involuntary Spasms Make ST a 'Nightmare'
DIANNE GILL of Port Jefferson, driving her Mustang convertible, stopped for a red light when she felt the first tremor in her head.
"That moment, eight years ago, was the beginning of the worst nightmare of my life," she recalled.
For the next six years Mrs.
Gill experienced neck spasms, stiff necks, an involuntary twisting of her neck and tilting of her head.
"Simple tasks became more difficult," she said.
"I couldn't eat, read or drive because I had to hold my head with my hands to keep myself focused."


FEB. 14-20: A Victory for the Church; Poland Restricts Abortion, But the Struggle Continues
With the stroke of a pen by President Lech Walesa, Poland last week was changed from one of Europe's most permissive countries for abortions into one of its most restrictive.
Under the new law enacted by Mr.
Walesa, abortion -- the leading form of contraception under Communist rule -- is now banned, with exceptions allowed only in cases of rape and incest, when the mother's health is seriously endangered or when tests reveal severe fetal defects.


N.H.L.'s Northern Lights Starting to Dim
While the expanding National Hockey League harvests a $100 million cash crop from the sunny, southern climes of Anaheim, Calif., and Miami, financial fault lines are widening in two places on its northern frontier.
Tremors are being felt in Edmonton, where the model franchise of the 1980's is becoming an embarrassment of the 90's, and in Minnesota, where the revival of two years ago might not be enough to keep the North Stars in one of the most sophisticated hockey markets in the United States.


All That Piffle on TV? It's Someone Else's Fault
They did not come to the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard this month to praise television; dire assessments abounded.
But the eminences who had been summoned to pronounce on "The Future of Television" showed no disposition to bury the creature, either.
For one thing, that would have cut off the livelihoods of most of those on the platform, not to mention many of us in the audience.
The one-day meeting, which dwelt more on television's immediate past and present than on its future, delivered a barrage of indictments.
Few of the charges were novel, but they still had weight.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-17  SPECTER OF TAJIKISTAN'S TURMOIL


To Save Lives, Raise Funds and Cut the Deficit: Tax Tobacco
To the Editor:
As our new President searches for ways to improve health care and reduce budget deficits, he should seriously consider a major increase in Federal tobacco taxes.
He could save hundreds of thousands of lives and simultaneously raise tens of billions of dollars for health care reform or deficit reduction.


Convivial Space, Straightforward Menu
ITALIAN restaurants continue to proliferate.
A recent arrival in Stamford is Mona Lisa, which has turned a plain storefront into a noisy, happy space.
One exposed brick wall has bricked-in Roman arches; the opposite white wall sports a bevy of framed photographs of the owner with various celebrities.


Alexis Robinson, John Waller 3d
Alexis Pearce Robinson, a daughter of Mrs.
George E. Summers of Palm Beach, Fla., and Caldwell C. Robinson of Golden Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to John Wickliffe Waller 3d, a son of Mr.
Waller 2d of Alexandria, Va., and the late Millicent Haywood Waller.
The Rev.
Ralph R. Warren Jr. performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of Bethesda-by-the-Sea in Palm Beach.
Mrs.
Waller, 26, was until recently an advertising coordinator at Sotheby's International Realty in New York.
Her mother, Ann Summers, is a saleswoman for Sotheby's realty in Palm Beach.
The bride's stepfather is a broker with Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons, the stockbrokerage, in West Palm Beach, Fla.


Rangers' Four-Goal Burst Stops Sharks
There was so much potential for embarrassment.
After all, the New York Rangers could not afford to lose tonight in the Cow Palace -- home to the San Jose Sharks, the National Hockey League's worst team.
Forget for a moment the fact that New York is embroiled in a tight Patrick Division race.
This game had as much to do with pride as with points.
Dismal on the road, having won just once in their last 13 outings, the Rangers were graced with the opportunity to play the team with the league's worst record at home.
Before tonight, the Sharks were 5-23-1 in their house.
New York did not want to become home victory No. 6.


Pangs of Guilt Over an Innocent
Britain had its conscience twinged last week by a 2-year-old boy.
The child, James Bulger, disappeared and was found slain after dropping out of his mother's sight in a shopping center in Liverpool.
A security camera caught pictures of him being led away by a young boy.
Another camera captured him struggling with two youths down the street.
On Sunday, two days later, his mutilated body was found on a rail embankment.
Two 10-year-old boys were arrested and charged, and the whole country is debating whether social neglect has made both victims and victimizers of Britain's young.


The Engagin' Cajun
The bayous and river banks, marshes and bays that fringe and rut this nation's map spawn a different kind of life, an ambience of otherness.
There is always the possibility of a high tide on a full moon spelling disaster.
At the same time, waterfront life is abidingly constant.
You can always count on renewal.
There are people born to live on these edges; others who find them and never leave.
Their daily composure may seem staunchly traditional.
But beneath their quotidian response is a cosmopolitan strain -- quick-thinking, adaptive, taciturn folk who live intensely, in the moment.


The Sharp Edge of Hope and Fear; New AIDS Report Brings a Wrenching Mix of Emotions
To have the virus that causes AIDS is to race the clock, clinging to the faintest glimmer of hope for a cure or at least an effective treatment.
So when news broke last week of a promising new strategy to halt the disease, a familiar range of wrenching and conflicting emotions welled up again.
One man who has lived for the last five years awaiting premature death said he was in "guarded ecstasy," while the mother of a 13-year-old infected child allowed herself "cautious elation."


Rethinking the Need to Avoid Cream
THE concern about fat and cholesterol has taken cream off the menu.
Cooks who might have added a spoonful of heavy cream to smooth or thicken a sauce now do without.
Whipped cream on the austere fruit dessert is out of the question.
Or is it?
What is often being used in place of cream is olive oil or some other vegetable oil.
Unlike these oils, cream does contain some cholesterol, but it is not significant in a small amount of cream, only about 25 milligrams in a tablespoon.
More important, the total amount of fat in a tablespoon of cream is about half that in a comparable quantity of oil.


Service for Salant
A memorial service for Richard S. Salant, the retired president of CBS News, who died on Tuesday, will be at 11 A.M. tomorrow at the Museum of Television and Radio at 25 West 52d Street in Manhattan.
Mike Wallace, Walter Cronkite and Dr.
Frank Stanton are among the scheduled speakers.


In a Tribute to Smith, Islanders Raise No. 31
At the beginning of the ceremonies on Billy Smith Day this afternoon at Nassau Coliseum, the scoreboard over center ice showed an interview with Smith from 1983, on "Hockey Night in Canada," right after he won the Conn Smythe Trophy as the most valuable player in the playoffs for leading the Islanders to a fourth consecutive Stanley Cup championship.
Having helped defeat the then-ascendant Edmonton Oilers, Smith wasn't about to praise the vanquished foe he had battled them with words and sticks, pushes and shoves.


Bumped in Madrid
To the Editor: Iberia ended our wonderful vacation to Spain with disaster.
We were scheduled to fly from Madrid to Kennedy International Airport on Oct. 3.
We bought our tickets more than six months in advance.
We arrived at the counter more than two hours before departure time but were placed on the standby list.
At flight time we were informed that there were no seats for us or the 50 to 70 other standby passengers and were assigned seats on the following day's flight.
We were then directed to another line where we waited two more hours to be compensated for being bumped.
We were then directed to a third line where we waited another hour and a half to be assigned hotel space.
Other bumped passengers, having already waited in line for more than four hours, got their own accommodations at their own expense.
The next day, the flight finally departed three hours late.
In the process, we were required to wait 90 minutes in a small waiting room.
There were insufficient seats and there wasn't even enough room for the more than 500 passengers even to sit on the floor..


Rethinking the Need to Avoid Cream
THE concern about fat and cholesterol has taken cream off the menu.
Cooks who might have added a spoonful of heavy cream to smooth or thicken a sauce now do without.
Whipped cream on the austere fruit dessert is out of the question.
Or is it?
What is often being used in place of cream is olive oil or some other vegetable oil.
Unlike these oils, cream does contain some cholesterol, but it is not significant in a small amount of cream, only about 25 milligrams in a tablespoon.
More important, the total amount of fat in a tablespoon of cream is about half that in a comparable quantity of oil.


Whitney M. Joy, Scott D. Cathcart
Mr. and Mrs.
James F. Joy of Paris have announced the engagement of their daughter Whitney Maguire Joy to Scott DePass Cathcart, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles D. Cathcart of Tuxedo Park, N.Y.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Joy, 26, is the regional sales manager for Mr.
G.S.L.
Inc., a junior sportswear company in New York.
She graduated from Ithaca College.
Her father is a director of Citicorp Venture Capital in Paris.


Ms. Zimmerman, Jonathan Sacks
Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Zimmerman of Plainview, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Barrie Lynn Zimmerman to Jonathan David Sacks, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Sacks of Kings Point, L.I.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Zimmerman, 23, graduated cum laude from the University of Massachusetts and is studying for a master's degree in speech-language pathology at Columbia University.
Her father owns Toyz Marketing, a toy manufacturers' representative in Plainview.
Her mother, Jaclyn Zimmerman, teaches art at Public School 80 in South Jamaica, Queens.


A Shorter Cruise
To the Editor: This is to describe an unhappy experience I had with Epirotiki Cruise Lines.
Although I purchased a seven-day Greek Island tour for $1,600, one full day, or one-seventh of the trip, was taken away.
Epirotiki offers three-, four- and seven-day cruises of the Aegean Islands.
Because the line could not fill one ship with the three- and four-day passengers, it put them on our larger seven-day cruise ship, the World Renaissance.
This meant that after four days, the ship spent 24 hours returning to Piraeus to discharge the four-day passengers and pick up the three-day ones.
This deprived seven-day passengers of 16 hours of time to spend on the islands.


Dig It: The Hot New Trends for Spring
BEFORE the planting season is full speed ahead, gardeners may like to know what some garden merchandising experts are saying about the coming season.
Gardening remains the top leisure activity in the United States.
Analysts note that the dollars spent on garden products are at an all-time high.
They seem to agree that this leisure activity will remain as popular in the coming years and even predict a 20 percent increase in sales.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: Sony's New Headquarters; Carving Chippendale Into the Sony Image
MICHAEL P. SCHULHOF has a pretty good idea of what the name Sony conjures up in most people's minds.
Trinitrons, Walkmen, all kinds of electronic wizardry.
He hates that.


'Ciao, Baby' to Old Oscar Ways
For years, the nearly 5,000 members of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences who selected the nominees for the Oscars were viewed as traditional film-makers, quite staid and predictable in their movie tastes.
No more.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: February 21, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
2
5
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor.
3
3
BYGONES, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $5.99.) A dinner party attended by a woman, her former husband and their two grown children reveals family strains and love.
4
5
THE ROAD TO OMAHA, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $6.99.) A retired general and a lawyer scheme to take possession of the state of Nebraska on behalf of an Indian tribe.
5
9
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A woman's death leads to an investigation involving the American-Japanese rivalry.
6
4
GUARDIAN ANGEL, by Sara Paretsky. (Dell, $5.99.) The private eye V. I. Warshawski probes a case involving pet dogs and Chicago scandals.
7
56
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
8
4
BLINDSIGHT, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $5.99.) A woman physician seeks to find the cause of a series of strange deaths of Manhattan yuppies.
9
31
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
10
45
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
11
22
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a farming family.
12
1
DARK FORCE RISING, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is still threatened by aliens.
13
5
LINE OF FIRE, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Jove, $5.99.) The fifth volume of the series "The Corps" tells of an attempt to rescue two marines in World War II.
14
17
A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, by Norman Maclean. (Pocket, $4.99.) Three tales of the outdoors in western Montana.
15
1
GROUNDED, by David Bischoff. (Pocket, $5.50.) "Star Trek" 's U.S.S.
Enterprise encounters a new form of alien life.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
6
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a leading feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
2
20
ALIVE, by Piers Paul Read. (Avon, $5.99.) How some of the members of a rugby team survived a plane crash in the Andes in 1972.
3
8
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Plume, $13.) The Vice President discusses factors affecting the environment and what must be done to save the earth.
4
485
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
5
17
THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF MALCOLM X, with the assistance of Alex Haley. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The life story of the black leader, originally published in 1965.
6
92
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
7
2
HILLARY CLINTON: The Inside Story, by Judith Warner. (Signet, $4.99.) A biography of the First Lady.
8
3
WOMEN ON TOP, by Nancy Friday. (Pocket, $5.99.) The changes in social life during the past two decades that have affected the sexual fantasies of women.
9
2
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's account of her childhood and adolescence.
10
19
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
122
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
2
105
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
3
80
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
11
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1993. (World Almanac/Pharos, $7.95.) The latest edition of a standard reference work.
5
1
THE TIGHTWAD GAZETTE, by Amy Dacyczyn. (Villard, $9.99.) Ways to save money and make frugality part of your life style.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


The Risk of Living Beside a Stream
The dispute on stream bank erosion between Oradell homeowners and the borough government ("Residents Battle Borough Over Stream Repair," Jan. 31) parallels a similar debate in Cranford Township (Union County).
In Cranford, however, the township committee is prepared to allocate several hundred thousand dollars to modify Orchard Brook, a tributary of the Rahway River.
Opponents of the proposed flood-control project cite financial and ecological issues.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Black History; Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
WORKING COTTON.
By Sherley Anne Williams.
Illustrated by Carole Byard.
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $14.95. (Ages 4 to 8) All the children help Mamma and Daddy pick cotton.
A 1993 Caldecott Honor Book.


Beethoven Chamber Works Abound
QUITE a rich chamber music week is at hand, with many events scheduled in the county and nearby.
The Lehman Chamber Players is presenting a free concert today at 2 P.M. at Lehman College in the Bronx.
On the program are works by Brahms and Ravel, plus a composition called the "Wave Hill" Trio by Donald Rauscher, a Bronx composer.
The number to call for more information is (718) 960-8247.


U.S. REMAINS CHILLY IN JORDAN MEETING
Secretary of State Warren Christopher brought kind words to King Hussein of Jordan in Amman today, but no promises of financial aid and no invitation to meet President Clinton, an indication that some tension between the once-close allies still lingers.
The King expressed hope that the United States shared Jordan's desire to "re-invigorate the friendship of many, many years between our countries."


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
AMERICAN MOVIES
African-American filmmaking takes center stage at the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford during a second annual celebration Friday and Saturday.
Donald Bogle, film historian at the University of Pennsylvania, opens the series with a talk titled "An Interpretive History of Blacks in American Films" on Friday at 6:30 in the Aetna Theater.
At 8:45 Robert Townsend's "Hollywood Shuffle" and his "Five Heartbeats," released in 1987 and 1991 respectively, will be screened.
"To Sleep With Anger" (1990) will be shown at 10 A.M.
Saturday, introduced by its director, Charles Burnett; and "Better Off Dead" (1992) is scheduled at 1:15, with commentary by Neema Barnette, its director.


Stuart Gerson's Parting Shot
As supporters of the Brady gun-control bill prepare to introduce it in Congress yet again this week, they find a welcome, if unlikely, ally in Stuart Gerson, the Acting Attorney General.
Because President Clinton has had so many problems finding a new Attorney General, Mr.
Gerson remains in office -- the last Cabinet holdover from an Administration that cynically relied on the gun lobby to help secure a right-wing constituency.


Dig It: The Hot New Trends for Spring
BEFORE the planting season is full speed ahead, gardeners may like to know what some garden merchandising experts are saying about the coming season.
Gardening remains the top leisure activity in the United States.
Analysts note that the dollars spent on garden products are at an all-time high.
They seem to agree that this leisure activity will remain as popular in the coming years and even predict a 20 percent increase in sales.


In Search of the Model Father
FAMILY NIGHT
By Maria Flook. 292 pp. New York: Pantheon Books.


He's No. 1
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE
By Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. 304 pp. New York: Pocket Books. $22.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Jan. 24 about Victoria Falls misstated the location of one national park in Africa and referred imprecisely to another.
The Okavango Swamps are in Botswana, not Namibia; the Hwange Game Reserves are in Zimbabwe.


Bronx Artist Conjures Haunting Dreamscapes
TWO exhibitions do not a revolution make, but they can imply a change of institutional character.
With its current shows -- one a solo on the charcoal and oilstick drawings of Whitfield Lovell, the other a display of works by various artists in different media -- the Lehman College Art Gallery seems to be developing a new, livelier personality.
Mr.
Lovell's drawings do not so much occupy their space at the gallery here as haunt it.
They are large images in grays and black tinged with or relieved by bright color.
The subjects are ghostly -- disembodied hands and hearts, a family tree with heads hanging from the branches like fruit, clothing inhabited by invisible figures and so on.


Jodi Samaras, Edgar Edmonds
Jodi Christine Samaras, the daughter of James C. Samaras of Crystal Lake, Ill., and Janet Samaras of Barrington, Ill., was married yesterday to Edgar Alden Edmonds, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George P. Edmonds Jr. of Cambridge, Mass.
The Rev.
John M. Krumm performed the Episcopal ceremony at Trinity Church in Boston.
Mrs.
Edmonds, 24, is a saleswoman at the A/X Armani Exchange boutique in Boston.
She and her husband graduated from Boston University.
Her father owns Viking Dodge, an automobile dealership in Crystal Lake.
Her mother is a painter.


Real Punks Wear Plaid
A plaid flannel shirt rakishly tied around the waist is the glue that holds together the mix of grunge.
But the flannel shirt established its presence long before Seventh Avenue embraced it.
Punk-rock fans started wearing the shirts around their waists years ago.
On the coldest days this winter, the shirt can be found all over -- tied under a winter coat, sometimes held in place with a studded belt (near right), or even wrapped around the outside of a coat (above left).


Instill Discipline, Install the Military
Do any of these educators and the other "champions of the poor" really want to give these Hartford kids an education? ("Failings but No Solutions for Hartford Schools," Jan. 31)
Would all these great thinkers from all these bureaus and all their lawyers really like to have the ghetto dwellers with the ability to read and write and calculate well (or almost as well) as their more affluent suburban counterparts?


A Polgar Triumph Before Her Triumph
JUST before Judit Polgar won her exhibition match with Boris Spassky in Budapest, the 16-year-old grandmaster achieved another important triumph -- tying for first place with the Russian grandmaster Yevgeny Bareyev in the traditional Hastings New Year's Tournament in England.
Bareyev, ranked eighth in the world, held the lead going into the last round, but Polgar smashed him to share top honors.
In this double-round event, she also defeated him in round seven.
FINAL STANDINGS
Player
Pts.
Polgar
9
Bareyev
9
Speelman
8
Gurevich, I.
7
Nunn
7
Sadler
7
Polugayevsky
5 1/2
Crouch
3 1/2
In her final-round game with Bareyev, Polgar gave one more bright illustration of her formidable power in attack.
The motive of the Burn Variation of the French Defense with 4 . . . de is to yield Black's strongpoint in the center to avoid a later cramping e5 and to bring about exchanges that would largely nullify White's advantage in space.
In this way it copies Black's strategy in the main lines of the Caro-Kann Defense.
But Bareyev never got beyond the one exchange with 7 Nf6 Nf6.
Rather than castle on the kingside early, Bareyev first finished the development of his queenside with 10 . . .
Bb7, yet after 11 Qb5 Nd7 12 O-O-O, his lack of space was becoming more noticeable.
And it became more noticeable still after Polgar's 14 c4 thrust.
On 17 Bd3, Bareyev probably should have tried 17 . . .
Bd3, although his problems would not have been solved.
For example, after 18 Rd3 Nf6?! 19 f5!, Black will quickly go under.
Instead, he defiantly grabbed a pawn with 17 . . .
Bg2 and faced a powerful attack after 18 Rhg1 Bd5 19 Qc2.
Since Polgar was threatening to blast open the black king position with 20 f5, he blocked that possibility with 19 . . . f5, which was also intended to let him use his KR for defense.
Polgar aggressively charged with 21 c6!, crowding the black pieces even more.
On 22 Ne5, Bareyev's 22 . . .
Bh4 prevented a doubling of the white rooks with 23 Rg3 and Rdg1, but Polgar revved up her onslaught with 23 Qe2 Qf6 24 Qh5.
On 24 . . .
Red8, Polgar struck the annihilating blow with 25 Rg7!
Bareyev could not play 25 . . .
Qg7 because 26 Qh4 Kh8 27 Rg1 Qh7 28 Qf6 forces mate.
But on 25 . . .
Kg7 26 Rg1 Kh8 (26 . . . Kh7 is crushed by 27 Ng4! Qg6 28 Qh4 Be4 29 Be4 fe 30 Qe7 Kh8 31 Nf6) 27 Nf7 Kh7 28 Nh6!, Bareyev gave up in the face of 28 . . .
Qh6 29 Qf7 Kh8 30 Qg8mate.
FRENCH DEFENSE
White
Black
Polgar
Bareyev
1
e4
e6
2
d4
d5
3
Nc3
Nf6
4
Bg5
de
5
Ne4
Nbd7
6
Nf3
h6
7
Nf6
Nf6
8
Be3
Bd6
9
Qd3
b6
10
Ne5
Bb7
11
Qb5
Nd7
12
O-O-O
a6
13
Qb3
b5
14
c4
O-O
15
f4
Be4
16
c5
Be7
17
Bd3
Bg2
18
Rhg1
Bd5
19
Qc2
f5
20
Ng6
Re8
21
c6
Nf8
22
Ne5
Bh4
23
Qe2
Qf6
24
Qh5
Red8
25
Rg7
Kg7
26
Rg1
Kh8
27
Nf7
Kh7
28
Nh6
Resigns


Keeping in Shape
Unlike most fashion, which seems to march from east to west, athletic style moves from west to east.
The beaches of Santa Monica and the sidewalks of Beverly Hills are to workout gear what the runways of Paris are to haute couture.
In the past decade, the sunny clime and the quest for status via fitness have coalesced to make Southern California and the Western mountain and desert spots the places where gym clothes crossed the line and became all-purpose casual wear.
During that time, the lean, mean contours of aerobic gear inspired the ubiquitous tights-and-long-jacket look.
Today, the billowing and baggy style that began to appear last year on the mats at the Jackson Sousa Training Facility in Santa Monica and nearby at Muscle Beach has an eerie resonance with shapes in the current spring clothes collections.


Two Voices That Helped Shape the Law
Following are excerpts from the rulings and public statements of David L. Bazelon and Gerhard A. Gesell, two influential Federal judges who died on Friday: JUDGE DAVID L. BAZELON
"The right-wrong test, which considers knowledge or reason alone, is an inadequate guide to mental responsibility for criminal behavior. An accused is not criminally responsible if his unlawful act was the product of mental disease or mental defect."
-- Decision in Durham v.
United States (1954), a principle that became known as the Durham Rule
"It would be a serious mistake for us as a nation to think that it is more important to repair our judicial machinery than to repair the institutions that provide uninhabitable housing, insufficient food, medieval medical care, and inadequate educations to the people who commit the crimes that concern us."
-- Madison lecture at New York University Law School, 1971
"For nearly 200 years of this nation's history, few blacks, Hispanics or Asian-Americans, to name only a few of the victims of oppression, would have thought of taking their claims to court. They knew they would receive no hearing there. If the so-called 'litigation crisis' is due in any significant part to the increase in social expectations of the disadvantaged and to society's growing sensitivity to these issues, and I believe it is, then in my opinion the increase in litigation is a healthy one."
-- Commencement speech at University  of Washington Law School, 1983 JUDGE GERHARD A. GESELL
"Censorship at this stage raises doubts and rumors that feed the fires of distrust. Our democracy depends for its future on the informed will of the majority, and it is the purpose and effect of the First Amendment to expose to the public the maximum amount of information on which sound judgment can be made by the electorate."
-- Ruling allowing The Washington Post to publish secret papers about the Vietnam War, 1971
"The Fourth Amendment protects the privacy of citizens against unreasonable and unrestrained intrusion by Government officials and their agents. It is not theoretical. It lies at the heart of our free society."
-- Ruling that President Richard M. Nixon had no constitutional right to authorize break-ins without a warrant, 1974  "And along the way you came to accept, it seems to me, the mistaken view that Congress couldn't be trusted and that the fate of the country was better left to a small inside group, not elected by the people, who were free to act as they chose while publicly professing to act differently."
-- Sentencing Oliver L. North to probation,  community service and a fine, 1989


New Caution, and Some Reassurance, on Vasectomy
TWO studies reported last week in the Journal of the American Medical Association linked vasectomy and prostate cancer, focusing attention on a procedure that is one of the most effective methods of contraception and probably the most common operation in adult American men.
More than 15 percent of men over the age of 40 have had a vasectomy.
In assessing the procedure, Population Reports, which is published by Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, has said:


Giants Have Plenty of Twists of Fate to Ponder
If major league club owners had immediately permitted a Florida group to buy the San Francisco Giants and move them to St.
Petersburg; if Bill White, the National League president, had not extended an invitation for someone -- anyone -- in San Francisco to make an offer for the Giants; if Peter Magowan and his group hadn't charged out of the Bay Area gloom to rescue the damsel in distress, Candlestick Park would be a legendary memory, Barry Bonds would be in someone else's outfield and Dusty Baker wouldn't be the Giants' manager.
Candlestick, despite all the horror stories it has told, has had nothing to say about the string of bizarre developments that have extended its life.
Bonds, who is scheduled to arrive in the Giants' spring camp next week, hasn't dwelled on the good fortune that brought him his fortune -- $43.75 million for six years -- a contract his agent had been unable to extract from anyone else.


Mutual Funds; Pluses and Minuses of Muni Funds
SALES of tax-free municipal bond funds have exploded in the last few months, and fund companies say there's probably more to come as investors worry about President Clinton's proposal to raise the top income tax rate from 31 percent to 36 percent -- and 39.6 percent for the wealthiest.
Even without the prodding, the sector has boomed.
Cranking out tax-free income year after year, stodgy muni funds now hold $192 billion, up from just $49 billion in 1987, when the 1986 Tax Reform Act slammed the door on most ways to shelter income from taxes, according to Morningstar Inc., mutual fund researchers in Chicago.


DEMOCRATS' UNEASE MAY SLOW CLINTON ON ECONOMIC PLAN
Signs of dissatisfaction have begun to appear in Democratic ranks on Capitol Hill that could complicate and perhaps delay the passage of President Clinton's ambitious economic program, on which he has staked his political future.
There are important dissidents, especially in the Senate, on both procedural and substantive grounds.
A few have publicly expressed their doubts and reservations, but many more have spoken critically at closed meetings on the plan this week.
Most of the criticism has come from conservative and moderate lawmakers from the South and the Midwest.


IN SHORT: FICTION
CONGLOMEROS By Jesse Browner. Random House, $21.


Do Not Repeal the Field of Dreams
Once again, nerve center issues surrounding the survival of baseball have spilled over onto the business and political pages.
The forced resignation of Commissioner Fay Vincent, charges of racism, the aborted movement of clubs to communities feeling seduced and then abandoned, and rumblings about a lockout of the players by the owners have all contributed to renewed scrutiny of how business decisions in baseball are made.
And just recently, the Senate subcommittee on antitrust and monopolies chiseled away the remaining legal sacred cow of the national pastime: its exclusion from the reach of Federal antitrust law.


Youth Movement Gets Prime-Time Hang Time In Slam-Dunk Contest
Harold Miner, the Miami Heat rookie out of Southern Cal, is nicknamed "Baby Jordan" not just because his style of play is a close copy of the Bulls' superstar but because Miner does slightly resemble Michael Jordan.
Though there is no true comparison to Jordan, Miner did do something the Chicago Bull has done a few times: thrill people with electrifying dunks.
As slam-dunk contests go, this one does not get a 10.
Jordan, Dominique Wilkins and other past champions decided to sit this one out to rest weary legs.
Thus, the level of competition was, shall we say, not quite up to par.
But even if Jordan and others did compete, Miner demonstrated tonight that he probably would have been able to hang with the best.


THE HIGH COST OF LIVING
Belkin writes that the social worker on Dimas's case called "the chairman of the Hermann ethics committee, which decides cases too hard (or too hot) for one person to make."


Conversations/Mamphela Ramphele; A Voice Raised in Apartheid, Lonelier Now, Extols Self-Reliance
AN interviewer for a political magazine recently asked Dr.
Mamphela Ramphele to name her greatest regret.
She answered simply, "1977." The interviewer moved on, assuming that for politically astute South Africans no explanation was required.
That was the year Steve Biko, Dr.
Ramphele's charismatic fellow pioneer in the movement called Black Consciousness, and the father of her soon-to-be-born son, was battered to death in police custody.
Had the interviewer pursued the matter, Dr.
Ramphele would have explained that she was lamenting not just her personal pain, but the loss of a powerful current in black thinking.
Black consciousness, as they conceived it in the 1970's, a creed of black self-reliance leading to psychological emancipation, is a philosophy now all but drowned out by the chorus of non-racial power politics on one side and the rattle of township gunfire on the other.
But it endures in Dr.
Ramphele's tidy office at Cape Town University, where she seems faintly amused to find herself the deputy vice chancellor in charge of equal opportunity.


Economic Plan Grew Slowly Out of Marathon of Debate
At the first meeting of Bill Clinton's economic team, on Dec. 30, the members already knew what the public suspected: the new President would abandon one of his earliest campaign pledges.
There would be no tax cut for the middle class.
In fact, taxes would probably rise on the very people Mr.
Clinton had vowed to protect.
The discussions went on for weeks before Mr.
Clinton put his ideas to Congress last Wednesday.
But at that first meeting, in the Washington offices of Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the accounting firm, Mr.
Clinton's advisers were already aware of statistics that the outgoing Bush White House was about to make public, showing that the Federal deficit was going to rise $50 billion a year more than they had expected.
The information crystallized Mr.
Clinton's budget predicament.


Mutual Funds; Debt-to-Debt Comparisons
MUNICIPAL bond funds today are a good deal relative to United States Government funds, which invest in a mix of Treasury securities and Federal agency debt.
Interest paid by munis is free from Federal income taxes, while earnings on Treasuries and other Federal issues are free from state taxes.
Because the Federal tax burden is much bigger, the tax-equivalent yield gives muni funds the advantage right now.


Going Blimey Milan
Italian designers have fallen for the England of "Tom Jones" and Tom Jones with the delirium of a Beatles fan coming upon the street called Abbey Road.


600 Free Immunizations
JUST KIDS is negotiating to open satellites of its health clinic in the Miller Place and William Floyd school districts, possibly this month.
The clinics, staffed by nurse practitioners and linked to specialists at Stony Brook Hospital, would offer care for 1,300 children who, because of their socioeconomic status, are considered more likely to have developmental disabilities, said a program consultant, Dr.
Virginia M. Barry.
Just Kids is also opening clinics in Head Start programs.
Under new rules that take effect tomorrow, Head Start has to offer disabled children special-education services, which Just Kids, through its educational arm, has been doing.
Since May, Just Kids has also been offering medical services for 85 children at the Head Start in Riverhead.


Chavez Knocks Out Haugen In Fifth
The night seemed to build to one frenzied moment.
Then it happened: Julio Cesar Chavez knocked down Greg Haugen in the fifth round tonight, then peppered him relentlessly in the corner before the fight was stopped, retaining his World Boxing Council superlightweight title.
Chavez, from Culiacan, Mexico, dominated the fight from the start.
He put down the American once in the first round and again in the fifth, and threw hooks to the body and uppercuts with both hands in between.
When the referee, Joey Cortez, moved in 2 minutes 2 seconds into the fifth, Chavez was throwing lefts and rights and Haugen was barely able to cover up.


Nearly Everything in Somalia Is Now Up for Grabs
The hand-written plea on the hotel's bulletin board was emblematic of a people adrift.
"We have 12 flag poles outside and no flags," it said.
"We would be grateful for any flags, either organization, corporate or national."
As the United States reduces its military commitment here, Somalia will begin to rebuild from close to scratch.
After two years of civil fighting and banditry, nearly everything about Somalia -- its borders, its demographics, its leaders, its political system, even its flag -- is an open question.


Streetscapes: 11 East 52d Street; Midtown East Town-House Erosion
THE Austrian Cultural Center is proceeding with permit applications for its new headquarters, a futuristic 20-story building at 11 East 52d Street designed by Raimund Abraham, an Austrian architect.
Its existing building, a former town house, is attractive, but not really a candidate for landmark designation.
But its demolition signals a change more important than the loss of any individual building: one by one, the last vestiges of Midtown East's character as a neighborhood of mansions and town houses is being lost.


Dancing for Dance
An opening-night benefit gala for Jennifer Muller/The Works. Rainbow Room, Feb. 16.


There's Life After Scars
NAME: Marla Hanson.
IDENTITY: Former model who gained national attention in 1986 after her landlord hired two men to slash her face.


On Sunday; Formula 1: Gentleman Tows Engines
JUST another day at Gambardella auto repair and tow service.
It was 10 degrees when Pat Gambardella, age 61, unlocked the front door at 6:45, carrying coffee and a corn muffin. ("You want half? It's still warm. Feel it.") He turned on the space heaters and compressors for his two sons who get in at 7:30 and settled behind the counter of his cramped 5-foot-by-6-foot "office" for another 14-hour shift.
The grimy cubbyhole is stuffed with ledgers, auto parts, family photos, religious pictures (Jesus, Mary, St. Anthony, the Pope), plaques honoring his service to the Yonkers Columbus Day parade.
There is one chair.
"You take it," Mr.
Gambardella said.
"I stand all day. Really. I like to stand. Please."


THE REFORMATION OF A STREET PREACHER
As I read about Al Sharpton's new attitude, I heard over the radio that Thurgood Marshall had died ("Al Sharpton's New Attitude," by Catherine S. Manegold, Jan. 24).
It's nice that Sharpton is "in process." I point out that Marshall and Martin Luther King Jr. (and even Malcolm X) were dignified, eloquent troublemakers from Day 1.
You don't have to be a lout to confront injustice or to avoid being co-opted by the system.


Mississippi Learning
Keep inside the Mississippi Delta, where he once dodged Klan bullets and sharecropper adulation, Bob Moses has quietly returned to finish the task he started 30 years ago.
It's midnight in Mississippi, and memories stir as Moses walks through the deserted Jackson airport.
Black men once feared traversing this state after dark.
Tonight, despite the hour, he dials Doc Anderson, a local physician who in the 1960's had a busy sideline stitching up civil rights workers.
"Guess what?" Moses says, laughing softly at his own audacity.
"I'm here. Can you come get me?"


Seeking to Break Grip of Violence in the South Bronx
When six people were shot to death execution style in a South Bronx apartment last week, the police said that no one reported the gunshots or footsteps of the killers fleeing down the hallway until nine hours later.
Violence is not new to Mott Haven, nor is the almost casual acceptance of gunfire echoing through the air.
But this weekend, some residents are saying that the time has come for the community to shake itself free from the numbing grip of continued violence and confront the apathy and fear that fosters silence.


THE SQUARE ROOT
I enjoy Molly O'Neill's offerings, and her treatment of the lowly turnip was no exception (Food: "The Square Root," Jan. 24).
But her reference to the turnip as "a squat little bulb" is not what necessarily grows in my patch.
My Swede turnips, or rutabagas, commonly grow to the size (and heft) of the mortar shells Ulysses Grant used to subdue Vicksburg.
MIKE O'NEIL
Vernon, Conn.


Boy Wonder


Shared Sacrifice, or Sacrifice the Elderly?; Generational Equality
To the Editor:
The call by Jon Cowan and Rob Nelson in "A Cowardly Retreat" (Op-Ed, Feb. 11) for an increase in the tax on Social Security benefits is timely and forceful.
It is good for those of us who receive such benefits to be reminded that everyone must share in the sacrifices needed to reduce the budget deficit.
I would think that any good citizen who did not share in the sacrifice would feel guilty.


Jackson in Running to Lead N.A.A.C.P.
Benjamin L. Hooks made his last report yesterday as executive director to the annual meeting of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
But the subject that dominated the meeting was the news that the Rev.
Jesse Jackson is one of a handful of finalists to replace him.
Mr.
Hooks, who announced his resignation last year in a tumultuous meeting, and Dr.
William F. Gibson, the group's chairman, would not confirm the candidacy at a press conference yesterday at the Sheraton Centre in midtown Manhattan.


Deals and Discounts
ROOMS AT THE INNS Days Inn has introduced a Simple Super Saver program in which rooms cost $19 to $39 if they are booked 29 or more days in advance.
The chain says the rates represent a discount of at least 20 percent off the standard price.
Rates, which are good for one to four people in a room, must be prepaid by check or guaranteed with a credit card within seven days after the reservation is made.
If the reservation is canceled within 15 days of arrival, there is no refund.
Call (800) 325-2525.
SAILING IN ASIA Windstar has announced introductory rates for its cruises in Southeast Asia this year and next; the booking deadline is the end of this month.
Effective for departures Nov. 21 through Dec. 12, 1993, and Jan. 9 through Dec. 11, 1994, the introductory rate is $1,648 a person, double occupancy.
The rate reflects a discount of 50 percent on regular prices.
The fares are good only for a certain number of cabins, but as of the second week of this month, all departures were "wide open," a spokeswoman said.
From late fall through early spring, seven-day itineraries will operate round-trip from Singapore and call at Penang, Langkawi and Malacca, Malaysia, and Phuket, Thailand.
In late spring through early fall, the ship will sail between Singapore and Bangkok, calling at Tioman Island, Terengganu and Perhentian Island, Malaysia, and Koh Samui, Thailand.
Information: (800) 967-8103.


Jennifer Weiner, Mark Hirschhorn
Dr. and Mrs.
Max Weiner of New Rochelle, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jennifer Sharon Weiner, to Mark Jason Hirschhorn, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Hirschhorn of Colts Neck, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Weiner, 27, teaches at the Greenvale School in Eastchester, N.Y.
She graduated from the State University at Albany and received a master's degree in education from Fordham University, where her father is the dean of the graduate school of education.
Her mother, Gloria Weiner, is an associate with Julia B. Fee, the real-estate brokerage, in Larchmont, N.Y.


Tippett Exonerated
A District Court jury in Dedham, Mass., has cleared New England Patriots linebacker ANDRE TIPPETT of charges that he threatened two men with a gun after an auto accident.
The jury decided Friday that Tippett, 32, had not drawn his pistol when he confronted the men March 4 in Dedham. (AP)


Most Cambodians See Nothing of Aid
Tith Poth and her neighbors line up each morning with their dented aluminum pails and white plastic jugs in hopes of coaxing a little water from the single functioning well in Chnap.
"Nothing has changed," said Mrs.
Tith Poth, a 65-year-old widow, grinning at the thought that life had somehow grown easier in Chnap since the arrival in Cambodia of thousands of United Nations peacekeepers.
"Sometimes the white United Nations cars drive by, but the people inside never get out."


What They're Wearing
The New Look is abroad in Manhattan.
At a Metropolitan Museum of Art gala, sheer styles were on display.


Shared Sacrifice, or Sacrifice the Elderly?
To the Editor:
In all the talk of special interests and sacrifice sharing, nobody mentions that only Social Security recipients are taxed on interest from "triple tax free" municipal bonds.


Voice of Assistance and More Aided by Neediest Cases Fund
In a crowded room in midtown Manhattan, 28-year-old Chin Kuoyen was confronting his nemesis.
He took a deep breath.
He braced his hands against the table.
His brow wrinkled, as if the strain were rippling through his body.
Then he spoke.
"In-soo-LAY-shun," he said in halting tones.
And he smiled.
So did his tutor, Oscar Mariani, a retired dress designer who meets with Mr.
Chin once a week to help him conquer the English language.
They were sitting amid the din at the International Center in New York, surrounded by other tutors with foreigners learning to contort their tongues so they could form newly discovered words.


FEB. 14-20: Environmentalist's Killers; Escape From the Law In the Rain Forest
The convicted killers of the environmentalist Francisco (Chico) Mendes escaped from a remote Amazon jail last week, taking with them the wider world's hopes for an end to criminal impunity in Brazil's Amazon.
In a region where the murders of hundreds of unionists, peasants and Indians went unprosecuted during the 1980's, the 1990 conviction of Darly Alves da Silva and his son, Darci Alves Pereira, seemed to send a signal that an new era of law and order would take hold in Brazil's wild west.


Sharpton Joins Fast Against Haitian Ban
The Rev.
Al Sharpton began a five-day hunger strike yesterday to protest the exclusion of Haitian refugees who have the virus that causes AIDS from the United States.
Mr.
Sharpton joins the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, who began fasting on Feb. 14 to protest United States policy toward the Haitians being held at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba.
Mr.
Sharpton also called for other public figures and elected officials to join the fast, which he said may be extended past five days.


Lee S. Golden and Leslie R. Wolff
Barbara and Melvin Wolff of Woodmere, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Leslie Ruth Wolff to Lee Scott Golden, a son of Michael and Sharon Golden of East Rockaway, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Wolff, 26, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is an associate in Latin American merchant banking at the Bankers Trust Company in New York.
Her father is a lawyer in Mineola, L.I.


Wrapping Up Arbitration
John Dopson, a Boston Red Sox pitcher, today won the last salary arbitration case decided, but the clubs still finished with the second-highest percentage of cases won in the 18-year history of the procedure.
The only more successful year in terms of favorable decisions for the clubs came in 1978, when they won seven of nine cases.


New Campaigns
*
Michael Jordan will add another product to his lengthy roster of endorsements with a campaign, created by Lintas Campbell-Ewald, Warren, Mich., for Hygrade Ball Park Franks.
His first Hygrade commercial, in which he grabs a hot dog from a video screen on a stadium scoreboard, begins running this week.


How to sell expensive jeans? Mix poetry and film noir with celebrity.
HERE is a recipe for one of the most ordered dishes at the Madison Avenue Cafe.
On the menu, it goes by the name of Modish Campaign for Pricey Apparel.
This time, it is being served up to Pepe Group P.L.C. for its Pepe Jeans:  1 small creative boutique agency  1 fresh celebrity spokesman or  spokeswoman who hopes to
become known as more than  just a pretty face  1 large, high-profile photographer  who has produced trend-setting  ads for designers like Calvin  Klein and Ralph Lauren  3/4 pound beatnik counterculture  elements like berets and poetry  1/2 cup self-consciously stylized
realism  1 ton black-and-white film for that  moody noir-ish tone so popular  among fashion marketers.


A Test of Church-State Relations in a Deaf Student's Need
When he was in eighth grade, Sandra and Larry Zobrest decided to transfer their deaf son, Jim, from a public school to a Roman Catholic high school.
They asked the Catalina Foothills School District here whether the state could continue to pay for a sign-language interpreter.
Now, five years later, with Jim in college, that question is before the Supreme Court, in a case that could set a new standard for deciding how much separation between church and state the Constitution requires.


Present Pays Homage to Past


Now Ask What High Rollers Can Do for Deficit; Uncle Ron's Fancy Pool
To the Editor:
In "There They Go Again" (Op-Ed, Feb. 18), Ronald Reagan doesn't understand even yet why President Clinton's economic program, including some rigorous spending cuts, is urgently necessary.
After all, he writes, the 1980's were the "longest period of peacetime economic expansion in our history."


Dinkins in Tokyo: Subways Can Be Clean
Mayor David N. Dinkins learned firsthand today about one of the deepest mysteries of the Far East: that beneath a city larger than New York, there runs a crime-free subway system in which trains arrive on schedule, passengers sit in cushioned velvet seats, and briefcases and packages can be stored on overhead racks without fear that they will disappear.
"It reminds me a lot of the New York subways these days, clean and no graffiti," Mr.
Dinkins said on the first day of a weeklong tour of Japan.
"Of course," he added, after a few members of his entourage shot him a skeptical glance, "the cushions and the racks might not be so practical in New York."


HORSE RACING: Kentucky Derby '93 -- In the Running; A Maze Before the Run for the Roses
For long odds in life, try these numbers: In 1990, the year Unbridled won the Kentucky Derby, 42,846 thoroughbred horses were born in the United States.
They are 3 years old now, and 342 of them have been nominated to this year's Derby on May 1.
That's 1 in 125.
It is likely that 20 of those nominated will make it to the post at Churchill Downs for the big race on the big day.
That's 1 in 2,142.
And it is incontestable that only one will make it to the winner's circle.
That's 1 in 42,846.


Vanity With a Purpose; States Expand Specialty License Plates
Into an age of Raiders jackets, X caps and Hard Rock Cafe T-shirts as ubiquitous as Lyme ticks comes the license plate with attitude -- both political and fashionable.
And like all good modern symbols, it costs extra.
By midyear in the New York metropolitan region, motorists with a social conscience or simply the need to decorate their cars will be gazing at each other's logos or slogans of choice on plates lauding professional sports teams and regional tourist areas (New York), ocean beaches and wildlife (New Jersey), or the recently marketed Connecticut tags that encourage preservation of Long Island Sound.


Review/Television; A Chinese Connection Of Mind And Health
Bill Moyers begins his new series, "Healing and the Mind," with a visit to China to explore the workings of an ancient philosophy of medicine that is exciting interest around the United States.
He is fortunate to have as his guide Dr.
David M. Eisenberg of the Harvard Medical School, a student of Chinese medicine.
Dr.
Eisenberg, who helped do a survey released last month that found that Americans spent $13.7 billion on alternative medicine in 1990, manages to be appreciative of the Chinese way of looking at health without going gaga about it; his steady approach lends credibility to a subject that has been known to turn some minds a little soft.
The first of five programs investigates the phenomenon called chi, which has to do with the flow through the body of what a Chinese doctor calls "the force of life." Looking in at hospitals where traditional Chinese medicine is practiced, the Americans find that illnesses caused by obstructions to that flow are treated with herbs, needles, massage and meditation.
Dr.
Eisenberg quotes a Taoist proverb: "When you have a disease do not try to cure; find your center and you will be healed."


Review/Rock; Blue-Collar Bad Boys, Rich but Still Rebels
The roses, tossed onstage or handed to band members, started appearing during Bon Jovi's second song, and by the third or fourth tune the occasional pair of women's underwear whizzed by on their way to the stage.
At the end of the sold-out concert, on Saturday night at the Brendan Byrne Arena in East Rutherford, N.J., flocks of women were finding their way up to kiss the group's charismatic lead singer, Jon Bon Jovi, dance with him a bit, and be photographed not just in his presence, but also all over and around his presence.
It was rock celebrity pandemonium, and everybody, fans and band alike, were having a great time.
One of the great myths fueling rock suggests that lower-middle-class people, usually male and white, can both make oodles of money and maintain the rebellious stance so important to rock's adolescent audience.
There's a clear contradiction in the myth, and Bon Jovi, as well as any band alive, has learned to play both sides of the problem.
In 1986, when the band's record "Slippery When Wet" (Polygram) began its ascent, eventually selling some 13 million copies, Bon Jovi was the ideal prole band, a group of guys from New Jersey who hit it big.
In their clothes, action and lyrics, the band pointed to a blue-collar tradition not so much linked to the urban decay mined by self-conscious prole poets like Bruce Springsteen, but to a suburban reality found in mall glamour and wasted Saturday nights.
Mr.
Bon Jovi, with his long blond hair, became a rock celebrity who was a hunk, enormously wealthy and who could sing songs like "Wild in the Streets." Critics, preferring to celebrate older, more romantic types of working-class rebellion, hated -- and still hate -- the band.


Peace From Chaos -- A special report.; Mozambique's Outlook Brightens As Truce Holds and Drought Ends
On a continent of withered promise, where country after country has defeated recent dreams of creating civil order out of chronic chaos, Mozambique has unexpectedly emerged as a candidate for an African success story.
When a cease-fire was signed in October few expected it would end this country's savagely indiscriminate 16-year war, but it has held for months.
A ruthless drought that had aid donors touting Mozambique as the next Somalia has been broken by quenching rains, and the country is carpeted with corn.
Peace Plus Rain
Here in the fertile northwest, refugees who fled the insurgent Mozambique National Resistance, or Renamo, are streaming home from border camps in Malawi and rebuilding the cane huts burned by the rebels.
In other regions, food and medicine are reaching villagers isolated for many years behind guerrilla battle lines.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  First for Mickelson
Phil Mickelson, bouyed by a wildly partisan gallery of family, friends and former schoolmates, returned to his roots yesterday to score the first victory of his pro career.
Calling on the unshakable nerves of youth, the 22-year-old left-hander conducted a putting clinic over the back nine at Torrey Pines in La Jolla, Calif., as he pulled away to a four-shot victory in the Buick Invitational.
Mickelson, still wearing the can't-miss label earned in his spectacular amateur career, won his hometown tournament with a seven-under-par 65, including a decisive 31 over the back nine.
Mickelson, who passed up a $180,000 prize to retain his amateur status when he won a PGA Tour event in Tucson in 1991, recouped that exact amount in the tournament he first attended as a boy from nearby San Diego and in which he once served as a standard-bearer.
His mother, Mary, and father, Phil, a former instructor at the Navy's Top Gun School at nearby Miramar and the man who taught the game to his preschool son, were in the gallery as Mickelson began to fulfill the promise of his amateur days with a 10-under-par 278 winning total.
Dave Rummells, the third-round leader, had a closing 70 and finished second at 282.
Payne Stewart, still hoping to end a non-winning streak that stretches back to his 1991 United States Open triumph, finished third at 283. (AP) Seniors Victory for Albus: Jim Albus, who never played the PGA Tour, shot a one-under-par 70 to win the Senior PGA Tour's Suncoast Classic at the Tournament Players Club in Tampa, Fla.
Albus's 54-hole total of seven-under 206 was good for a two-stroke victory over Don Bies and second-round leader Gibby Gilbert.
Three strokes behind the winner at four-under 209 were Gary Player, Tom Wargo and Jim Feree.
The victory was worth $75,000. (AP)


Review/Music; A Young Artist Revels In Chopin's Nuances
Yevgeny Kissin is such an extraordinary pianistic talent that I felt somewhat guilty listening to his refined and supple playing in his all-Chopin Carnegie Hall recital on Saturday night.
The guilt was in wishing that the playing were even more extraordinary.
There was so much that was exquisite (the Opus 17, No. 4 Mazurka, for example, with its lilting, unresolved phrases), so much effortless virtuosity (could one have asked for the Third Sonata to emerge more fluently?) and so much imagination (the pedaling in the Opus 44 gave a spicy haze to parts of the score), that wishing for more seemed ungracious.


A Building With a History, From Bootleggers to Beatles
It was built in the fabled days of vaudeville, thrived as a honky-tonk music hall and a legitimate theater, catered to mobsters and showmen, reached out to the nation on radio and ushered in the golden age of live television.
On its stage under a vaulted cathedral ceiling, American television audiences had their first look at the Beatles, Elvis Presley, Jackie Gleason and Rudolf Nureyev.
The landmark Ed Sullivan Theater, 1697 Broadway, between 53d and 54th Streets, has seen circus acts and opera stars, rock musicians and situation comedies, even an occasional political figure like Fidel Castro.
It has been associated with some of the biggest names in show business: Oscar Hammerstein, Billy Rose and its namesake, Ed Sullivan, host of "a really big shue" from 1948 to 1971.


Donna Faltitschek, Philip Selby
Donna Faltitschek, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eric Faltitschek of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., was married yesterday to Philip Robert Selby, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph J. Selby of Lynbrook, L.I.
Rabbi Richard Chapin performed the ceremony at the Regency Hotel in New York.


Market Place; Glaxo is still dogged by concerns, even though its profit is higher.
THE news last week that pretax profits for Glaxo Holdings P.L.C. for the six months that ended on Dec. 31 were up 16 percent -- far higher than the 10 to 12 percent predicted by most analysts -- was a pleasant surprise for investors in the British drug company.
But the strong earnings did little to dispel the uncertainties that have dogged Glaxo in recent months, depressing its shares in London and New York.
The shares ended last week in London at 666 pence, down 38 pence for the week and nearly a third below the high last fall of 943 pence.
In New York, Glaxo's American depository receipts closed at $18.875 each, down 87.5 cents for the week and 38 percent below the 52-week peak of $30.375.


Ted Haworth, 75, an Oscar-Winning Art Director
Ted Haworth, who was the art director of many films, including "Sayonara," for which he won an Academy Award, died on Thursday at the Utah Valley Regional Hospital in Provo, Utah.
He was 75 and lived in Sundance, Utah.
His son, Sean, said Mr.
Haworth (the name is pronounced HAW-worth) died of heart failure after he was injured in a car accident and developed a blood clot in the brain.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption in Science Times last Tuesday about stone statues on Easter Island misidentified the archeological site.
It was Akiva Ahu, which has been restored, not Tongariki, which is being restored.


SYRIANS PUT ISSUE OF PEACE EFFORT BEFORE DEPORTEES
In an unusually conciliatory gesture to the Clinton Administration, Syria said today that it would not link the return of nearly 400 Palestinians deported by Israel to the resumption of the stalled ddle East peace talks.
It said a successful peace settlement for the region was a much higher priority.
The move was apparently prompted by a promise by Secretary of State Warren Christopher that Washington would play an active role in the negotiations if and when they start up again.


METRO DIGEST
A NEW HOME (IN NEW YORK) FOR LETTERMAN
CBS has bought the Ed Sullivan Theater on Broadway to serve as the new studio home for David Letterman, making it certain that his late-night show will continue to be produced in New York after he switches to CBS from NBC this summer, CBS officials say.
The deal, which was concluded on Saturday and is to be announced this morning, includes the 14-story office building adjacent to the theater.
CBS paid about $4 million and expects to pay "several million more" for renovation, said Edward Grebow, the network's senior vice president of operations.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Dance in Review
Dance Forum Taipei  Bessie Schonberg Theater
The ability of modern dance to leap across international boundaries and flourish everywhere was demonstrated on Tuesday night at the Bessie Schonberg Theater when Dance Forum Taipei, from Taiwan, presented a program of short pieces.
The works blended Asian and Western styles and themes, and the well-trained group, founded in 1989, was a pleasure to watch.


People
*
Fred Wray, media director at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, Chicago, was promoted to the additional new position of media director at FCB North America. *
Diane Spencer, senior vice president and worldwide media director on the Revlon International account at Young &amp; Rubicam New York, was named to the additional new position of director of the print services group.
She will handle duties previously assigned to Nancy W. Smith, who held the title of executive vice president and director of print and media relations before leaving to join Time Inc., New York, as group publisher at its Parenting Group.


Doctor Who Assists Suicides Makes the Macabre Mundane
As the death toll mounts, the bizarre has become almost banal.
The local police come and go more quickly from the suicide scenes, rarely unraveling their yellow tape.
Local television stations no longer broadcast the lawyers' news conferences in which the ages and illness of the just deceased are described.
And succeeding deaths go ever further inside the Detroit newspapers.
But if Dr.
Jack Kevorkian's routine has become familiar, the pace is not.
Last Thursday, he helped two cancer patients from California commit suicide by inhaling the gas from a carbon monoxide canister -- the eighth and ninth since December, when Gov.
John Engler signed a law intended to make his conduct criminal.
In the two and a half years before the law was passed, Dr.
Kevorkian assisted in six suicides.


In London, a Jewish Ritual Fence Is Becoming a Thorn Bush
The names conjure up the leafy preserve and suburban uniformity of northwest London -- Hendon, Golders Green, Hampstead, Child's Hill, East Finchley.
But the people who live in the neat rows of brick houses and cottages tucked behind hedged gardens are heterogeneous.
They include thousands of Jews who have blended in discreetly for generations -- until now.


Owen Is Feeling Secure As a Yankee Newcomer
For some of the Yankees' middle infielders, life at this moment is a mystery.
For Spike Owen, it is not.
Oh, he may have arrived at his new team's spring training facility only to find that he has not yet been assigned a uniform number, nor had his name attached to a locker.


Those Numbers, Again?
Oil industry officials said the proposed energy tax would bite far deeper than the Administration predicts.
Page A14.


Now Ask What High Rollers Can Do for Deficit; Health Care Wipeout?
To the Editor:
President Clinton's State of the Union Message was remarkable for its breadth, vision and the compelling salesmanship of his message (front page, Feb. 18).
However, until Hillary Rodham Clinton reveals her health care program, the jury is out on the program's economic implications.


Harvey Kurtzman, 68, Cartoonist Who Helped Start Mad Magazine
Harvey Kurtzman, a prominent cartoonist and historian of pop culture who helped found Mad magazine and was also a guiding force in several other satirical magazines, died yesterday at his home in Mount Vernon, N.Y.
He was 68.
Byron Preiss, his publisher, said he died from complications of liver cancer.
Mr.
Preiss described Mr.
Kurtzman as "one of the greatest cartoonists of the 20th century."


Finding the Next Fernandez
New York City's Board of Education did not distinguish itself during the purge of Schools Chancellor Joseph Fernandez.
Now it needs a new chancellor, and it could gain some measure of redemption by distancing itself from the selection process.
That task should be assigned forthwith to an independent panel.
An independent panel would not be tainted by the recent turbulence.
And it would be insulated from the politics of the upcoming mayoral race.
The board will make the final choice, but the panel could do the crucial preliminaries -- identifying and interviewing candidates and winnowing the list.


Factory Owner Slain
A factory owner was shot and killed in front of his house in Queens late Saturday night as he was returning from his garment factory, the police said yesterday.
Wen-Liang Zheng, 29, the father of a 3-year-old girl and a 21-day-old girl, was shot once in the right ear outside his house in Corona shortly before midnight, the police said.
He was returning from working in his factory, Lisin Inc. at 102-11 44th Avenue in Corona.
The police said they have not established a motive in the killing.


Storm Creates Major Transportation Delays
A storm that dumped snow, sleet and rain on the New York metropolitan region yesterday caused delays at local airports and resulted in scores of traffic accidents.
The storm, which left accumulations of up to a foot in upstate New York, was the third snowfall in the metropolitan region in the last 10 days.
Communities in and around the city reported from three to six inches of snow.


Now Ask What High Rollers Can Do for Deficit; Marriage Tax Penalty
To the Editor:
President Clinton's tax proposals have an element of unfairness that has not been generally noted: the inequality of sacrifice between two-income married couples and single people with the same income.


Bridge
Three men with strong New York City affiliations have a major place in the history of the game.
Ely Culbertson, who died in 1955 at the age of 64, was the leading figure in the early years.
Charles Goren, who died in 1991 at the age of 90, was the leading figure after Culbertson retired.
And Harry Goldwater, now a sprightly nonagenarian, was famous as a tournament director and even more famous as a prankster.
Many years ago he was on duty at a national championship and giving helpful advice to arriving spectators.
"Goren's in the room to your left," he told them, and "Culbertson's in the room to your right."


Books of The Times; Why Baseball Is Striking Out and How It Can Be Saved
Coming Apart at the Seams How Baseball Owners, Players and Television Executives Led Our National Pastime to the Brink of Disaster By Jack Sands and Peter Gammons Illustrated. 266 pages.
MacMillan. $24.


Rangers Get No Reward for Effort
Ron Smith is not a hypocrite.
Smith, coach of the Rangers, has spent weeks complimenting his players for strong efforts and promising performances in games that fell short of victory.
Sure, he wanted the points to bolster his position in the standings.
But he didn't overlook the positives.


Arizona's Quiet Dangerfields Finally Acquire Some Respect
Arizona 70, Cincinnati 60  Arizona St. 89, Memphis St. 76
PHOENIX, Feb. 21 -- In a year in which West Coast basketball is supposed to be down, the University of Arizona came into this afternoon's game with eighth-ranked Cincinnati feeling it had something to prove.
The fourth-ranked Wildcats, maligned by many for what is perceived as a weak schedule, came back from a second-half deficit to defeat the Bearcats, 70-60, before a highly partisan crowd of 13,421 on what was technically a Veterans Memorial Coliseum neutral court.


States Are Ready to Spend Extra Clinton Transit Aid
Officials in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut are anticipating a windfall of more than $435 million in new transportation aid as part of President Clinton's economic stimulus package.
They say that if the money is approved by Congress, it could create about 12,000 new jobs this year as local highways, bridges, and subway stations are rebuilt.
While transportation officials are still analyzing details that were released in Washington last week, they have already calculated what share of President Clinton's $4.16 billion in transportation proposals they will get if the $30 billion package, intended to provide an immediate stimulus to the economy, is passed in full.


Review/Television; Beaming Up New Science-Fiction
Here's a trade secret: In television science-fiction, there is no final frontier.
There is only an unending quest for workable series concepts that might tap into the blockbuster lode virtually monopolized by the "Star Trek" machine.
Coming up this week, tonight at 8 on Channel 55 and on Friday night at 8 on WWOR, Channel 9, is the stilted but promising two-hour pilot for a possible syndicated series called "Babylon 5." On a far more modest scale, Nickelodeon is showing, tonight through Wednesday night at 7, "The Tomorrow People," a nifty British-Australian mini-series for young audiences.
Like Paramount's new "Star Trek: Deep Space Nine," Warner Brothers' "Babylon 5" is set on a futuristic space station.
J.
Michael Straczynski, the creator of "Babylon," charges that the resemblance is hardly coincidental, maintaining that his project was submitted in detail to Paramount four years ago.
Paramount and the producers of "Star Trek" reject the allegations.
Prognosis: interminable countercharges.


Italian Chief Replaces 3 Ministers Who Resigned in Bribery Scandal
With disclosures of corruption rapidly corroding the heart of Italy's power elite, Prime Minister Giuliano Amato battled today to keep his eight-month-old administration alive, appointing three officials to replace ministers who quit over bribery scandals.
But the measures could prove to be no more than a stopgap, because many Italians sense that their whole postwar way of doing politics and business is under its greatest challenge, however ill-defined the future may seem.


Review/Pop; A Folkie Who Doesn't Look Back
The strum-and-hum style of singer-songwriter music that record stores classify as "folk" rests on a few conservative musical notions.
Melody is emphasized over rhythm, lyrics form straightforward narratives and personal expression takes precedence over formal experimentation.
These simple, unspoken rules make folk a consistently satisfying but often unchallenging genre.
It's music that lets listeners sit back, relax and ponder the familiar infinities.
That's what folk music was, anyway, until Luka Bloom grabbed hold of it.
Mr.
Bloom is an Irish performer who would probably prefer to be called a rock musician or even a hip-hop artist, but performing solo on Monday night at the Bottom Line, accompanying himself on acoustic guitar, he fit a surface description of a folkie.
His jeans, illustrated with a painting of Malcolm X, displayed his progressive politics; his mellifluous singing of verses devoted to the old themes of love, tradition and survival indicated his affinity to bards ranging from Percy Shelley to Michelle Shocked.
Mr.
Bloom's crucial difference lay in his musical approach, which overturned folk's values and renewed the form.


Seeing Figures, 2 Sides Calculate Clinton's Math
Much of the Congressional battle about President Clinton's economic package could come down to a duel over algebra: the ratio of proposed tax increases to proposed spending cuts.
Republican mathematicians attack the President's plan as a tax-and-spend scheme, asserting that it includes $1.75 to $18 in tax increases for every dollar in spending cuts.
Mr.
Clinton's number crunchers respond that it is a prudent, balanced plan, with one dollar in revenue tax increases for each dollar in spending cuts.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Agreed to terms with Jose Valentin, shortstop, and Otis Green and Francisco Gamez, pitchers, on one-year contracts.
National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Agreed to terms with Steve Foster, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
NEW YORK METS -- Agreed to terms with Anthony Young, pitcher, and Azron Ledesma, shortstop, on one-year contracts.
Football National Football League  CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Released Rodney Holman, tight end.


Trade Pact Job Gains Discounted
The two most influential academic experts on the North American Free Trade Agreement, whose forecasts of short-term job gains were heavily cited by the Bush Administration last year, have concluded that any net increase in job gains would evaporate after 15 to 20 years.
The two experts, Gary C. Hufbauer and Jeffrey J. Schott, who are both senior fellows at the Institute for International Economics here, have not included this conclusion in their new book on the pact, although they do mention that the short-term gains may not be permanent.


Now Ask What High Rollers Can Do for Deficit; Youth to Cooperate
To the Editor:
President Clinton has two proposals for young people in America.
The first, for college-bound students, calls for college tuition credits for community service; the second is for those not going to college and provides job training through apprenticeships.


As Plants Close, Injury Claims Rise
On June 1, 1991, a jeans manufacturer named Big Yank shut an Oklahoma factory employing 225 workers.
As the plant closed, the employees filed nearly 400 workers' compensation claims for injuries on the job, despite having filed only 6 in the previous year.
The company, which had already been battered by foreign competitors with lower labor costs, saw workers' compensation premiums for its nine factories across the country rise to more than $3.6 million a year from $1.8 million.
It says the increase forced it to shut three more factories that had employed 800 American workers.


Clinton Heads West, Stressing His Plan's Rewards
President Clinton traveled to the West Coast today to turn the debate over his economic plan away from the unpleasant topic of what taxpayers will lose to a more politically salable discourse about what he says they will gain.
Appearing before a supportive crowd leavened with politicians and celebrities at Santa Monica College, Mr.
Clinton said, "The only reason for reducing the deficit is not just to prove you can bring it down, but because it's better for the people of this country."


Dance in Review
Yanceydance Theater  Ohio Theater  SoHo
Leslie Yancey creates considerable atmosphere in "Trio," the opening work of an evening of theater-dance pieces presented on Thursday.
But she did little with that atmosphere in the dance, an excerpt from "Ne Lachez Pas les Patates" in which three women cross and recross the stage and manipulate sheets pulled from the baskets on their heads.


Music Goes Round and Round, the Old Way
Long after the last musician is dead and forgotten, live music will still soothe heavy hearts.
So on behalf of musically deprived generations yet to come, it is time to pay tribute to QRS Music Rolls Inc., the country's oldest and largest manufacturer of music rolls -- the perforated sheets that are the brains, and hands, of player pianos.


Now Ask What High Rollers Can Do for Deficit; Grand Old Hypocrisy
To the Editor:
It was fascinating to listen to Republican Congressional reaction to President Clinton's speech.
G.O.P. lawmakers spoke about cutting Government spending, intelligent oversight of programs and being fiscally responsible before raising taxes.


Coffee Romance Leads to a Hit Book
In the United States, the serial television commercials for Taster's Choice coffee have attracted a fair amount of interest.
But in Britain, where the soap opera-like commercials originated more than five years ago, they have become something of a national obsession.


Fixated on Texas and No Apologies
Ross Perot showed up on the cover of Texas Monthly last year caricatured as Alfred E. Neuman, along with the headline, "What, Me President?" Gov.
Ann W. Richards came along the next month in a much-doctored photograph, leather-jacketed and straddling a Harley-Davidson.
"White Hot Mama," the magazine called her.
When the state's economy took a dive in the 1980's, Texas Monthly was right there with a helpful feature, "Life Styles of the Rich and Bankrupt (How Texans Go Bust Without Going Broke)." And it's not as if the magazine only cares about politics and finance.
"Hats Off to Big Hair! A Tribute to a Texas Classic" was a recent cover story.


Canada Is Found to Lead U.S. In Holding Drug Prices Down
Canada has been successful in the last five years in getting drug companies to hold back rising drug prices while also getting them to increase their spending on research, a Congressional report finds.
The report, by the General Accounting Office, an investigative arm of Congress, suggests that the United States consider establishing a board to review drug prices similar to the one in Canada.


The 81 Seconds That Shaped 2 Years Return to Center Stage in Los Angeles
After two years of turmoil, Los Angeles comes face to face this week with the prospect of more upheaval with opening statements expected in the Federal civil rights trial of four white police officers accused in the beating of a black man, Rodney G. King.
The 81-second beating, captured on videotape in the early morning of March 3, 1991, led to a racially charged trial last spring and touched off a chain of events that included the overhaul of a police department and the departure of a Mayor, a Chief of Police and a District Attorney.


The Price of Protecting Pentagon Turf
Senator Sam Nunn posed the right question: With four separate air forces and two light infantries, can't the people who run the armed services find some way to redefine and rationalize their missions?
"No can do, sir" was the answer they gave in a recent report.
While offering modest money-saving adjustments, the service Chiefs continued to defend their traditional turf.
Gen.
Colin Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, tried to convince them otherwise, but his will to fight had its limits: "My momma didn't raise a fool," he said in publicly presenting the report.


Japan's 'Recycling' of Its Trade Surplus Declines
Even as Japan racks up the largest trade surpluses in history, the flood of international investments that the surpluses were supposed to finance have declined sharply in recent years, undercutting one of the Government's justifications for the imbalances.
The Japanese Government has taken a variety of steps to blunt criticism over the overwhelming size of its surpluses.
One of the more important of these, during the 1980's, was the development of multibillion-dollar programs to "recycle" some of the money to needy areas of the global economy.
The Government sent funds to areas of the developing world that were starved for capital and encouraged Japanese corporations to make productive investments in the United States and Europe.


Now Ask What High Rollers Can Do for Deficit
To the Editor:
I want to applaud President Clinton for submitting an economic plan in his State of the Union Message that seems based on justice rather than fairness (front page, Feb. 18).
Earlier statements that sacrifice would be borne evenly indicated that this would not be the case -- that all income levels would have to pay their fair share of the deficit.
But the plan Mr.
Clinton proposed last Wednesday night seems to be a just plan, in which those who benefited most from the national borrowing spree will participate most in returning the country to solvency.


Corrections
An article yesterday about President Clinton's televised appearance with children at the White House described the preparation of the program incorrectly.
The children were chosen by ABC News, and both ABC and the White House were aware of the general nature of the questions they would ask, but the questions were not rehearsed.


CLINTON SAYS U.S. IS PLANNING AIRLIFT TO EASTERN BOSNIA
President Clinton said today that the United States was drawing up plans with its allies to conduct an emergency airlift of food and medicine to remote areas of eastern Bosnia and that they expect to disclose the initiative in the next few days.
"We'll probably have an announcement today for you or tomorrow," Mr.
Clinton told reporters at the White House as he left for a two-day visit to California.
"We're working on it. I have authorized our people to talk to the U.N. Security Council about the possibility of extra help with food and medicine for Bosnia."


Convoy Finally Reaches Besieged Bosnian Town
A week after it set out from a United Nations depot barely 200 miles away, a convoy of relief supplies arrived today at a besieged Muslim enclave in eastern Bosnia, effectively ending the latest crisis in the effort to keep 1.6 million Bosnians from starving while their country is torn apart by war.
The senior relief official with the convoy, Larry Hollingworth, radioed United Nations headquarters in Sarajevo to report that about 150 villagers lining the road into the mountain community of Zepa applauded as the convoy pulled in with 65 tons of food and medical supplies.
The convoy was only the second to reach Zepa in nearly 11 months of war, and the supplies it carried constituted a bonanza of sorts for 30,000 residents who have survived a Serbian siege partly by making bread from straw.


Dance in Review
'A Midsummer Night's Dream'  New York City Ballet New York State Theater
A new cast of human and supernatural lovers roamed the enchanted forest when the New York City Ballet presented "A Midsummer Night's Dream" on Thursday night.
Although some of the mimetic details in George Balanchine's adaptation of Shakespeare have been slightly blurred over the years, this choreographic comedy remains a delight.


Is a Major Deal In the Works?
Two days after the National Basketball Association adopted a salary cap measure designed to spur more trades next season, the Seattle SuperSonics and the Los Angeles Lakers were said to be on the verge of making a major deal tonight.
According to sources close to those teams, the Lakers were ready to send veteran forward Sam Perkins to the Sonics for center Benoit Benjamin and unsigned No. 1 draft pick Doug Christie.
The key to the deal for the Lakers, who don't really want Benjamin, is Christie, a 6-foot-6-inch scoring guard who played at Pepperdine.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the special City Council election in District 4 on the East Side of Manhattan described The Daily News's editorial position incorrectly in some copies.
The News has indeed printed an endorsement, for Paula Blasband.


U.N. Relief Agency Set to Resume Distribution of Supplies in Bosnia
The main United Nations relief organization in Bosnia today welcomed reports of an American-led plan to deliver relief to isolated eastern villages, and it said it was resuming overland aid distribution after warring factions agreed to stop blocking delivery.
"We're delighted with the reports the United States and its allies are planning to parachute in supplies." said Sylvana Foa, spokeswoman for Sadako Ogata, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, who is coordinating all relief work in the former Yugoslavia.
"We want to use every way possible to get food to these starving people."


Sports of the Times; Yankees In Spring: From Ford to Taylor
UNDER an eggshell-blue sky and a gentle sun and with a palm tree now and then leaning over to lend proper atmosphere, William Nathaniel Showalter 3d, the youthful manager of the Yankees, stood recently on a practice field just beyond Fort Lauderdale Stadium here.
He was extolling this time of year, the beginning of spring training, which is forever pregnant with possibilities.
As Buck Showalter spoke, he kept a close eye on the cluster of pitchers who were running through a fielding drill, during which they covered first base on a ground ball.


Market Place; Glaxo is still dogged by concerns, even though its profit is higher.
THE news last week that pretax profits for Glaxo Holdings P.L.C. for the six months that ended on Dec. 31 were up 16 percent -- far higher than the 10 to 12 percent predicted by most analysts -- was a pleasant surprise for investors in the British drug company.
But the strong earnings did little to dispel the uncertainties that have dogged Glaxo in recent months, depressing its shares in London and New York.
The shares ended last week in London at 666 pence, down 38 pence for the week and nearly a third below the high last fall of 943 pence.
In New York, Glaxo's American depository receipts closed at $18.875 each, down 87.5 cents for the week and 38 percent below the 52-week peak of $30.375.


The West Prevails In Serious Showdown
Usually, as these National Basketball Association All-Star Games go, there is more of a jovial atmosphere than an intense one.
Seriously, how intense can a game be when one team scores 153 points, as the West team did last year?
The players show up, have a few laughs, pull a few gags, sign 10,000 autographs, play some ball and go home.
Not this time.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; One Offended Viewer Tries To Hit 'Donahue' in Wallet
Dozens of companies that were advertising on the "Donahue" show a year ago have stopped doing so, and Dr.
Richard Neill says he is the reason.
Last summer, Dr.
Neill, a Fort Worth dentist, sat down and watched one of Phil Donahue's talk shows.
He didn't like it.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Athena Neurosciences Inc., 3 million common shares, 2.4 million in the U.S.
Paine Webber.


Debt, Taxes and a Politician's Downfall
Is Bill Clinton the second coming of John F. Kennedy?
Franklin Delano Roosevelt?
Or even Abraham Lincoln, whose bust is so proudly displayed on the new President's desk?
Sorry.
Maybe someday, but for now his real model isn't even an American.
Look to President Clinton's
real
roots and those of all the Rhodes scholars and Oxfordophiles in his Administration.
English history gives us the best insight into the Clinton proposals and what lies ahead.
In 1909, Lord Asquith was the Liberal Prime Minister, with Lloyd George as Chancellor of the Exchequer and Winston Churchill as head of the Board of Trade.


Dinkins Goes to Japan to Try to Keep Investors in New York


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.


The Right Budget Track, Mostly
The Clinton economic plan envisions an America that provides "rising living standards for all its citizens." The lofty goal may not be reached.
But that should not detract from President Clinton's achievement: He has put forward a credible, honest plan for government, after 12 years of less-than-benign neglect, to help put America's economic house in order.
Mr.
Clinton's vision stakes out three objectives: speed recovery to put millions of Americans back to work as soon as possible; cut the long-term deficit to pump money into private capital markets; and retarget Government spending away from consumption and toward investment.


Deborah Cott, Derek Messulam
Deborah Lynn Cott, a daughter of Nancy Feldman of Fairfield, Conn., and Gordon Cott of Woodbridge, Conn., was married yesterday to Derek Messulam, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Lewis Messulam of Ridgewood, N.J.
Rabbi Noam E. Marans performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Messulam, 25, is a merchandising assistant at Print-a-Pattern Design Studio, a textile design company in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University.


Corrections
A dance review on Thursday about a performance by the Royal New Zealand Ballet at Brooklyn College misstated the size of the company.
There are 31 dancers on the current United States tour, not 22, the number listed in the printed program.


A Sweet Lou Primer On Marge and Loyalty
Lou Piniella's departure from the Cincinnati Reds occurred last October, but it began a year earlier.
"It was time for me to move on," Piniella said Saturday, sitting in his office here at the Seattle Mariners' new spring-training site.
"I didn't like some of the things that were done there, and as a manager, I had a chance to come back or move on and I chose to move on."


Energy Tax's Effect Understated Up to 50%, Industry Officials Say
The proposed tax on energy would be much larger than the Clinton Administration asserts, costing a typical family as much as $500 a year rather than $320, industry officials and a former Secretary of Energy contended today.
In budget documents released by the Administration last week, the energy tax was projected to raise $22 billion a year after it was fully phased in on July 1, 1996.
But industry critics said today that the tax would actually raise $33 billion or more.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9 U.S. AND ALLIES PLAN AIRLIFT
President Clinton said that the U.S. was drawing up plans with its allies to conduct an emergency airlift of food and medicine to an estimated 200,000 people in remote areas of eastern Bosnia and that they expected to present the initiative soon.A1


New York Agencies Get Soft-Drink Jobs
Two soft-drink marketers have selected New York-based agencies to handle their accounts.
Austin, Nichols &amp; Company in New York named CME KHBB Advertising to handle its Yoo-Hoo Chocolate Drink, previously at Geer, DuBois Inc. in New York, which is closing.
The account was awarded without a review; billings were not disclosed.


Dance in Review
'Square Dance'  New York City Ballet New York State Theater
It was touching to see Nikolaj Hubbe trying to make sense of the mysterious solo that George Balanchine appended in 1976 to his Baroque-inspired ballet "Square Dance." Mr.
Hubbe, new in the principal male role and partnering Kyra Nichols on Saturday afternoon, has been effortlessly working his way through the repertory in his first year with the New York City Ballet.


De Klerk Names Three Nonwhites to Cabinet Posts
President F.W. de Klerk has named the first nonwhites to his Cabinet, in a bid to broaden the appeal of his National Party prior to South Africa's first universal elections.
Mr. de Klerk announced Saturday night that he gave minor Cabinet posts to two mixed-race politicians, known as "coloreds" in South Africa, and to an Indian lawyer.
He considered naming a black to his inner circle, he said, but decided this would be viewed as tokenism and distract attention from negotiations with black groups on the country's future.


Voters Viewing Tax Bill, And Saying They'll Pay
Nobody is cheering the arrival of new taxes, but many voters here say they accept what seemed so hard for voters to accept during the glory days of the 1980's: that new taxes are simply necessary.
President Clinton's appeal to patriotism and a sense of national need is not taken lightly by people like Jim Seros, a restaurateur visiting from Detroit who declares, "I know it's going to cost me a little bit, but that's O.K.," or Steve Nudelberg, a 32-year old telecommunications executive in Miami, who says, "I'm in an income bracket where it actually affects me dramatically, but I'm a firm believer that at some point somebody's going to have to sacrifice."


Peru's Leader Clears a Path With Sharp Elbows
One morning in January, Alberto Arciniegas, a retired army general, looked out of his bedroom window here and noticed that his armed guards had disappeared.
A few weeks earlier, General Arciniegas presided over a secret military tribunal that imposed a life sentence on Abimael Guzman Reynoso, founder of the Shining Path guerrilla movement.
Suddenly stripped of Government protection, the general started to hear the terrorist clock ticking loudly.


Just When Life Seems Easy, The Devils Find That It Isn't
Except for the Aleksandr Semak line, which includes Claude Lemieux and Valery Zelepukin, nothing worked well for the Devils tonight against the Quebec Nordiques, the team with the league's best record on the road.
From Chris Terreri in goal to the defense to the forwards and the power- play units, everything the Devils did left something to be desired for a team with high aspirations.


Lee Polk, TV Writer And a Producer, 69; Won Emmy in 1986
Lee Polk, a television producer, director and writer who specialized largely in programs for children, died on Friday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 69 and lived in Manhattan.
His daughter Joanne Polk said the cause was leukemia.


CHRONICLE
BRENT SCOWCROFT, adviser to three presidents and most recently President George Bush's national security adviser, has received an honorary knighthood for his contributions to Anglo-American relations, The Associated Press reported.
An honorary knighthood is the highest accolade that Britain can bestow on a foreigner, and it has gone to 58 Americans, including Presidents Ronald Reagan and Dwight D. Eisenhower, Henry Ford 2d, Paul Mellon and Sidney Poitier.


Fernandez's Success Wasn't a Fluke
The spin in the clubhouse is as fierce as that after any presidential debate.
It is spin so great that it qualifies as torque: Injuries did in the Mets in 1992.
The season was freakish.
The failure was an aberration.
Today, a formal news release was handed out in the clubhouse providing a chronology of surgery on players.


Al Pacino Confronts A Gala, Kudos, Fame And His Own Shyness
Al Pacino, Hollywood's legendary shy guy, was playing against type.
The theory, he said in his raspy voice, is "if you bring the body, the mind will follow."
The body, outlined in exploding flashbulbs, was standing outside the Grand Ballroom of the Waldorf-Astoria on Saturday night.
The actor, who had just received two Academy Award nominations, was being honored by the American Museum of the Moving Image at a gala charity dinner for 700 luminaries from the worlds of film, theater, society and publishing.


World Economies


New Investor Gives The Post $3 Million
The New York Post obtained a major new investor yesterday who could help to stabilize the newspaper, which has been buffeted by hard times, the bankruptcy of its current owner and the legal problems of its incoming publisher.
Abraham Hirschfeld, a multimillionaire real-estate developer and perennial New York political candidate, has invested $3 million in The Post and will become chairman of the board, according to a joint statement issued yesterday by Mr.
Hirschfeld and Steven Hoffenberg, who obtained court approval on Friday to buy the newspaper.


Dance in Review
Truus Bronkhorst  Theater for the New City
Truus Bronkhorst's "Black Blossom" never flowered into choreographic or political significance.
The production, offered on Saturday night, was the second attraction of the United States-Netherlands Touring and Exchange Project, which is bringing three Dutch theater and dance groups to the United States this season.


The Homeless Fare Far Worse in Yet Another Winter Storm


A Ballet Director Resigns
Joyce Moffatt, the executive director of the San Francisco Ballet, has resigned, effective June 30.
Ms.
Moffatt, a former administrator at American Ballet Theater, joined the San Francisco company as general manager in 1987 and was named director last year.
Ms.
Moffatt said her resignation had been prompted by a desire to pursue other career interests.


Revival for Party Line on Soviet Coup
With two months to go before he and 11 co-defendants stand trial on charges of high treason for their role in the hard-line Communist coup in August 1991, Anatoly I. Lukyanov is not entertaining second thoughts.
When not helping the old Communist Party struggle to its feet, the wily and versatile former chairman of the Soviet Parliament, which is now defunct, has been polishing off a new cycle of sonnets, while awaiting publication of a more prosaic work, "The Coup -- Fake and Real."


Worst of Weather Evokes Best in This Champion
It took the worst weather of the week for Diann Roffe-Steinrotter to come alive here and show that when it comes to the giant slalom, she's still the ski racer to beat.
As the Olympic silver medalist in the giant slalom last year in France, Roffe-Steinrotter came to the Subaru United States Alpine championships here this week with a reputation as big as all outdoors.
But she had been on a losing streak, despite her domination of the national event last year with gold medals in three events.
That changed today, the last day for the women in this competition.
Roffe-Steinrotter, a 25-year-old skier from Potsdam, N.Y., streaked down a course laced with 45-mile-an-hour gusts of wind, and blowing snow.
She finished first, with a total from two runs of 2 minutes 8.04 seconds.
In second-place was Julie Parisien, of Auburn, Me., in 2:09.12; Heidi Voelker, of Pittsfield, Mass., was third in 2:09.57.
No Sense Complaining
The women competed in conditions that Parisien said would have caused World Cup officials to cancel a race.
But Roffe-Steinrotter said the weather turned out to be an advantage.
"I grew up in the East," she said, referring to the cold, icy slopes where she learned to ski.
"Let other people stand up at the top and complain. It doesn't make much sense when you have a job to do."
It has been a tough year for Roffe-Steinrotter.
She has not been able to duplicate her 1992 season, which included a spectacular run on the World Cup circuit and a No. 3 ranking in the world giant slalom standing.
"For me, maybe I have been trying too hard," Roffe-Steinrotter said.
"My expectations at the beginning of the season were too high. Maybe I put too much pressure on myself and forgot to ski with the freedom you need to ski with." A Trying Year
The 21-year-old Parisien has also overcome a trying year.
Ranked No. 1 in the world in slalom at the beginning of this season, she won the first World Cup slalom, at Park City, Utah.
But she was sidelined temporarily in January with a knee injury, and is still reeling from the death in December of her brother, Jean Paul.
But in the championships here, Parisien regained some of her prowess.
Besides the giant slalom, she won a silver medal in the super giant slalom, and a bronze in the slalom.
She also won a gold medal in the combined, a total of all four events including the downhill.
"I'm a little disappointed in my downhill," Parisien said.
"I was seventh, and I definitely think I should have been in the top five. But over all, I'm psyched. I pulled myself together after being really tired after Japan."
As did the other world-class skiers here, Parisien competed two weeks ago in the world Alpine championships in Shizukuishi, Japan, where she won a silver medal in the slalom.
A Near Sweep
This is the third year in a row that Voelker, 23, won a bronze medal at the nationals.
"I'm very happy with my third-place," she said, noting that the competition has been more intense than in other years.
The United States women's team excelled here, winning 13 of 15 medals.
The other two went to Lindsey Roberts of Canada.
Picabo Street, of Sun Valley, Idaho, who has emerged lately as a major world-class contender, won the silver in the combined; and Kristi Terzian, of Park City, Utah, won the bronze.
The American men were under much more pressure from the Canadians.
So far, the Canadian men's team has won four medals, compared with five for the United States.
The men are scheduled to race their giant slalom on Monday.


Arts Still Flourish At La Guardia H. S.
To the Editor:
"As Schools Trim Budgets, the Arts Lose Their Place" (front page, Feb. 3) gives New York City credit for having established the High School of Music and Art, the country's first specialized public school for the arts, but then ignores that this school and its mission are alive and well.


On Malcolm X Anniversary, Film Plays at Rikers


A Lot Stirring in Big East In a Race to Move Ahead
Foremost on the Big East agenda are Connecticut's surge, St.
John's concern about Shawnelle Scott's tender ankle and Seton Hall's on-going effort to distance itself from the rest of the pack.
UConn, which held on to edge Pittsburgh, 81-80, on Saturday night for its fourth straight victory, will play Seton Hall at the Hartford Civic Center on Saturday in the conference's most important game of the week.


Clinton's Point Men Face Doubts About Their Edge
After the fall of Speaker Jim Wright, an arm-twister who alienated many lawmakers, House Democrats looked for integrity, calm and conciliation.
They turned to Thomas S. Foley and Richard A. Gephardt.
The two leaders buried the poisons of the Wright era, but now they face a very different and bigger challenge: how to steer the biggest legislative package to come through the House since Lyndon B. Johnson's Great Society program in the 1960's.


Risk Is Seen In Municipal Bond Rally
President Clinton's plan to impose higher taxes and cut the deficit by $500 billion within four years gave municipal bond prices a boost last week, as investors turned to these tax-exempt securities as a hedge against any tax increase.
But some analysts cautioned that the rush to these tax shelters has created a greater demand than the current available supply of municipal bonds can accommodate.
As a result, analysts said, investors are paying premium prices for the available issues, and some may end up buying bonds they might normally shun as too risky.


Patents
AS Uwe (Rocky) Rockenfeller sees it, the standard American kitchen of the new millennium will have a countertop appliance that works like a reverse microwave oven, quickly refrigerating food and freezing ice cubes in as little as four minutes.
Mr.
Rockenfeller, 34, the founder, president and chief executive of Rocky Research in Boulder City, Nev., last week received his second patent in quick-chill technology, this time for a device that would function as a portable cooler but might also supplement a home refrigerator.
In November he got a patent for what he calls the Ultra-Fast Freezer Appliance, the reverse microwave.


Ralph Stillman, 86; Headed Grace Bank
Ralph S. Stillman, the president of the Grace National Bank of New York from 1954 to 1965, died on Thursday at New York Hospital.
He was 86 and lived in Pawling, N.Y.
The cause of death was a heart attack, said his wife, the former Eugenia Alcaine.


Jordan-Majerle: Game Within Game
The All-Star Game offered a preview today of Dan Majerle, one of the best defenders in the National Basketball Association, versus Michael Jordan, the best player in the world.
Is Majerle vs.
Jordan, The Series, coming next Spring?
"If we both get to The Finals, that will be one the highlights," the Bulls' Jordan said of the matchup between himself and his All Star shadow, the Suns' Majerle, after the Western Conference outlasted Jordan and the East, 135-132, in overtime.
"I can already see the stories in the newspapers."


CHRONICLE
JUDITH ROSSNER finished her 10th novel, "Olivia or the Weight of the Past," on Thursday -- just in time, she said, for a party.
Tonight the directors of the Writers Room are celebrating the 15th anniversary of the room, which occupies an entire floor at 153 Waverly Place in Greenwich Village.
It offers up to 150 writers both solitude in which to create and camaraderie in which to share their craft.


Lobbyists Hearing 'Taxes' But Don't Cry 'War' (Yet)
Understand, please, that Tom Donohue, the president and pre-eminent lobbyist for the American Trucking Associations and its 4,000 members, does not actually oppose President Clinton's package of tax increases and deficit reductions.
Not even its tax on energy sources, including the diesel fuel that is the truckers' lifeblood.
"People want Bill Clinton to succeed," he said.
"We're not going to fight it. We're just going to work with Congress to assure that it is
fair
."


Once Praised by Judges, Contractor Faces Prison
Everyone who met Nicholas Pastoressa -- politicians, top law-enforcement officials, judges and financiers -- came away charmed by his smile and impressed by his business acumen.
In less than a decade, the former New York City police officer and City Hall guard nurtured an idea for courthouse security into a multimillion-dollar nationwide business.
By employing retired police officers, Mr.
Pastoressa offered more experienced personnel than rival bidders for Federal contracts.
Soon, he provided 1,500 private guards at Federal courthouses in 20 states, and drew lavish praise from an illustrious roster of officials including William Webster, then the director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the United States Attorneys in Manhattan and Brooklyn and three chief Federal judges in the region.


CBS Buys a Theater To Keep Letterman On New York's Stage
CBS has bought the Ed Sullivan Theater on Broadway to serve as the new studio home for David Letterman, making it certain that his late-night show will continue to be produced in New York after he switches to CBS from NBC this summer, CBS officials said yesterday.
The deal, which was concluded on Saturday and is to be announced this morning, includes the 14-story office building adjacent to the theater.
CBS paid about $4 million, and expects to pay "several million more" for renovation, said Edward Grebow, the network's senior vice president of operations.


No Headline
We were dumb.
The state is different than Texas.
We really thought California was a cohesive community of interests -- you know, Southern California, Northern California, it's all California.
It's not.
It's more like Bosnia and Herzegovina. -- MICHAEL R. LEVY, founder of Texas Monthly, on his failed California magazine.  [ D6:2. ]


Accounts
*
Pennant Systems, Norwalk, Conn., an I.B.M.
Corp. subsidiary that manufactures, sells and services printers, narrowed the review on its estimated $5 million account to four finalists: Keiler &amp; Co., Farmington, Conn.; Korey, Kay &amp; Partners, New York; Partners &amp; Shevack, New York, and Poppe Tyson , New York.
A decision is expected early next month. *
Bali Co., Winston-Salem, N.C., to Long, Haymes &amp; Carr Inc., Winston-Salem, to handle the intimate apparel company's account, previously at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, New York.
Long, Haymes also handles advertising for Hanes.
Bali and Hanes are owned by the Sara Lee Corp.
Billings were not disclosed.


In Miami's Wali Jones, The N.B.A. Discovers It Has a Conscience
Anyone here with a young Horace Grant fan at home could be an instant hit by returning with a pair of red goggles that replicate the futuristic look of the Bulls' hard-working forward.
As of yesterday afternoon, there were still plenty remaining for the non-negotiable price of $66.
"You mean $16," an interested purchaser corrected the salesman at the raucous All-Star store set up by the National Basketball Association this weekend.


Mexico's Toll Roads Not Taken
Like the United States in the 1950's, Mexico is building an interstate highway system so goods and people can speed along at 60 miles an hour or more instead of crawling at half that pace on antiquated roads.
But hardly any big trucks, and not many cars, use the fancy new tollway from here to Toluca, on Mexico City's western outskirts -- three smooth asphalt lanes in each direction.
This is a major problem for a country that aspires to become a powerful exporter of goods to the United States, moving most of them by truck.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Friday about the proposed space station referred incorrectly to the source of protests against rumored plans to cancel it.
Many protests came from the aerospace industry, not from space scientists.


Dance in Review
Eduardo Zeiger and Dancers Merce Cunningham Studio
When Eduardo Zeiger kept his dances simple at the Merce Cunningham Theater on Feb. 14, they were pleasant.
When he ventured into choreographic wildernesses tangled with symbolism, it was difficult to follow him on his journeys.


A Little Girl Speaks, and a Nation Listens
For years, Mary Somoza has been an advocate for disabled people, lobbying elected officials, speaking before a Congressional subcommittee and serving on various task forces.
But she marveled yesterday over how much attention the cause has received since her 9-year-old daughter met President Clinton on national television Saturday morning.
"It's just snowballed," Mrs.
Somoza said as reporters waited in the hallway of the family's West Side apartment for a chance to speak to her daughter Anastasia, who is disabled.
"It's good that this issue is getting this much attention. And it's good that it was my daughter who put it in the spotlight. She's going to be the advocate when she grows up." Emotional Appeal
In an emotional appeal during a question-and-answer session with children that was broadcast by ABC, Anastasia pleaded that her twin be allowed to attend regular classes rather than special-education classes at their elementary school.
The President, however, said he could do no more than speak out about the issue.


Essay; Calling a Tail a Leg
If you call a tail a leg, went the riddle attributed to Lincoln, how many legs has a dog?
The answer: four, "because calling a tail a leg doesn't make it a leg."
Red-eyed with lack of sleep, racing to make a self-imposed deadline like bright students cramming before an exam, the Clintonites slapped together a dog's breakfast of a budget proposal -- and did not like what they saw.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Voters in a survey say more taxes are simply necessary.
Meanwhile, Washington lobbyists are wary of the Clinton package, reluctant to join the battle lest they be swatted down.  [ Page A1. ]
The net increase in jobs from the free trade pact will evaporate after 15 to 20 years, according to two academic experts on trade whose forecasts of short-term job gains were heavily cited last year by the Bush Administration.  [ D1. ]


Abroad at Home; The Two Clintons
One quality above all made President Clinton's economic speech a stunning success as he delivered it.
That was the self-confidence he radiated.
When he ad-libbed jabs at mocking Republicans, there was an inner security that brought Franklin Roosevelt to mind.
That quality made the Clinton speech much more effective than was perceived in the blinkered vision of Washington.
In Washington it brought warning that this or that interest group would be offended.
In the country most people admired Mr.
Clinton's courage in asking them to do hard things.


INSIDE
Church, State and the Deaf
A dispute over providing a sign-language interpreter in a Catholic school could lead to a new standard on separation of church and state.
Page A10.
Backer for New York Post
The developer Abraham Hirschfeld is investing $3 million in the newspaper and its new ownership.
Page B1.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:


Treasury to Sell Bills and Notes This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week begins with the regular weekly auction today of new three- and six-month bills.
Two-year notes will be auctioned on Tuesday, followed by a five-year note auction on Wednesday.
Traders said that by late in the day on Friday the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 2.91 percent and the rate on a six-month bill was 3.00 percent.
In when-issued trading, the two-year issue was being offered at a price to yield 4.01 percent and the five-year to yield 5.29 percent.


Man Sleeping on Subway Is Set Afire by Youths
A group of teen-age boys set fire to a 37-year-old man as he slept aboard a subway train in Queens early yesterday, the transit police said.
The rider was badly burned in the attack, and the youths escaped.
A witness told the police that he had also been dozing in the same car on the train when he was awakened by loud voices and saw about five youths laughing at a man whose clothing was on fire, said Officer Loretta Lorendi, a transit police spokeswoman.


Slipping Free From Entrapment's Tangled Web
WHEN Ginger Labensky, the 34-year-old daughter of a retired New York City police officer, first told her parents about Aaron Cohen, they were delighted: finally, a nice Jewish boy.
Generally, Ms.
Labensky's relationships with men had not been the stuff of storybook romance.
At least not the storybooks she would read to the pre-school classes she taught lovingly at a Long Island community center.
The last man with whom she had been involved was a construction worker who also was a retired member of the Pagans motorcycle club.
They had become engaged while he was in prison.


Columbia Torn by Disciplinary Hearing
Twenty-five years after a series of student protests roiled Columbia University, students and administrators are again wrangling over how far students may go to protest an action by the university -- and how harsh the punishment should be for those who do so illegally.
Tomorrow, seven students will be tried in a university disciplinary hearing on charges stemming from a protest in December over Columbia's plans to turn the Audubon Theater and Ballroom, where Malcolm X was assassinated on Feb. 21, 1965, into a biomedical-research complex.


Missing High School Star Found Dead of Gunshots
Shilie Turner, the 17-year-old high school track star from West Philadelphia who vanished in the early morning of Jan. 18, was found dead Saturday afternoon in the city's Fairmount Park.
Turner's body was discovered by a man walking his dog in a wooded area near a music hall and tennis courts.
Sgt.
Dennis Murray of the Philadelphia police homicide division said that an autopsy completed yesterday had determined that Turner died of multiple gunshot wounds.
Murray said there were signs of decomposition in the body, but that it was impossible to tell how long Turner had been dead.


Ferruccio Lamborghini, 76, Dies; A Top Maker of Stylish Sports Cars
Ferruccio Lamborghini, who founded the industrial company that vied with Ferrari and Maserati to produce the most stylish of Italian sports cars, died on Saturday in Silvestrini Hospital in Perugia, the ANSA news agency reported.
He was 76.
Mr. Lamborghini suffered a heart attack on Feb. 5, said his son, Tonino Lamborghini.


Weprin Wants Hearings to Help Pick Comptroller
Faced with the unusual legislative task of choosing a new state comptroller, Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin wants to use committees of the Assembly and the Senate to interview candidates for the job, his aides said today.
Because the new comptroller will almost certainly be a Democrat, many of the candidates and their political strategists believe the decision will ultimately be made by Mr.
Weprin and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
But the method Mr.
Weprin proposes would give the selection process at least the appearance of openness.


Bronx Isn't Dumping Ground for Homeless
To the Editor:
"One Room, $2,250 a Month" (news article, Jan. 31) captures the frustration that the Bronx has experienced in dealing with New York City's policy of placing homeless families in privately owned motels.


On Malcolm X Anniversary, Film Plays at Rikers


Israeli Electors Select the Two Chief Rabbis
After a campaign sullied by charges of mischief and wrongdoing, Israeli rabbinical elders and political leaders chose Chief Rabbis today for the Ashkenazic and Sephardic branches of Judaism.
The election may affect the Government because the results seem to strengthen Shas, a party of fervently Orthodox Sephardic Jews and the only religious party in the coalition.
Shas supported both winning candidates.


A Night to Remember Is Punctuated by Chavez's Victory for the People
One day later, the spectacle of Saturday night hadn't quite subsided.
Don King had finished taking his bows, Julio Cesar Chavez had finished smiling and waving to the crowd, and Terry Norris had finished taunting and baiting Chavez about a fight to prove which of them was best.
But the event itself -- the 130,000 fans packed into Estadio Azteca, the laser show, the police in riot gear -- was still overwhelming in memory.


Berlin Journal; Stepson of German Politics: Is Fatherland Proud?
The thousands of men and women who hold elective office in Germany are a tremendously varied group, emerging from backgrounds rich and poor and ranging in ideology from Marxist to crypto-fascist.
With perhaps only a single exception, however, all have one thing in common: they were born in Germany.
That exception (and he believes there are no others) is Ismail Hakki Kosan.
He says he is the only foreign-born citizen who has successfully challenged the unspoken taboo against nonnative politicians.
From a remote Kurdish village in eastern Turkey, he has risen to membership in the Berlin City Council.


Review/Theater; A Mind, A Body And Their Evolution
Garry Marshall is the Hollywood showman who gave the world "Pretty Woman," "Laverne and Shirley" and the television edition of "The Odd Couple." Lowell Ganz is the co-author, with Babaloo Mandel, of "City Slickers" and "Splash," among other frisky screen comedies.
So why have these men hitched up to write a play that drops names like Baudelaire and Schopenhauer, uses Beethoven's Ninth as incidental music and concludes with a recitation of "The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock," an Eliot poem so grave that even "Cats" wouldn't paw it?
Or, to put it another way: What is it about the theater that makes otherwise sensible citizens of show business lose their minds?


On Rikers, 'Malcolm X' And Director Find Fans
Maliek Malcolm, a prisoner on Rikers Island, said he experienced a flood of emotions yesterday after watching Spike Lee's movie, "Malcolm X."
"It made me realize this is not the last stop," said Mr.
Malcolm, who is serving up to six years for assault.
"I know now that whatever the mind can conceive is what the mind can achieve. I feel like something will eventually penetrate this darkness that I've gotten myself into."


Review/Rock; Gather No Moss, Take No Prisoners, But Be Cool
Keith Richards's genius is in his fingers, as they flick brazen rhythm-guitar chords and barbed-wire leads.
At the Beacon Theater on Friday night, opening an engagement that lasts through Wednesday, he also showed talent in his legs.
Strolling as he played, suddenly pivoting, perching on one foot like a heron, tipping his ankles toward the floor or finishing a phrase with a high kick, Mr.
Richards had body language to match his music: casual, sly, cocky and insolently graceful.
When he's not working with the Rolling Stones, Mr.
Richards seems to make records and tour for the sheer pleasure of playing.
The concert on Friday night lasted more than two hours, paced as casually as a club set, with Mr.
Richards feeling free to smoke a leisurely cigarette between songs.
His partner in the Stones, Mick Jagger, worked frantically to hold onto his hyperactive image during a closed-circuit concert telecast on Feb. 9, coming dangerously close to self-parody.
Mr.
Richards, by contrast, thrives on understatement and concentrated guitar playing, radiating a consummate rock-and-roll cool.


A Big Day Even Bigger For Dehere
Terry Dehere stood back and listened this afternoon as his coach, P. J. Carlesimo, heaped praise upon his star guard.
Later, Dehere would joke that he thought Carlesimo was talking about someone else.
Indeed, during his four seasons at Seton Hall, Dehere has been pushed, prodded and challenged by the volatile Carlesimo.


Ex-Executives Form Own California Shop
Three former top executives at the San Francisco office of DDB Needham Worldwide have formed their own shop after an acrimonious departure from the agency.
Scott Heimbrodt, Tony Broadbent and Andrew Hyett said they have opened HBH Advertising in San Francisco, where each will serve as a managing partner.
Mr.
Heimbrodt, 41, is also general manager; Mr.
Broadbent, 45, is also creative director, and Mr.
Hyett, 42, is also director of business development.


Alvin Schonfeld, Securities Executive, 74
Alvin Schonfeld, a retired Wall Street executive, died yesterday at the Humana Hospital in Phoenix.
He was 74 and lived in Phoenix.
His son, Robert, said the cause was heart failure.


Books of The Times; People With Bad Luck and Even Worse Behavior
Van Gogh's Room at Arles  Three Novellas  By Stanley Elkin  312 pages.
Hyperion. $22.95.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Sara Zahn  Eighty-Eight's 228 West 10th Street Greenwich Village Through March 31


Baker and Mosbacher Are Hired by Enron
The Enron Corporation said today that it had hired former Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and former Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher to help develop overseas projects.
Mr.
Baker and Mr.
Mosbacher have signed consulting agreements with Enron, the nation's largest natural gas company, and will have an opportunity to invest in any projects they develop, the company said.
Details of the agreements were not disclosed.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the rise in municipal bond prices last week misstated the goal of President Clinton's plan to cut the deficit.
It would reduce the deficit by a total of $325 billion over the next four years.


Executive Changes
CEM CORP., Charlotte, N.C., a maker of microwave-based testing instruments, named Richard N. Decker treasurer and chief financial officer.
DORNA U.S.A., New York, a sports and entertainment marketing unit of Dorna Promocion del Deporte S.A., Madrid, appointed Harry L. Usher president and chief executive.


Austin Makes Return
TRACY AUSTIN , at 30, will play tournament tennis for the first time in almost four years when she faces RENNAE STUBBS today in the first round of the Evert Cup at Indian Wells, Calif.
Austin has no tournaments lined up after the Evert Cup. (AP)


Court Fight Over Parade Continues
The longtime sponsor of the St.
Patrick's Day Parade contended in court yesterday that New York City was threatening this year's march by insisting that a homosexual organization be allowed to participate.
Ernest L. Mathews Jr., a lawyer for the sponsor, the Ancient Order of Hibernians, said in a hearing in Federal District Court in Manhattan that city officials had withheld the required parade permit "because they don't agree with our message."


A Politician He's Not
DICK MacPHERSON , the former New England Patriots and Syracuse University football coach, will not run for mayor of Syracuse.


Advice to the Shopworn
COMPUTER enthusiasts are a generous lot, generous with their time and information, and eager, sometimes to a fault, to share their hard-won knowledge with others.
A recent column here of excerpts from readers' letters brought an outpouring of advice.
Richard M. Gummere Jr. of Barrytown, N.Y., had asked about getting software for his "wood-burning" old Kaypro computer, which uses the now-eclipsed CP/M operating system.
Well, like a star from the days of black-and-white movies, the Kaypro may be faded, but it still has its admirers, and even lovers. (A friend still imagines going on a date with Alexis Smith.)


Robert Rafsky, 47, Media Coordinator For AIDS Protesters
Robert Rafsky, a public relations executive and advocate for people with AIDS, who confronted Bill Clinton during the presidential campaign, died Saturday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 47 and lived in Brooklyn.
The cause of death was AIDS, said his former wife, Barbara Krolik.


You Can't Lock Up City Hall and Toss the Key; Heavy Lifting in Boston
To the Editor:
"Older Cities Relying More on Suburbs' Taxes" (news article, Feb. 12) reinforces false stereotypes, implying that older cities are wards of the state and the wealthier suburbs.
A more rigorous analysis may prove otherwise, at least for some cities.
Take, for example, those larger cities like New York City, Newark and Hartford.
You never calculate how much in revenue these cities generate for their states.
In Massachusetts, Boston generates almost one in four dollars of state revenue.
Do we get that money back?
Not even close.


4 Concerts Without Masur
Kurt Masur, the New York Philharmonic music director, has withdrawn from four Philharmonic concerts because of illness.
James Levine, the Metropolitan Opera conductor, is to replace Mr.
Masur at the Philharmonic Pension Fund Benefit concert at 8 tonight in Avery Fisher Hall.
Jahja Ling, the resident conductor of the Cleveland Orchestra, is to make his Philharmonic debut at the subscription concerts at 8 P.M. on Thursday and 11 A.M. on Friday in Avery Fisher Hall.
Mr.
Ling is also to conduct the Philharmonic at 8 P.M. on Saturday in Tilles Center, on the C. W. Post campus of Long Island University, Brookville.
Information: 875-5030.


Black History Concert
Brother John Sellers, the folk and spiritual singer and a longtime associate of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, is to perform with Carolyn Bird and the Inspirational Choir on Sunday at 3 P.M. at Riverside Church, Riverside Drive at 122d Street, Morningside Heights.
The concert will celebrate Black History Month.
Suggested admission: $10.
Information: (212) 222-5900.


Dublin Journal; Ireland Tightens Its Belt, but Smiles on Academe
The ancient Celts were said to fear that the sky would fall on their heads, and many Irish today understand such anxiety, as their public institutions seem to be failing them in economic hard times.
Unemployment, near 20 percent, is the highest in the European Community; the Irish punt was devalued by 10 percent at the beginning of this month, meaning that food and fuel prices will probably go up; mortgage rates have been rising sharply, to 14 percent.
The Government seems unable to inspire confidence that better days are coming soon.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11 CLINTON SEEKS AID OF U.N. CHIEF
President Clinton invited the U.N.
Secretary General to meet to try to win his support for U.S. plans to airdrop relief supplies into Bosnia and Herzegovina.
But the Secretary General wants the airdrop to be coordinated with and commanded by U.N. forces in Bosnia.
A1


Nasdaq Index Falls 1.7% But Dow Stocks Are Up
The stock market accelerated its screeching swerve away from Nasdaq stocks yesterday as investors piled into the Dow industrials and utilities.
The Nasdaq composite index, home of technology companies large and small, fell 1.7 percent even as the Dow Jones industrial average rose 20.81 points, to 3,342.99.


HOME DEPOT (N)
Home Depot Inc., whose warehouse stores have become a mecca for self-appointed home repair experts, put in another record-breaking financial performance in the fourth quarter.
"I think Home Depot will continue to be a great growth story through the end of the decade," said Christopher E. Vroom, a retail analyst with Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons.
He estimates that the company's earnings will increase 33 percent this year, to $1.45 a share.


Air Canada reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Oh, Canada: Men Finish 1-2-3 in Giant Slalom
A blizzard swept through today, but its ferocity was no match for the Canadian Alpine team.
Canadian skiers won all three medals in the men's giant slalom event.
It was a disappointing outcome for the United States Ski Team, which had hoped to dominate the Subaru United States Alpine championship.
But Canada posed a threat from the beginning of the national race series, which began here last Thursday.


ASPIN IN HOSPITAL FOR CARDIAC TESTS
Defense Secretary Les Aspin was hospitalized late Sunday for shortness of breath and is in intensive care, the Pentagon said today.
Doctors at Georgetown University Hospital said the breathing problems of Mr.
Aspin, who is 54, resulted from a "mild pre-existing heart condition" that was aggravated by a fever-inducing series of immunization shots he took Saturday for a planned trip to Somalia, a Pentagon statement said.


Computer Makers Told To Get Involved in Rules
The chairman of the House subcommittee on telecommunications warned today that the computer industry was in danger of losing out in the emerging but potentially enormous business of providing computer services to American homes and offices unless it became involved in the Federal standard-setting that will occur this year.
The panel's chairman, Representative Edward J. Markey, Democrat of Massachusetts, told a gathering of computer executives here that under the Clinton Administration, with its penchant for technology policy, crucial steps will be taken this year in setting the nation on the path toward establishing a so-called data superhighway that will eventually reach every home in the country.


U.S. School Program Criticized Anew
The Chapter 1 program, the Federal Government's main effort to improve basic academic skills of poor children, was called outdated yesterday by two new studies, the second and third reports in three months to criticize the program.
One of the new reports, released by the National Assessment of Chapter 1, concluded that the program did not do enough to help students improve their skills or to properly assess students' progress.
It also said some of the program's money was misdirected or poorly spent.


Lufkin Industries reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Government Mired in Muck
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey is caught in a squeeze play between the Environmental Protection Agency and the Army Corps of Engineers.
Two years and ten months is long enough for those Federal agencies to resolve their differences and let the Port Authority proceed with essential dredging.
The issue is whether to allow dredging of dioxin-contaminated silt in Newark Bay.
The accumulating muck threatens to clog berths for ships that carry everything from scrap metal to canned foods.
The problem is that cancer-causing dioxins in the sediment can, at high enough levels, contaminate fish when deposited at an ocean dump site off Sandy Hook, N.J.


At Murder Arraignment of Two 10-Year-Olds, British Crowd Erupts
Shouting abuse and wrestling with police officers, a crowd of angry protesters rushed police vans carrying two 10-year-old boys away from a Liverpool courthouse this morning, after their arraignment on charges of murder and kidnapping in the brutal killing of a 2-year-old.
Six people were arrested as a result of the brief melee, the latest episode of public fury here since the toddler, James Bulger, disappeared from his mother's side at a downtown shopping center on Feb. 12, and was later spotted on security cameras being led away by two boys.
His battered body was discovered two days later beside a railroad embankment.


Nobody Needs Nukes
In the wake of the first and second treaties on reducing strategic arms, many security experts say the world can afford a long pause in nuclear arms control.
They are wrong.
Worldwide, there are about 40,000 nuclear warheads with a total destructive power more than a million times that of the Hiroshima bomb.


CalMat Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


On My Mind; The Driver's License
One day when the United Nations was young, a British delegate delivered a warning: This place is going to choke to death with new members.
Take care, he said, or instead of the 50-odd countries we have now we will wind up with 75, maybe even 80.


Dress Barn (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 23


Foster Wheeler reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Collection of Soil Serves as a Reminder


Track and Field; Hammer Thrower Reaps Benefits of Being Indoors
In 1987, Lance Deal, an outstanding hammer thrower outdoors, entered his first formal indoor competition in the 35-pound weight throw at the USA/Mobil track and field championships.
He won with a throw of 74 feet 5 inches.
"At the time, I was just figuring to pick up a couple of hundred dollars in the Mobil Grand Prix," Deal said last week by telephone from his home in Eugene, Ore.


Price of Platinum Tumbles; Other Precious Metals Drop
Platinum futures prices skidded to their lowest point in more than a year yesterday as economic anxiety rose in Japan, the world's largest consumer of the metal.
Prices of other precious metals also fell.
On other commodity markets, oil futures rose; lumber continued to soar; livestock rose, and grains and soybeans ended mixed.


1993 Finds Mets Aiming to Connect the Bat to the Ball
The final club average for 1992 was .235, the worst mark for the Mets in nearly a quarter of a century.
Each member of the Mets took a piece of it with him -- a .209 or .223 -- a kind of radioactive artifact that couldn't be buried too deeply or fully extinguished from the psyche.
Say that number -- .235 -- out loud today, and people shake their heads or turn away or fall silent.
Tom McCraw, the man who might have taken the collective number most personally, absorbed it again today, without blinking.
In a Word: 'Sick'
"A pathetic season," said McCraw, the hitting instructor for the Mets.
"Crazy as it sounds, a club could hit .235 and get away with it better than we did. We did not do one of the minor things -- flyballs with a man at third, advancing a man with a bunt -- right or well. That .235 was a sick .235."


E.P.A. Plays a Dioxin Numbers Game in Newark Bay Dredging
To the Editor:
Although a reader would never guess it, most environmentalists and fishermen agree with Albert Cernadas of the International Longshoremen's Association that Newark Bay should be dredged (letter, Feb. 10).
What both groups do object to is the ocean dumping of the dredged spoils, which contain high levels of dioxin, in a prime fishing ground.


Review/Fashion; Galanos's Latest: Call It Top Spin
For more than 40 years, James Galanos has listened to his own music, orchestrating his own scores.
Never has his particular take on fashion, a marriage of technique and taste, seemed more topical or effective.
Starting with a loosening-up of suit jackets, shown most often over tunics and wide-leg pants, progressing through dinner suits with cutouts at the yoke, and ending with the chiffon dresses that have been his hallmark through the years, his new collection represents top-quality dressmaking at its best.
Galanos packed the 175 outfits he designed for spring into nine metal containers in Los Angeles.
They arrived in New York over the weekend, and he will spend the next 10 days showing them personally to retailers.
Then, he will take them on tour -- to stores in Houston, Dallas, Chicago and Palm Beach, Fla. -- to show to customers.


Metropolitan College Report
With tournament time approaching, the following is a look at area conferences in the National Collegiate Athletic Association.
DIVISION I


Chess
John Fedorowicz, a Manhattan grandmaster, was fascinated by Boris Men of Cleveland, his Round 14 opponent in the United States championship, which ended Dec. 20 in Durango, Colo.
Men, a 43-year-old former Soviet junior champion, hasn't played serious chess in 25 years.
A mathematician who emigrated to the United States in April 1991, he has taken up chess again.
He was invited to play in the prestigious United States championship after doing well in American tournaments, including a victory in the recent Ohio championship.


A New Clue to the Splendor That Was Troy
THE rich businessman and gifted amateur archeologist Heinrich Schliemann believed implicitly Homer's epic of the Trojan War.
It was as real to him as were Achilles and Hector, Paris and the beautiful Helen.
So was Troy, site of the bitter siege, which the German archeologist set out more than 120 years ago to find on the Aegean coast of Turkey.
Schliemann succeeded in 1873, revolutionizing the archeology of ancient Greece and establishing at least some possible historical basis for the Homeric tales.
His excavations revealed the outlines of an ancient city, about where Troy should have been, and uncovered a wealth of golden diadems, jewelry and goblets.
This was, he concluded incorrectly, the treasure of Priam, king of Homer's Troy. (It turned out to be from an earlier period.)


In '92, Largest Nassau Deficit
The Nassau County Comptroller's office closed the books today on the 1992 budget, revealing what everyone had expected: a $119.9 million deficit in the county's general fund.
Alan Gurien, the acting comptroller, said the deficit -- about $1 million less than earlier projections -- was the largest in county history.
The 1992 general fund budget was about $1.1 billion.


METRO DIGEST
WOMAN NOMINATED FOR TOP JUDICIAL POST
Governor Cuomo has nominated Judge Judith S. Kaye, a judicial centrist on the New York State Court of Appeals who has worked to expand individual rights under the State Constitution, to become the first female chief judge of New York's highest court.
A1.


Smoking Tied to Leukemia Risk
SMOKING cigarettes may increase a person's risk of contracting leukemia by 30 percent and cause up to 3,600 cases of adult leukemia a year in the United States, according to a new analysis.
Pooled results from 15 studies, which included a total of more than 4.5 million people, suggest that cigarettes may account for 14 percent of the nation's adult leukemia cases, researchers said.


Effects Are Unclear In Limits On Medical Residents' Hours
Four years and nearly $1 billion after New York State adopted the nation's strictest limits on the hours worked by medical residents, it is unclear whether the changes have helped or hurt patient care, doctors and hospital administrators say.
In many hospital departments, the rules are simply ignored, meaning that residents are working well beyond the 80-hour-a-week limit imposed by the state and are potentially more vulnerable to exhaustion and mistakes.


Reputed Mobster Sent To Hospital by Judge
A Federal judge has ruled that a reputed mobster dying of AIDS should spend his final days in a hospital bed rather than in jail, despite his "proven dangerous propensities."
Gregory Scarpa, 64 years old, who is under indictment on murder and racketeering charges, was freed from jail once before because of his illness, when he was placed under house arrest last September.
But he was returned to jail in January after he left his Brooklyn home Dec. 29 without permission for an encounter that ended with his being shot and seriously wounded.


Review/Ballet; A Surprise Premiere by Martins
The Reader's Digest approach to ballet programming receives a yearly nod when more than a dozen excerpts or short pieces fill up the closing night of the New York City Ballet's winter season.
The occasion is the annual Dancers' Emergency Fund Benefit at the New York State Theater, and the ninth edition was true to form, playing to a packed house on Sunday night despite a winter storm.
Fourteen entries, including "Sinfonia," an unscheduled premiere by Peter Martins, were on the bill, testimony to the company's determination to put onstage virtually every member who had escaped injury or the flu.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices to Decide if Anti-Bias Law Is Retroactive
The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether the Civil Rights Act of 1991, which restored some legal remedies for employment discrimination and expanded others, applies retroactively to the thousands of cases that were pending when President George Bush reluctantly signed it into law.
The Bush Administration took the view that the new law applied only to cases filed after Nov. 21, 1991, when the law went into effect, and most lower Federal courts have agreed.
The Clinton Administration has not taken a position but will almost certainly do so before the two cases that the Court accepted today are argued next fall.


Antarctic Hooved Animals Left Fossils
EVIDENCE has been found that hooved animals, today represented by such species as the horse, pig and antelope, once roamed the Antarctic landscape, now buried in ice.
The fossils were found last year on Seymour Island, off the tip of the Antarctic Peninsula, by scientists from the Argentine Antarctic Institute, based in Buenos Aires.


Filene's Basement Picks a New Agency
The Filene's Basement Corporation in Wellesley, Mass., said yesterday that it had named Deutsch/ Dworin Inc. in New York as its agency.
The off-price retail chain had its account at AC&amp;R Advertising in New York for two years before moving it in-house in December.
The retailer's total ad spending last year was estimated at $15 million.


Dean Witter Stake Is Sold In Offering
In a widely anticipated public offering, Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company sold 29.5 million shares of its Dean Witter brokerage firm subsidiary yesterday at $27 a share, or $796.5 million.
Demand for the shares was so strong that over the weekend underwriters increased the price range for the offering to between $25 and $27 a share, from an initial range of $23 to $25.


Clinton Asks U.N. Chief to Meet On Plan for Airdrop to Bosnians
Clearly intent on moving ahead with plans for an airdrop of relief supplies into Bosnia and Herzegovina, President Clinton invited the United Nations Secretary General today to meet with him on Tuesday in an effort to win his support for the initiative, Administration officials said.
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, while not opposing the plan outright, is insisting that any relief operation be coordinated with, and under the command of, United Nations forces already in Bosnia.
American officials say they have no problem coordinating with the United Nations but are clearly reluctant to cede military control of the operation.


Bonar Inc. reports earnings for Year to Nov 28


3-Part Financing Priced by Houston
The City of Houston and two utility districts priced a $219 million financing yesterday.
The offering includes $176.9 million of general obligation public improvement refunding bonds that are tentatively priced to yield from 2.50 percent in 1994 to 4.35 percent in 1998, 5.5 percent in 2003, 5.55 percent in 2008, and 5.65 percent.
The offering also includes about $33 million of Harris County, Tex., Municipal District bonds.
These bonds are priced to yield a maximum 5.70 percent for an issue due in 2010, with shorter-maturity serial bonds yielding from 2.55 percent in 1994 to 5.30 percent in 2005.


Teen-Agers Join in Supporting Brady Bill


Long-Bond Yield Hits 6.93% Low
President Clinton's economic program may be running into some obstacles in Congress and in the corporate world.
But it is having no problems in the bond market, where long-term interest rates continue to fall.
The yield on the 30-year Treasury bond dropped below 7 percent yesterday for the first time since the Treasury began issuing 30-year bonds regularly in 1977, as traders and investors continued to see positives for long-term interest rates in the program the President proposed last week.
The price of the bond jumped 28/32, to 10214/32, to yield 6.93 percent.


Christopher Visits Beirut to Affirm Support and Push Peace Talks
Secretary of State Warren Christopher flew by helicopter to Beirut today in a gesture intended to affirm the Clinton Administration's commitment to Lebanon's fragile sovereignty and to win support for a quick resumption of the Middle East peace talks.
Mr.
Christopher, the first senior American official to visit Beirut since Secretary of State George P. Shultz in 1983, flew from Larnaca, Cyprus, wearing an orange life vest over his suit.
His aircraft was accompanied by armed security guards in a convoy of three United States Army Blackhawk helicopters.
Along the way, he passed over the rubble of buildings bombed during the 18 years of Lebanon's war-scarred history and over new construction sites.


Nets' Second Season Starting With a Bang
Long before the break for the All-Star Game, Coach Chuck Daly peeked at the Nets' schedule for the resumption of the season and winced.
It starts with games in Charlotte on Tuesday night and in Boston on Wednesday night before a five-game homestand against Portland, the Knicks, Chicago, Orlando and Denver, the team in this stretch with a losing record.
That's why Daly called for a practice session tonight before boarding their charter flight to Charlotte.


AIDE TO TSONGAS INDICTED IN FRAUD
The chief fund-raiser for former Senator Paul E. Tsongas's campaign for the Democratic Presidential nomination was indicted today on charges of defrauding the campaign of more than $1 million.
The United States Attorney's office here termed it the largest case of campaign finance fraud in American history.
Nicholas A. Rizzo Jr., a longtime friend of Mr.
Tsongas, was arrested in his bed in suburban Andover at 7 A.M. today, and later pleaded not guilty to a 46-count Federal indictment.
He was released on $100,000 bail.


Stars O'Neal and Johnson Had Time to Sit and Think
After Sunday's All-Star Game, Shaquille O'Neal's father, obviously sticking up for his son, blasted Pat Riley for limiting the playing time of the much hyped rookie.
Of course a father complaining about a son's playing time is about as old as dirt, but by relying mainly on veterans during the final stages of the National Basketball Association All-Star Game, Riley clearly irked some young stars on his East squad.


Lending a Hand for the Final Time


Promising Moves in South Africa
South Africans neared a historic compromise last week that promises an orderly end to white minority rule.
Both President F. W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela's African National Congress have approved creating an interim government for five years.
This would follow elections in which 30 million blacks would be able to vote for the first time.
During the transition, minority parties would be entitled to cabinet office and important decisions would require two-thirds approval.


Wherein a President Easily Outpolls Pooh
Say what you will about his economic plan, President Clinton is outperforming Winnie-the-Pooh.
In an ABC special broadcast on Saturday morning, the President answered questions from a group of children gathered in the White House.
The broadcast, from 11:30 A.M. to 1:30 P.M. received an average rating of 6.4 in the nation's largest media markets, according to Nielsen Media Research.


More Snow Than Usual? What Seems to Be So Isn't
Many weather watchers suspect that Sunday's storm was further proof that there has been more winter this winter than usual.
But the National Weather Service said yesterday that there was actually less than wet the eye and that snowfall has been well below normal this winter.
"It just seems like more because there was so little last year," said Ignatius Camporeale, a Weather Service meteorologist in Manhattan.


Profits Don't Explain High Drug Costs
To the Editor:
Recently expressed concerns relating to the high price of pharmaceuticals and vaccines clearly have some validity ("President Assails 'Shocking' Prices of Drug Industry," front page, Feb. 13).
The cost of routine immunization may indeed be a deterrent to some parents, and the annual cost of routine medications for some Medicare recipients can approximate $10,000 a year.
Yet the comments of Administration spokesmen and the substance of press reports have done nothing to educate the public concerning two important reasons for the high cost of drugs and vaccines.
Excess profits and high research cost are not the whole problem.


Knicks Near Pace of '73 As the Second Half Begins
After compiling their best record at the All-Star Game break since they last won a league championship, the Knicks went back to practice today with a goal of improving in the season's homestretch.
The Knicks begin the final 32 games of the regular season at home tonight against the Minnesota Timberwolves with a 34-16 mark.
Twenty years ago, in 1972-73, the Knicks were 39-11 after 50 games, concluding the regular season 57-25.
That team went on to defeat the Los Angeles Lakers for National Basketball Association title.


Suffering in Silence Behind the Red Maple Forest
THE house stands behind a forest of red maples, like a hidden medieval castle.
In truth, it is not much to look at.
A two-bedroom bungalow with faded green siding.
But Robert and Emmanuella Pliscott loved the place.
It fit them.


Irish Deny Quid Pro Quo
Notre Dame, which successfully recruited star quarterback RON POWLUS of Berwick High School in Pennsylvania, offered an assistant coach's job to Powlus's high school coach, GEORGE CURRY .
Curry, USA Today's national high school coach of the year, confirmed the job offer, but said he turned it down.
Coach LOU HOLTZ denied that the offer to Curry was contingent upon Powlus coming to Notre Dame.


Can Winner Be a Loser? A Riddle For a Rebel
Onstage at the Beacon Theater on Friday night, Dave Pirner of Soul Asylum didn't look like an ordinary hero.
His long shanks of ratted blond hair were twirling in an unruly halo around his face, and his ripped, faded jeans exposed his legs from knee to shin.
He stomped around in tight, frustrated circles, flailing on an acoustic guitar, singing songs from Soul Asylum's current album "Grave Dancers Union" in a parched, unpolished voice.
The other members of the band -- Dan Murphy on guitar, Karl Mueller on bass and Grant Young on drums -- were bashing their hearts out, playing a kind of wanton, riff-laden brand of classic post-punk.
Sometimes the band missed a cue in a song.
Sometimes Mr.
Pirner missed a lyric.
Sometimes he looked as though he might lose himself completely.


Corrections
An obituary in some copies yesterday about Harvey Kurtzman, a cartoonist and historian of pop culture, misstated his role with Mad magazine.
Mr.
Kurtzman was the founder and creator of Mad.
The obituary also referred incorrectly to his book "From Aargh! to Zap!" It is his most recent book.
A corrected obituary appears today on page B7.


Trump Plaza to Sell Notes, In Bid to End Bank Scrutiny
Trump Plaza Funding Inc. filed today with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell as much as $325 million in mortgage notes due in 2001.
The move could help the developer Donald J. Trump to shed some personal debt and end bank supervision of his businesses.
The company, which owns and operates the Trump Plaza hotel and casino in Atlantic City, said it would use proceeds from the notes to redeem the company's outstanding $225 million of 12 percent mortgage bonds due in 2002.
In addition, $12 million will be used to pay the outstanding $17.5 million debt on its Regency hotel; $8.5 million will be used to redeem debt to Harrah's, Trump's previous partner in an Atlantic City casino operation, and $50 million will be distributed to the company to redeem its stock units, according to the filing.


Islanders Get Defenseman
The Islanders yesterday acquired minor league defenseman RICK HAYWARD from the Winnipeg Jets for future considerations.
Hayward played in 47 games for Moncton of the American Hockey League this season.
He had one goal, three assists and 233 minutes in penalties.
He will report to the Islanders' Capital District team in the A.H.L. (AP)


A New Job for Stein, Without a Race?
What's in a name?
For the New York City Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, it seems, everything.
Prodded by the Speaker, the City Council voted overwhelmingly yesterday to change the title of City Council President to a new name, Public Advocate, a move that many lawmakers saw as a prelude to eliminating the $4-million-a-year office altogether.


Review/Music; Prized for Ideas, Pianist Shows Why
David Owen Norris, an English pianist who is a professor at the Royal Academy of Music in London, was named the first Irving S. Gilmore Artist in 1991, and last Tuesday evening he collected part of the prize, a New York recital debut at the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater.
The prize is one of a growing number of important awards given for a musician's work over several years rather than in a competition performance.
Mr.
Norris was selected from 75 pianists in 22 countries by a panel that listened to concert recordings and attended recitals without the candidates' knowing they were under consideration.
Mr.
Norris's winnings include $250,000 in cash and concert fees, about 60 recitals and management and publicity services that will continue even after the next Gilmore Artist is chosen in 1994.
A news release says the Gilmore Foundation is even paying for a nanny to care for his two children while he is on tour.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Jane Bunnett  Sweet Basil


Europe Is Divided on Clinton's Plans
European governments are divided in their response to President Clinton's economic plan, gratified by his attempt to reduce the American budget deficit, but increasingly irked by his tough approach to trade issues.
Before the Clinton Administration came to power last month, there was widespread optimism here for improved trans-Atlantic ties.
European leaders felt that economic relations had reached a nadir under President George Bush's neglect of the dollar as it drifted downward and in the failure to reach a world trade accord.


Small Houses: Holding in the 80's, Or Back to the 70's
Fashion may be heading back to the 1970's, with long skirts, unstructured cardigans and bell-bottoms, but the jackets and short skirts of the 80's are not yet endangered species.
That's one of the messages sent out by designers taking part in the fall edition of the Fashion Coterie.
The Fashion Coterie, a three-day trade show at the Plaza Hotel that closes today, is a showcase for small design houses.
Since its beginnings in 1986 with 22 exhibitors and 200 visitors, it has grown to 220 exhibitors attracting 4,000 buyers from boutiques and specialty stores who, a month before big-name designers' runway shows, are seeking the latest fashion trends below high-fashion prices, usually under $1,000 an outfit.


Parents Plead Guilty In Starvation Death
The adoptive parents of a Nassau County boy who starved to death last year while in their care, for which the state was paying $800 a month, pleaded guilty in Mineola, L.I., yesterday to charges stemming from the case.
Carmencita Mitchell, the adoptive mother, pleaded guilty to manslaughter in the second degree in the death of 7-year-old Weyland Brown Mitchell, whose weight had dropped from 40 pounds in 1990 to 24 at the time of his death.


Loud Noise May Offer a Way to Save Fish From Electric Plants
EXPERTS on antisubmarine warfare at a small company in Waterford, Conn., have long been obsessed with Soviet submarines because they design the sonar systems that enable the Navy's submarine and surface ships to detect and track those subs.
But in the last few years, 25 engineers and computer programmers at the company, Sonalysts Inc., have been obsessed with much smaller inhabitants of the deep that may not pose a threat to national security but are a big concern to electric utilities, the fishing industry, governments, environmentalists and municipal water systems.


Chiat/Day Hires A Creative Associate
David Angelo, one of the creators of the popular "Hey, you never know" campaign for the New York State Lottery at DDB Needham New York, is leaving the agency, effective Monday, to join Chiat/Day in New York as an associate creative director, working with Ty Montague, also associate creative director, on accounts like Reebok International and MTV.
Mr.
Angelo, who is 31, is an art supervisor at DDB Needham.
Both he and his Lottery account creative teammate, Paul Spencer, a copywriter, also did freelance work last year for the Clinton/Gore Presidential campaign.


Airline Traffic Rises 6.1%
Traffic on the largest United States airlines rose 6.1 percent in January from the similar period of 1992, the Air Transport Association said today.


Closest Pulsar
Using a radio telescope the size of a football field, scientists have identified a star emitting pulses of radiowaves 400 light-years from Earth as the closest pulsar ever found, according to a study published in the current issue of the journal Nature.
The 10-mile-wide pulsar has the same mass as the Sun, which is 864,000 miles wide.
But at 9 light-minutes or 93 million miles away, the Sun shines brightly on Earth, while this pulsar can be detected only through radiowaves.


Confidence Index Up Again
Business confidence in the economy rose for the fourth consecutive month in February, the Cahners Business Confidence Index said today.
The index, which tracks companies' spending, production and hiring plans, increased to 68.9 in February, from 68.6 in January.
It was the highest reading since the index was started by Cahners Economics in 1991, and 3.8 points ahead of the index reading for February 1992.


Vanbiesbrouck, No. 1 Again, Helps Rangers Become No. 3
It wasn't the toughest game John Vanbiesbrouck has played.
Most likely, it was not even in the top 300.
After all, these were the San Jose Sharks.
Vanbiesbrouck, though, proved once again why he has reclaimed the role as the Rangers' No. 1 goaltender this season.
He poke-checked a puck on a San Jose shorthanded breakaway in the opening minutes of tonight's game at Arco Arena, and he batted away a flurry of shots at the finish to make sure the Rangers' 4-0 shutout over the Sharks was never in doubt.


George Lovi, 53, Dies; Astronomy Instructor
George Lovi, a writer and instructor on astronomy who was widely known in that field, died on Thursday at St.
Peter's Medical Center in New Brunswick, N.J.
He was 53 and lived in Lakewood, N.J.
The cause of death was cancer of the liver, said his sister, Jane Goldstein.


Jury Upheld at Retrial of Congressman
Rebuffing requests from the Justice Department and defense lawyers, a Federal district judge today refused to order the selection of a new jury in the trial of Representative Harold E. Ford on charges of bank fraud.
But before the trial of the Tennessee Democrat could proceed as scheduled today, Mr.
Ford clutched his chest and complained of pains.
He was taken to a nearby hospital, where he is to be held for 48 hours' observation.


Harold Barlow Dead; Pop Composer Was 77
Harold Barlow, a songwriter and consultant on music plagiarism, died on Feb. 15 at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 77 and lived in Douglaston, Queens.
The cause was cardiopulmonary arrest brought on by sepsis, said his son, Steven, of Fresh Meadows, Queens.


Metropolitan College Report
With tournament time approaching, the following is a look at area conferences in the National Collegiate Athletic Association.
DIVISION I


New Deal for Aguilera
RICK AGUILERA , who had 41 saves last season, agreed yesterday to the fourth richest contract ever given a relief pitcher, a two-year extension with the Minnesota Twins worth $7.81 million.


Treasury Report On Clinton Plan Labels It as Fair
A Treasury Department document scheduled to be made public on Wednesday takes pains to assert that fairness was a major consideration behind many of President Clinton's proposed tax changes, including one to end deductions of country club dues as a business expense.
A draft of the document, which was provided by someone outside the Treasury Department, also shows that the Administration has put some intricate restrictions into its tax breaks for business, including the new credit on investment in equipment, to prevent corporations from exploiting them.


Angels' Rodgers Takes a Look (and a Seat) Back
When the California Angels rode a bus from Milwaukee to Chicago late last season, Buck Rodgers did not sit in the first seat, the one that traditionally is the manager's place on a team bus.
"I don't have any qualms about sitting there going from the ball park to the airport," Rodgers said today.
"But going from one city to another, I won't sit in that seat. That's the pizza and garbage seat now. I'll sit three or four rows back."


Arms Are Root Cause Of Somalia's Plight
To the Editor:
Re "In Somalia, Now It's the U.N.'s Turn" (editorial, Feb. 1): Other steps besides a greater role for United Nations forces need to be taken.
Frances Moore Lappe found that of 31 drought-affected countries in sub-Saharan Africa in the early 80's, only 5 had severe famine -- Ethiopia, the Sudan, Mozambique, Angola and Chad -- and now we can add Somalia.
The common denominator was war.
People displaced by war cannot farm.
The root cause of Somalia's war was the massive supplying of arms, compounded by United States support of the deposed dictator, Siad Barre.
The U.S. must lead in curbing arms sales to developing countries.


Fuqua Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Palestinian Set Peace-Talk Terms
Leaders of the Palestinian delegation to the Middle East peace talks said today that they would tell Secretary of State Warren Christopher that their continued participation in the negotiations depends on an Israeli commitment to stop deporting Palestinians from the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.
It is not essential that Israel immediately bring back all of the nearly 400 accused Islamic militants who were expelled in mid-December and who remain at a tent camp in southern Lebanon, Palestinian officials said.


Roof in Lumber Yard Collapses


Mr. Clinton's Captious Critics
Over the weekend, the public got a look at the Republican response, such as it is.
The G.O.P. legislators and their fellow-traveling commentators are worried -- yes, gravely worried -- about President Clinton's economic proposals.
Their arguments, boiled to basics, are twofold.
They believe that his efforts to reduce the deficit rely too much on new taxes and not enough on spending cuts.
And in words usually reserved for the Apocalypse, they warn that his strategy will vastly expand government's reach, cripple the markets and stampede the nation into statism.


Escalade Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Poles Forge Private Bank System
More than three years after dismantling Communism, Poland is struggling to get a grip on that most basic of capitalist tools, the banking system.
For decades banks here, as in other Communist countries, played little economic role other than to channel the money allocated by central planners to state-owned industries.
In an economic culture that revolved around manufacturing, banking was a low-paid backwater.


Security at Nuclear Power Plants Is Inadequate
To the Editor:
"Gate Crasher Shakes Up Nuclear Debate," your Feb. 11 news article on the breach of security at the Three Mile Island nuclear power station, raises some serious questions about the security and regulation of nuclear power plants in the United States.
As your article points out, nuclear power plants are supposed to be able to protect against armed terrorists.
Yet a recently released mental patient, armed with little more than a Plymouth station wagon, was able to enter the "protected area" of a nuclear power plant and elude capture for four hours.


U.S. Names New Coordinator For Aid to Ex-Soviet Lands
The State Department today announced the appointment of a career diplomat who is an expert on Russia as the new coordinator for American aid to the former Soviet republics.
The announcement came a day after the publication of comments by the current coordinator who had forecast the political demise of President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia.


Douglas MD-11 Plans
The Douglas Aircraft Company may develop a version of the MD-11 with 64 more passenger seats in the lower forward fuselage section, Aviation Week and Space Technology said today.
The unit of the McDonnell Douglas Corporation would offer the 362-passenger MD-11D in two takeoff weight classes.
Douglas is discussing the MD-11D with airline customers, but does not expect to introduce either version until the commercial transport market improves.
McDonnell Douglas stock closed yesterday unchanged at $51.375.


Cuomo Nominates Judith Kaye For Top New York Judicial Post
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today nominated Judge Judith S. Kaye, a centrist on the New York State Court of Appeals who has worked to expand individual rights under the State Constitution, to become the first woman to be Chief Judge of the court.
If confirmed by the State Senate, she would succeed Sol Wachtler, who resigned in November after being arrested on charges that he extorted money from a former lover.


Clinton Backs Funds For Science Projects
DESPITE the Clinton Administration's hopes to achieve sharp reductions in Government spending, prospects appear to have brightened for Federal financing of some branches of scientific research and for construction of the world's largest particle accelerator, the Superconducting Supercollider.
The National Science Foundation, the Federal Government's major financing agency for small to medium-sized scientific research, would receive a special increase in its budget for the current year, which its officials say would permit real growth.
Although the pace of construction of the supercollider would be throttled back, it would still receive ample financing to keep it alive.


Robinson, Lake Buys Sawyer/Miller
Two large public relations and corporate communications agencies based in New York and Washington said yesterday that as expected they would merge.
Under the transaction, Robinson, Lake, Lerer &amp; Montgomery will acquire the Sawyer/Miller Group to form an as yet unnamed new firm with more than 200 employees and about $38 million in revenues.
Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt in New York, Robinson, Lake's parent, would not disclose further details of the transaction.


Dorothy Van Doren, Author and Editor, 96
Dorothy Van Doren, author, editor and widow of the poet and critic Mark Van Doren, died on Sunday at the Sharon Hospital in Sharon, Conn., where she lived.
She was 96.
The cause was pneumonia, said her son John, of Evanston, Ill.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Clinton Administration announced a broad new technology initiative that embraces Government and industry cooperation to create new technologies and nurture innovative small companies.
The program could lead to a significant change in the balance between civilian and military research and development, and generate new Government-industry consortiums.  [ Page A1. ]
President Clinton told Boeing employees that they were not to blame for the company's loss of business and that unfair foreign competition had undercut their industry.
He criticized government subsidies for Airbus, the European aircraft consortium.  [ A1. ]


2 Accuse Unification Church of 'Coercion'
Four days before the state is to act on the University of Bridgeport's accreditation, two Russians held a news conference here today to say that they had been promised scholarships in exchange for taking Unification Church training.
A church affiliate, the Professors World Peace Academy, took over the financially troubled university last year amid much controversy.
The church is headed by the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon.


Pondering the Fate of Old Hardware
YOUR new 486 DX with the 120-megabyte hard drive may be running flawlessly but it still leaves a serious computing problem: what do you do with the old machine?
It may be an antique at age 4, but it is not old enough to be charming desktop bric-a-brac, and its price was too high to turn it into municipal solid waste.
Many people's first inclination is to sell the old machine, but they tend to price it thinking of the original cost and devising some optimistic depreciation schedule.
In fact, the price of old computers varies in accordance with the cost of new ones, and since a 486 is cheap and getting cheaper by the day, the old PC-XT's are extinct in the commercial world and the 286-based machines are not far behind, old machines are not worth much.


CHRONICLE
BARBARA LAZEAR ASCHER wrote a book called "Landscape Without Gravity: A Memoir of Grief," emanating from her feelings about the death of her brother, Robert Allen Lazear Jr., from AIDS in 1989 at age 31.
But that effort, searing and poignant though it is, did not seem enough, and she said yesterday, "I tried to think over a long period of time how I could somehow use the book to do something bigger for the AIDS effort."
She ruled out donating any proceeds from sales of the book, which arrives in bookstores this week.
"The first printing goes to pay the advance," she said, "and there would be nothing left for AIDS."
She made a contribution to the Gay Men's Health Crisis, and in return 10 days ago she received a red metal pin that was a replica of the AIDS ribbon.
"As soon as I saw it, I knew what I was going to do," she said.
"I bought $500 worth of pins from G.M.H.C., and when my publishers heard what I was doing, they said they would match it."
Now, 160 people who buy the book at any of six shops in Manhattan -- Books and Company, the Corner Bookstore, Madison Avenue Bookshop, Burlington Books, Endicott Booksellers and Shakespeare &amp; Company -- get a pin, too.
When those run out, regular red ribbons will be distributed to buyers of the book.
"What I'm doing," Ms.
Ascher said, "is to make an anonymous donation in honor of the unknown reader. If this goes well, we'll kick in more. It feels so right."
Though she confined the effort to independent shops and did not approach any chains or discount stores, she said, "Now I'm thinking maybe I should just go across the country with my books and my red ribbons and be the Johnny Appleseed of AIDS ribbons."
Ms.
Ascher is forgoing the usual parties to celebrate publication of the book by Delphinium Books next week.
Instead, she said, "I am doing a reading and having a party in the gay bar in New Orleans where Bobby was the bartender. His lover said, 'Don't you want more decorum?', and I said, 'No, this is the way Bobby would have wanted to do it.' "


Making an Embryo: Biologists Find Keys to Body Plan
AS any ardent viewer of the "Star Trek" television series will attest, the great majority of alien creatures portrayed, no matter how theoretically distant their origins, look terribly familiar.
They have bodies separated into two basic regions, head and trunk.
They have eyes, ears, mouths and snouts, albeit of varying puttied-up shapes and dimensions.
They have arms and legs in tidy symmetrical pairs.
It is as though the producers of the show believe in a Platonic ideal of a body plan, a way of putting an organism together that has such firm transgalactic logic behind it that the scheme has evolved independently time and planet again.


Jury Sworn In for Police Beating Case
A jury that includes two blacks and a young Hispanic man was chosen today to decide the Federal case of four white police officers accused of violating the civil rights of a black motorist, Rodney G. King, in a videotaped beating.
"I don't think I have to say anything designed to impress upon you the importance of the task you will face in the next few weeks," Judge John G. Davies of Federal District Court said after swearing in the jurors this afternoon.
"I want you to keep in mind the very, very grave responsibility thrust upon you."


Derailed Conrail Cars Are Pulled Out of Hudson


Ameritech Offers to End Monopoly
By ANTHONY RAMIREZ


Security Plan Aims Savings At Tenants
To encourage tenants to become more involved in curbing crime in their buildings, the New York City Housing Authority plans to let residents use money saved by safety improvements.
Sally Hernandez-Pinero, the chairwoman of the Housing Authority, describes a proposal to allow tenants to spend half of the savings any way they choose in their buildings as part of a broader security plan for the city's housing projects to be released in the next two weeks.
She said she would be conducting meetings with dozens of groups of residents, community advocates and employees to fine-tune the plan.


IMMUNITY SOUGHT FOR BOSNIAN SERB
The international mediators seeking to resolve the Balkan crisis have asked the Clinton Administration to grant immunity from lawsuits in the United States to the Bosnian Serbian leader, Radovan Karadzic, to encourage him to return here for a new round of peace talks later this week.
But the future of these talks appeared in growing doubt today after Mr.
Karadzic did not keep the pledge he gave former Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance and Lord Owen of Britain last week to return to New York for further negotiations today.
Mr.
Karadzic cited the threat of law suits against him.


Track and Field; Kenya's Open Spaces Provide Running Start
Middle-distance runners from Kenya, the naturals of track and field, must now battle the stereotyping that comes with such outrageous success.
"It is true that some schoolboys in Kenya run far to school, cross rivers and obstacles, and that is a good beginning," said Phillip Barkutwo.
"But we also train very hard."


31 Closings Set By Phar-Mor
Phar-Mor Inc. said it would ask a bankruptcy court for permission to close an additional 31 money-losing stores as part of the discount drugstore chain's effort to return to profitability.
Phar-Mor said it would hold closeout sales in the stores, most of them in the Southeast and Midwest, if the court approved the closings.


CLINTON TO FIGHT FOREIGN SUBSIDIES
President Clinton today told an audience of aeronautics workers, many of them threatened with the loss of their jobs, that their livelihoods were imperiled because of unfair foreign competition, and that the Federal Government would help them.
At other stops on his road trip to promote his economic plan, Mr.
Clinton has appealed for support for the tax increases that are its major feature.
But this time the message was one of reassurance.


Culbro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Congress Is Pressed to Join in Belt-Tightening
If members of Congress could finish all their business in one day, shut down their offices, dismiss their staffs and resign without pensions, they could save the nation's taxpayers $2 billion a year -- about the cost of one B-2 bomber.
That may be small change, but Congress is coming under increasing constituent pressure to cut down on mail privileges, leather furniture, office expenses for retired Speakers and other pork from the Capitol Hill budget.


Serbian Arms Sale Suspected
Washington suspects that a Serbian arms shipment is headed to Somalia and has begun a diplomatic effort to block it, officials said.
Page.
A6


Kenneth Gerald Peters, Liquor Executive, 78
Kenneth Gerald Peters, former chairman and president of Austin Nichols &amp; Company, importers and distributors of wines and liquors, died on Saturday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 78 and lived in Manhasset.
The cause of death was a heart attack following a stroke, said his brother, C. Brooks Peters.


Suffolk Mother's Illness Imperils Son, Judge Rules
Since her son Aaron was born eight years ago, Ellen Storck says, she has lavished attention on him, nursing him through illnesses and virtually willing him to survive a life-threatening condition.
Today, however, a Suffolk County Family Court judge said that Ms.
Storck had caused Aaron more harm than good and was, in truth, responsible for his illnesses.


By Design; Pants at Parties
Anyone who has been on the party circuit this winter couldn't help but notice.
The ball gown is dead.
Short dresses are in short supply, and calf-length skirts are as rare as taxis in the rain.
The evening fashion of choice?
Pants.
Tall women are choosing loose tunics and wide-legged pants like those Zoran has been showing forever.
The very young (and the very fashion-conscious) are wearing pants that flare out at the hem like those by Donna Karan and Norma Kamali.


Recalling Joe Caldwell, Circa 1974
Joe Caldwell lives in 1993, but he is stuck in 1974, when the former Atlanta Hawk's basketball career ended, not with an injury, a release, or a slam dunk, but with a suspension from the St.
Louis Spirits of the American Basketball Association that he charges deprived him of more seasons, more salary, a better pension and a legacy.
"I would have liked to have played my 15 or 20 years, retired and get inducted into the Hall of Fame," Caldwell said.


2d Phone Line In Airline Suit
Travelers seeking to take part in the proposed settlement of a class-action lawsuit, accusing nine domestic airlines of price fixing, so overloaded the toll-free line yesterday that the law firm for the plaintiffs added a second number: (800) 854-7264.
Calling hours for the new number are 8:30 A.M. to 9 P.M., Eastern time, Monday through Friday, and 10 A.M. to 2 P.M. on Saturday.


Editorial Notebook; Two Strong Judges
The deaths of two judicial giants, David Bazelon, 83, and Gerhard Gesell, 82, are stark reminders that the Supreme Court isn't the only seat of legal power.
Former Chief Judge Bazelon was profoundly influential in four decades on the U.S.
Court of Appeals in Washington.
Judge Gesell, on the District Court in the same courthouse, often had the last word in the cases he tried.
Judge Bazelon pushed at every frontier he encountered.
His dissent in a local rape case became law in 1957 when the Supreme Court, anticipating its own Miranda ruling of 1966, unanimously threw out a confession obtained during an unlawful arrest.
He was even more influential in the realm of insanity and criminal responsibility.


New Job for NBC's Laugh Master: Fill the Late-Night Letterman Gap
For the better part of two decades, Lorne Michaels has been camped out along the borders of bad taste.
As creator and executive producer of "Saturday Night Live," he has poked fun at five Presidents and even at their small daughters.
He has lampooned just about every institution in America, including the networks.
Over the years, he has probably been responsible for more scatology and androgyny than anyone else in television.


Two Arrests Embroil Fiat In Scandal
Two high-ranking Fiat S.p.A. executives were arrested today in a growing year-old scandal involving hundreds of Italian politicians and officeholders accused of trading public works contracts for bribes used to finance their political parties.
The arrests of the two -- on suspicion of corruption as officers of a Fiat construction subsidiary -- brought the scandal closer to the auto giant that symbolizes Italy's business sector.
News of the arrests buffeted Fiat shares and rippled through the Milan stock exchange, where companies owned by the Agnelli family, which controls Fiat, account for 12 percent of the market's capitalization.
Stock's Rise Halted
Since Feb. 11, Fiat common shares had surged 19 percent, from 4,520 lire to 5,385 lire, apparently on rumors that a French or Japanese auto maker or a German bank was about to buy a stake.
The arrests brought the surge to a halt, and Fiat shares fell five-tenths of 1 percent, to 5,350 lire, or about $3.41 a share, after a day of seesawing on the market.


Bally Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sir Dick White, 87, Ex-British Intelligence Chief
Sir Dick White, the former Director General of two British intelligence agencies, M.I.5 and M.I.6, has died at his home in the Sussex region of southern England, The Associated Press yesterday quoted his family as saying.
He was 87.
His family said that Sir Dick, who had been living quietly in retirement, had been suffering from intestinal cancer, the agency said.
The date of his death was not immediately available.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Signed Alan Mills and Anthony Telford, pitchers, and Jack Voight, outfielder, to one-year contracts.
National League
CINCINNATI REDS -- Signed Milt Hill, pitcher, to a one-year contract.


Share Price Of Synergen Plunges 68%
Shares of Synergen Inc. plunged 68 percent yesterday after the company's executives said they were disappointed by results of recent tests for Antril, Synergen's most promising new biotechnology drug.
Antril is a treatment for sepsis, a deadly bacterial infection.
The disclosure prompted drug industry analysts to compare Synergen's problems to those of two competitors, Centocor Inc. and the Xoma Corporation, which stunned Wall Street last year when the Food and Drug Administration ruled that their septic-shock drugs were not clearly effective. 100,000 Deaths a Year
"We're seeing history repeating itself," said Jay B. Silverman of Wertheim Schroder, one of many analysts who previously liked Synergen but yesterday urged that investors avoid the stock.
"It's unfortunate, because it was such a potentially big product."


No Headline
My father taught me how to plant and my mother, she taught me discipline.
When I am older I want to be a doctor.
I see so many people who are sick and they die before they even get to the hospital. -- JULIUS KEEYA KINTU, a 13-year-old Ugandan who is raising his family because both parents have died of AIDS.  [ A1:3. ]


Bowe Visits Somalia
RIDDICK BOWE, the heavyweight champion of the other two sanctioning groups, got a first-hand look at the devastated capital of Mogadishu yesterday after arriving in Somalia on a charter flight paid for with $94,000 of his own money.
He said his visit was intended to lift morale among the United States troops stationed in the country.


Senate Ordered to Detail Mailings to Constituents
In a ruling that opens a longstanding Legislative perquisite to greater public scrutiny, a New York State Supreme Court justice has ordered the State Senate to release detailed information about the taxpayer-financed literature it produced and mailed for one of its members.
Saying that such mailings are covered under the state's Freedom of Information Law, Justice James B. Canfield directed the Senate to disclose information about the number and cost of publications that a Long Island Senator mailed last year, when he was seeking re-election.


Q&amp;A
Melting the Ice
Q.
If the polar ice caps were to melt completely, what would happen to the ocean level?
How much dry land would be lost?


The 'Oklahoma!' Gag
To the Editor:
You note in " 'Oklahoma!' Is Still O.K." (editorial, Feb. 7) that Mike Todd walked out after the first act and pronounced the musical a failure, exclaiming, "No legs, no jokes, no chance." Mr.
Todd denied this in a letter to Richard Rodgers, saying he left because a friend was in jail. (Rodgers doubted it.) Helene Hanff, assistant to the Theater Guild press agent, and Celeste Holm (co-star of "Oklahoma!") suggested that Walter Winchell or his secretary coined the line.
Winchell wrote Rodgers denying that he or his secretary had anything to do with the original gag.


Woman in the News;  Cuomo's Choice to Head the Court of Appeals: A Judge's Judge
While Judge Judith S. Kaye exercises on her Nordic Track early each morning, she watches Court TV on cable television.
When she travels to Switzerland each summer, she takes along a compendium of recent rulings by the United States Supreme Court as her vacation reading.
Although she had never served on the bench until Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo appointed her to the State Court of Appeals 10 years ago, Judge Kaye has become, in the words of one former clerk, "a judge's judge."


Sports of The Times; Basketball, And Time, In Perspective
SUNDAY afternoon, Meadowlands Arena.
Georgetown had lost again.
This time to Seton Hall, by 10 points, the seventh loss in nine games for the once-mighty Hoyas.
John Thompson stood in front of reporters and repeated what has become a familiar refrain for him this season:


Market Place; Read-Rite is out front with a new technology for reading disk data.
SOME savvy investors have played the PC price wars by investing in the few chip and disk drive companies that supply the computer manufacturers.
Now some investors are taking a look at a major supplier to the disk drive makers, the Read-Rite Corporation, which makes advanced heads that read data from high-performance hard disk drives.
With more than a 50 percent market share, Read-Rite is the primary beneficiary of the move from ferrite heads to thin-film technology, which produces smaller, lighter heads and is better suited to manufacturing automation.
Heads read the bits and bytes of data stored on magnetic disks in personal computers.
Read-Rite supplies Conner Peripherals, Maxtor, Western Digital and other disk drive manufacturers.


Classical Music in Review
Cyprien Katsaris, pianist Ewa Podles, mezzo-soprano Kenn Hicks, tenor Alice Tully Hall


Accounts
*
The Holland Inc., Vancouver, Wash., to Borders, Perrin &amp; Norrander, Portland, Ore., to handle its Burgerville U.S.A. fast-food restaurant chain account, previously divided among various agencies.
Billings were not disclosed.


Corrections
A picture caption in some copies yesterday about Hillary Clinton's appearance at an Eleanor Roosevelt celebration at Lincoln Center misidentified the man with her.
He was Franklin D. Roosevelt 3d, not Herbert Zohn.


NORDSTROM INC. (NMS)
The fourth-quarter results reported yesterday by Nordstrom Inc. were evidence that traditional retailers have taken their cue from discount chains and have learned to shepherd more of their sales to the bottom line through tight inventory controls.
Nordstrom, based in Seattle, is a broad-line store chain known for a high level of customer service.
While Nordstrom had strong sales growth in the quarter that ended Jan. 31, it said its earnings surged ahead 22.3 percent despite a $4 million charge to cover the legal costs of a class-action lawsuit contending that the company did not pay some of its employees for working overtime.


CLINTON PROPOSES CHANGES IN POLICY TO AID TECHNOLOGY
The Clinton Administration announced today a broad new technology initiative that enthusiastically embraces Government and industry cooperation to create new technologies and nurture innovative small companies.
The program could lead to a significant change in the balance between civilian and military research and development and could generate new Government-industry consortiums modeled after a successful consortium created six years ago to help the flagging semiconductor industry.


Doskocil Cos. (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Jan 2


Officer Is Shot As 2 Suspects Are Pursued
A police officer was shot in the ankle early yesterday in a barrage of gunfire from a car he and his partner had stopped in upper Manhattan.
After chasing the car into the Bronx and pursuing the suspects through the snow and into the Bronx River, officers arrested the two suspects in a vacant lot.
Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly called the shooting of Officer Patrick Ahearn, 27, of the 34th Precinct "particularly brazen" because he and his partner, Officer Gonzalo Torres, 27, were in uniform and were fired on as soon as they emerged from their patrol car.


East Village Doctor Convicted Of Performing Illegal Abortion
An East Village doctor was convicted yesterday of performing an illegal third-trimester abortion in which he severed the arm of a fetus.
The doctor was the first person convicted of conducting an illegal abortion in New York State in more than a decade.
After four and a half days of deliberation, a jury in State Supreme Court in Manhattan found Dr.
Abu Hayat guilty of assault on Rosa Rodriguez and her baby, Ana Rosa.
He was also convicted of two counts of assault on another patient.


Nation of Orphans: A special report; Uganda, Scarred by AIDS, Turns to Its Youth
Before Julius Keeya Kintu's father died of AIDS five years ago, he taught his son how to grow coffee, squash and cassava, whose root is Uganda's staple food.
Together they patched up the family's brick-and-thatch hut.
Then, a few months ago, Julius's mother, sick with AIDS and unable to care for herself, left her children and traveled to her mother's home to die.


Men's Movement Challenges Prison Machismo
The men's movement, with its talk of warriors and kings, magicians and lovers as role models, may seem to be an unlikely comfort for an incarcerated group of murderers and robbers, macho-trippers and loners.
But deep inside the Shawangunk maximum security prison set here in an old farm valley, some lifers have formed what is apparently the very first chapter of the men's movement to be established inside an American penitentiary.


Politics' Tracy and Hepburn Signed by Publishing Rivals
In a highly unusual marriage of convenience and commerce, Random House and Simon &amp; Schuster will jointly publish the joint campaign memoirs of James Carville, President Clinton's chief strategist, and Mary Matalin, a top political aide to President George Bush.
"It's like the Hatfields and the McCoys publishing the Montagues and the Capulets," said Robert Barnett, a lawyer with the Washington firm of Williams &amp; Connolly, who represented the authors.
"The planets will not align this way again soon, if ever."


Surrender? Boggs Says He's Just Begun to Hit
The statement was made with the sincerity and confidence of someone who knew without a doubt that his words were gospel, according to baseball record books.
"I want to get back to .350, .360, but I don't have to come out and say that my goal is to hit .360. But my lifetime average is .338. If I hit my lifetime average, I had a great year. But naturally I want to hit a lot higher than that."


U.N. General Warns Against an Airdrop for Bosnia
Senior United Nations officials renewed their warnings today against a proposal by President Clinton that the United States augment the Bosnia relief operation by dropping supplies by parachute to some of the 1.6 million people here who are estimated to be at risk from starvation, disease and winter cold.
"If the Americans start dropping supplies by parachute, there will be an explosion here," said Lieut.
Gen.
Philippe Morillon of France, who commands the 8,000-member United Nations military force here.
Its principal task has been to escort land convoys of food and medicine to communities ravaged by the Bosnian war.
General Morillon, 57, said airdrops of refief supplies were "absolutely unnecessary" because United Nations soldiers could get supplies through overland.


Bridge
Look at the East hand shown in the diagram, which is much worse than anything you will ever hold in real life.
Would you have a chance to make a trick against a heart contract, assuming that nobody blunders?
One might think that the answer is no, but half a century ago Bridge World Magazine published the diagramed deal to prove the contrary.
It was constructed by Robert Gray, a young Scot, and was not accompanied by bidding.
Looking at the North-South cards it is obvious that the lack of an entry to the North hand is a serious problem.


Classical Music in Review
Vladimir Feltsman Pianist Avery Fisher Hall


Harvey Kurtzman Is Dead at 68; Cartoonist Was Creator of Mad
Harvey Kurtzman, a cartoonist and a pop-culture historian who founded and created Mad magazine and was a guiding force in several other satirical magazines, died on Sunday at his home in Mount Vernon, N.Y.
He was 68.
Byron Preiss, his publisher at Visual Publications Inc., in New York, said the cause was complications of liver cancer.
Mr.
Preiss described Mr.
Kurtzman as "one of the greatest cartoonists of the 20th century."


Search for Colorado Skiers Intensifies
Rescue teams using a helicopter, an airplane and snowmobiles scoured the treacherous back country here today for signs of five cross-country skiers last seen early Saturday in a region that has been swept by ferocious avalanches.
The search was delayed by fierce gales and heavy snows over the weekend that made it impossible for aircraft to navigate near the mountains.


Closer Scrutiny Urged for Providers of Day Care
City Councilwoman Una T. Clarke called on the state to revamp its system of inspecting and monitoring day-care centers yesterday, five days after a fire killed two children at an unlicensed center in Queens.
But it was unclear how the changes Ms.
Clarke proposed would have prevented the Queens deaths, because her recommendations would affect only those centers that have applied for licenses, not the thousands of unlicensed centers.


Patterns
A Bendel's Shoe Coup
There's a close-to-the-vest poker game in progress among the uptown retailers, but every so often one of the players can't resist showing a good hand.
This week, the president of Henri Bendel's, Susan Falk, disclosed that Bendel's will carry shoes and bags by Susan Bennis Warren Edwards, whose pricey, high-fashion goods have been available in New York only at the Bennis Edwards 57th Street boutique.
The move is part of an overhaul of the Bendel's shoe department.
The fourth-floor atrium will soon sell just the Bennis Edwards line, with 60 percent of the 250 styles exclusive to the store and a few styles by Karl Lagerfeld and Claude Montana.
"Our strategy is to develop an assortment that is different from our competitors'," explained Ms.
Falk, who in September also commissioned pieces from Claude Montana.
Mr.
Edwards, who has been designing with Ms.
Bennis for 15 years, says changing trends -- longer-length skirts and wider trousers -- have stepped up the shoe business.
"People can't walk around in low-cut shoes when proportions are demanding a heavier, more substantial style," he said.
What about the impact on their own store?
"We don't see it as competing with ourselves," Mr.
Edwards added.
"There's a lot of momentum right now. You have to keep moving."  A Character's Lived-In Look
It says something about the life of fashion people that they are talking about Drew Barrymore's look in the film "Guncrazy" as if they had never seen it before.
The costume designer, Merrie Lawson, did all her research for dressing Ms.
Barrymore's trailer-dwelling character by studying girls at the Eagle Rock Plaza shopping mall in Pasadena, Calif.
"We were looking for a real-life gutter image," Ms.
Lawson said.
"We didn't want it to look like Hollywood. We wanted a little girl, living without a mother, who only can buy clothes every few years. I got everything from the Salvation Army, St. Vincent de Paul's and Goodwill shops."
Ms.
Lawson chose dresses that were a little small for Ms.
Barrymore, she said, "as if they were years old and all of a sudden she grew a bust." She also tea-dyed everything, "down to the socks, to give the image of someone who doesn't do laundry very often, and does it all together." Don't be surprised to see Ms.
Barrymore's wardrobe staples in fashion shoots: flower-print thermal underwear shirts, Osh Kosh B'Gosh overalls, cork-soled wedge sandals worn with tea-dyed socks and ruffled midriff tops.
Ms.
Barrymore herself, who just turned 18, seems destined to be a cover girl.
"For one thing, she's stunning," said Mademoiselle's entertainment editor, Peter McQuaid.
"And for another thing, the roles she's portrayed are much more what America is about than this image that every young girl is a cheerleader." A Designer in From the Cold
The designer whose show inspired the most fear and loathing among the fashion press last season, Martin Margiela, won't be on the runway for the fall-winter collections.
In Paris, where designers have the star power of rock stars, Mr.
Margiela's presentations have been like festival-seating sellouts: overcrowded and underventilated.
Mr.
Margiela's spokeswoman, Elsa Skalvoll, said, "For March, we decided to use the energy differently and receive people with personal contact in the showroom."
The most unpretentious show last season was the "funkin' fashion" event in the Tuileries Garden by the young Senegalese designer Lamine Kouyate, for Xuly-Bet.
Now, he's coming indoors.
The Samaritaine department store, which is devoting a new boutique to his small collection, will provide space for his fall-winter show.
"Designers in general take ideas from the streets," said Mr.
Kouyate, whose signature is uneven, roughly stitched patchwork.
"This season I'll be doing the opposite. I'm making things for people that they can take into the streets and wear it like they've sewn it themselves." Jean Colonna, the popularist of Drugstore Cowboy dressing, is also getting an establishment-level salute, at Le Printemps.
The department store has even adjusted its logo in tribute to the designer's unisex philosophy, painting interlocked symbols for man and woman over the floral pattern on bags and catalogues.


Dollar Drops Sharply to Record Low vs. Yen
The dollar continued its fall to record lows against the Japanese yen today as traders anticipated that the leading industrial nations would push for a stronger yen to help reduce Japan's soaring trade surplus with the United States and Europe.
But Japanese authorities, while not totally against a stronger yen, said the recent rise of the yen and fall of the dollar were too swift, and hinted they might intervene in the currency markets to stabilize wild fluctuations.


4 People Shot or Knifed During Violent Incidents Near Schools
Two people were shot and two suffered superficial knife wounds in separate incidents in and around three schools in Brooklyn and the Bronx yesterday, the police said.
Edward Muir, director of the school safety department for the United Federation of Teachers, said the union and school officials were exploring an expansion of security measures in place at 41 high schools, such as metal detectors, to middle schools.


Research On Smell Providing Major Hint
THINK spring.
You're walking through a botanical garden amid a cascade of spirit-lifting scents: first lilac, then hyacinths and daffodils and finally the first roses.
How is it, though, that as you pass through the garden the lilac odor, which seemed so intense initially, does not linger and become intermingled with the others?
And why, when you smell gas upon entering a room, do you quickly lose your sensitivity to the noxious odor?
The answer to these questions, suggested in a report published in a recent issue of the journal Science, may lead one day to exciting new treatments for a host of human health problems, from a diminished sensitivity to odors to asthma and congestive heart failure.


A Novel Microscope Probes the Ultra Small
A new generation of optical microscopes is emerging, capable of resolving images far beyond the conventional limits imposed by visible light.
These microscopes are known as near-field scanning optical microscopes, or N.S.O.M., and they may soon offer a wide variety of remarkable applications ranging from detailed movies of the inner workings of cells to vast increases in data storage capacity for the computer industry.
In theory the technique could pack information so densely that two copies of "War and Peace" could be transcribed in the area of a pinhead.


You Can't Lock Up City Hall and Toss the Key
To the Editor:
Hilary Rosenberg's "Let Cities Go Bankrupt" (Op-Ed, Feb. 3) is certainly right that drastic action is necessary to halt the downward spiral of some cities.
Her solutions, however, reveal a misunderstanding of both Federal law and reality.
She fails to distinguish between the role of a corporation and a municipality.
In the arcane world of bankruptcy, the distinction between making money (business) and serving the public (government) makes an enormous difference.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.94
2.86
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.96
2.91
3.96
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.06
3.00
4.08
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.64
5.72
7.11
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.93
7.00
7.96
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.80
7.85
9.00
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.99
6.02
6.81
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


CHRONICLE
No, it's not true that everyone in President Clinton's inner circle went to Yale.
GEORGE STEPHANOPOULOS, the White House communications director, who will be honored this week by his alma mater, Columbia College, said he does not understand how that perception spread.
"I wish I knew," he said from the White House the other day.
"We have a healthy contingent of Columbia people here, Bernie Nussbaum, the White House counsel, and Michael Waldman, one of my deputies, among them."


Pop and Jazz in Review
Henry Rollins  Irving Plaza


Acquisition By Conagra
Conagra Inc. said today that it had acquired United Plastic Films Inc., a Cartersville, Ga., maker of the Brute and Fiesta brands of household and outdoor trash bags.
Under terms of the acquisition, a stock swap that will be accounted for as a pooling of interests, Conagra, an international food and consumer products giant, exchanged 820,000 of its common shares for all of the closely held shares of United Plastic Films.


Classical Music in Review
James Tocco Pianist Merkin Concert Hall


A new award for ad creativity, the Cresta, joins a long line of aspirants for the title of the next Clio.
WHAT, another award for creativity in advertising?
Yes, but this new one has some old hands at the helm.
Nancy Ross, who for 16 years helped run the Clio Awards, is teaming with two experienced French and British executives to create a global awards competition called the Crestas, Cresta being a telescoped version of creative standards.


Designed for Diapering
To the Editor:
While New York's City Council seeks bids for street toilets, why not encourage design of both men's and women's rooms to accommodate a simple pull-down board on which to diaper a baby?
HARRIET RIBOT South Orange, N.J., Feb. 2, 1993


Woman in the News;  Cuomo's Choice to Head the Court of Appeals: A Judge's Judge
While Judge Judith S. Kaye exercises on her Nordic Track early each morning, she watches Court TV on cable television.
When she travels to Switzerland each summer, she takes along a compendium of recent rulings by the United States Supreme Court as her vacation reading.
Although she had never served on the bench until Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo appointed her to the State Court of Appeals 10 years ago, Judge Kaye has become, in the words of one former clerk, "a judge's judge."


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.  1,000 Points, but a Tie
Steve Yzerman became the 36th player in league history to score 1,000 career points, but his Detroit Red Wings failed to hold a pair of two-goal leads and finished in a 5-5 tie with the Philadelphia Flyers last night in Richfield, Ohio.
In the neutral-site game, the Flyers overcame deficits of 3-1 and 5-3 and sent the game to overtime when Brent Fedyk reached through a pile of bodies in front of the goal and punched the puck across with eighth-tenths of a second left in regulation.
Yzerman reached 1,000 points with a third-period assist, after he had scored his 999th point on a goal in the second. (AP) Kings 5, Lightning 2: Goaltender Rick Knickle, making his second start with Los Angeles after 14 years in the minors, won his first league game with the help of a 4-point night from Wayne Gretzky in Tampa, Fla.
Gretzky had a goal and three assists in support of the 33-year-old Knickle, who made 43 saves. (AP)


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Philadelphia Electric Co. is offering $100 million of 7 3/4 percent first and refunding mortgage bonds due in 2023 at 98.852 to yield 7.85 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co. with the issue callable in five years.
It is also offering $250 million of 6 5/8 percent noncallable first and refunding mortgage bonds due 2003 at 98.794 to yield 6.793 percent through Lehman Brothers.
Both the callable and noncallable bonds are rated Baa-1 by Moody's, and BBB+ by S.&amp; P. and Duff &amp; Phelps.


Corrections
The calendar of cultural events in the New Jersey Weekly on Sunday misstated the time and place of a free lecture, "The Russian Chess Tradition," at Fairleigh Dickinson University in Madison, N.J.
It will be at noon tomorrow at the Hartman Lounge in the Mansion on the campus.


Lewis Agrees to Defend His Title Against Tucker
World Boxing Council heavyweight champion LENNOX LEWIS signed a contract yesterday for a mandatory defense against TONY TUCKER , Lewis's promoter, DAN DUVA , said.
Duva said the bout would be at a site and date to be determined by promoter DON KING , who submitted the winning purse bid of $12.2 million on Feb. 4.
King is expected to stage the bout May 8 in Las Vegas, Nev.


Men's Movement Challenges Prison Machismo; Hardened New York State Inmates Find 'Oasis' in Sensitivity Sessions
The men's movement, with its talk of warriors and kings, magicians and lovers as role models, may seem to be an unlikely comfort for an incarcerated group of murderers and robbers, macho-trippers and loners.
But deep inside the Shawangunk maximum security prison set here in an old farm valley, some lifers have formed what is apparently the very first chapter of the men's movement to be established inside an American penitentiary.


Shut Library To Reopen For 3 Days Each Week
The library of the New-York Historical Society, which closed on Friday, will re-open three days a week, possibly as early as tomorrow, with an emergency grant of $66,000 arranged by state and local officials.
Barbara J. Fife, New York City's Deputy Mayor for Planning and Development, said one-third of the money had been authorized by Mayor David N. Dinkins through the city's Department of Cultural Affairs, one-third by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo through the New York State Council on the Arts, and one-third by Peter F. Vallone, the Speaker of the City Council, and Ruth W. Messinger, Manhattan Borough President.


Avondale Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Oh, Canada: Men Finish 1-2-3 in Giant Slalom
A blizzard swept through today, but its ferocity was no match for the Canadian Alpine team.
Canadian skiers won all three medals in the men's giant slalom event.
It was a disappointing outcome for the United States Ski Team, which had hoped to dominate the Subaru United States Alpine championship.
But Canada posed a threat from the beginning of the national race series, which began here last Thursday.


Delhi Is Nervously Bracing For Militant Hindu Protest
New Delhi is a city under siege as it braces for an enormous demonstration by Hindu fundamentalists to be held on Thursday.
The Government has banned the demonstration, and fears of violent confrontations between Hindu militants and the police are sweeping the city even as security forces try to seal the capital off from the rest of India.


Classical Music in Review
Jean-Efflam Bavouzet Pianist 92d Street Y


Jean Lecanuet Dies; French Senator, 72, Backed One Europe
Jean Adrien Francois Lecanuet, a prominent centrist politician who ran against President Charles de Gaulle in 1965 and forced him into a runoff, died early today at his home in Neuilly-sur-Seine, near Paris.
He was 72.
His colleagues said he had been fighting cancer for several years.


U.S. Believes Greek Ship Is Carrying Serbian Arms to Somalia
The United States believes that a shipment of Serbian arms is headed to Somalia and has begun a diplomatic effort to block it, Administration officials said today.
American officials believe that the suspected sale of the Serbian arms is intended to raise cash to purchase goods in violation of the United Nations embargo on trade with Serbia.


Elizabeth Cadwell Dance, Volunteer Worker, 67
Elizabeth Cadwell Dance, who was prominent in volunteer work in the Detroit area, died Thursday at Bon Secours Hospital in Grosse Pointe, Mich.
She was 67 and lived in Grosse Pointe.
Her daughter, Elizabeth Ellen Dance, said she died of lung cancer.


Insight; Tobacco Blues
The more the Administration talks about raising sin taxes to pay for improved health care, the more the tobacco stocks have fits.
UST, the maker of Copenhagen and Skoal chewing tobacco, gets no protection from diversification, either.
Instead of peddling cookies or cheeses, like some tobacco-based companies do, UST's other major products are premium wines.


INSIDE
Dollar at Low Against Yen
The dollar hit a new low against the Japanese yen amid expectations that a stronger yen would be needed to cut Tokyo's trade surplus.
Page D1.
Court to Review Rights Act
The Supreme Court will decide whether the 1991 Civil Rights Act applies retroactively to cases pending when it became law.
Page A17.
Aspin Hospitalized
Defense Secretary Les Aspin, who has a mild heart condition, was in intensive care, hospitalized with a breathing problem.
Page A18.
Melee at British Arraignment
Protesters clashed with the police as two 10-year-olds were arraigned in the killing of a toddler.
Page A3.
Doctor Convicted in Abortion
A New York City doctor was convicted of an illegal abortion in which he severed a fetus's arm.
Page B1.
Publishing's Odd Couples
Random House and Simon &amp; Schuster will publish the joint memoirs of James Carville and Mary Matalin, friendly political rivals.
Page D1.


Texas Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


COMPANY NEWS
PRUDENTIAL INSURANCE COMPANY OF AMERICA, Newark, said it acquired the European real estate unit of global fund manager Invesco MIM P.L.C. for $:2 million, or $2.9 million.
The London-based unit, MIM Property Services Ltd., manages about $900 million of real estate investments, mostly in Britain and on the Continent.


That Cursing Coach? He's Just Old Yeller
It may seem like cruel and unusual punishment for a college basketball coach to scream and cuss and humiliate a player.
And it may seem a perfectly appropriate action for an athletic director to dump a coach for such behavioral sins, as California's Bob Bockrath did two weeks ago to coach Lou Campanelli.
That makes sense to us namby-pamby outsiders.


U.S. Planes to Fly High To Keep Casualties Low
To minimize the risk of American casualties, the Pentagon is planning to drop relief supplies to the Bosnians from 10,000 feet even though Pentagon officials say the usual and most accurate way to deliver the aid is through low-altitude flights at 400 feet.
According to the Pentagon plan, C-130 cargo planes carrying relief supplies will fly to eastern Bosnia from Rhine-Main, an air base in Germany.
The planes, a Pentagon official said today, will drop the food and other relief supplies in containerized pallets from about 10,000 feet.


MORGAN STANLEY GROUP (N)
Benefiting from the strong performance in its investment banking and currency trading operations, the Morgan Stanley Group, parent of one of Wall Street's leading brokerage firms, said yesterday that earnings in its fourth quarter ended Jan. 31 rose more than 7 percent from the comparable period a year earlier.
For the full fiscal year, net earnings were also up more than 7 percent.
"Morgan Stanley's 1992 performance reflects the continued strength of the company's major businesses," the company said in a statement.


Socialists in France, Facing Defeat, Turn Against Mitterrand
Battered by financial scandals, unpopularity and in-fighting, the Socialist Party is gambling that it can recover from an expected drubbing in parliamentary elections next month if it can pin the blame for the debacle on President Francois Mitterrand.
With a conservative coalition looking certain to take over the Government, the Socialists are hurriedly turning against the man who brought them to power in 1981, hoping to persuade voters that it is "Mitterrandism" and not Socialism that they will reject on March 21 and 28.


Editorial Notebook; A Stealth Industrial Policy It Makes Sense, If Done Cautiously
First there was the uncola.
Then the non-bank.
Now, courtesy of President Clinton, America has its first non-industrial policy.
Under a real industrial policy -- of the type scorned by three successive Republican Administrations -- the Government picks winners by subsidizing selected industries.
But in announcing his own policy this week, Mr.
Clinton never uttered the phrase "industrial policy," perhaps because he doesn't call for picking winners.
He calls for picking high-wage, high-tech enterprise.
There's a difference there somewhere.


Banks Lower Deposit Rates Slightly
Yields offered by banks on money market accounts and certificates of deposit for the week beginning today are modestly down from those offered last week, particularly in the longer maturities and at commercial banks.
In the New York market, six-month C.D. rates were lower than those at 20 major banks across the country, with the decline in yields on money market accounts about the same everywhere.


Bridge
If the first trick in a no-trump contract is won by the declarer's right-hand opponent, he should rarely shift to another suit and in practice hardly ever does so.
Shrewd declarers can sometimes trade on this tendency, and two of them did so on the diagramed deal from the 1991 world championships in Yokohama, Japan.
It was normal for South to play in three no-trump, and most West players led a heart.
The declarers counted eight top tricks, noting that they would have to exercise a little care in diamonds: The deuce would have to be saved until the fourth round to solve the problem of the internal block.
A ninth trick was needed from one of the black suits.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
A plan to ease banking regulations and encourage lending, especially to small businesses, is being prepared, President Clinton and Alan Greenspan said in separate appearances.
The plan is said to make it easier for bankers to lend based on a borrower's character, rather than a strict analysis of financial data.  [ Page A1. ]
President Clinton's plan to bolster industrial technology involves almost no increase in total spending on research, but it would redirect billions from military programs.  [ A14. ]


Classical Music in Review
Andrea Lucchesini  Pianist  Frick Collection
Music is served by pianists like Andrea Lucchesini.
The young Italian is well trained in traditional values, but he also has the boldness to renounce usual recital fare and program newer music close to his heart.
Mr.
Lucchesini began on late Sunday afternoon with a rock-steady performance of Beethoven's Sonata Op. 109 and ended with Rachmaninoff's B-flat-minor Sonata firmly under control.
In between came Schoenberg's Three Piano Pieces (1909) and the Six Little Piano Pieces (1911), each a milepost on the composer's way toward 12-tone philosophy.
Both lay tonality aside, but the first set is generous in its vestigial Romanticism, while the second concentrates music into aphorism, some of it startlingly brief.


Kraft to Drop Women's Tour
The women's tennis tour, which this year offers an unprecedented $33 million in prize money, is losing its title sponsor, Kraft, when their five-year deal expires at the close of 1994.
"I'm disappointed but not all that surprised that Kraft has decided to leave us," said Anne Person Worcester, managing director of the Women's International Professional Tennis Council.


Political Jargon, China's Barometer, Shows Clear Skies for Art and Sex
Throughout the ideological and cultural worlds, Chinese are again testing the limits, and mostly getting away with it.
Bold films, plays and books are appearing, newspapers are virtually becoming readable, China's foremost rock-and-roll star is back onstage, and sex and democracy (in that order) are again on the agenda.
The kind and gentle face of Communism, a young woman in a silk blouse who is the anchor for the evening news, has been opening the broadcast in recent weeks with a smile and a greeting that is startling in what it leaves out: "Good evening, viewers."


Westvaco Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


The Pop Life
Music Honors
The Grammys aren't until tonight, but a group of artists and music pioneers -- including Little Richard, Pete Seeger, Chet Atkins -- were honored at a dinner last night in Los Angeles, where they were presented with the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences' Lifetime Achievement and Trustees Awards.


Serbian Commander in Bosnia Says U.S. Airlift Will Intensify War
A senior commander of the Serbian forces in Bosnia said today that the Clinton Administration's plan to airdrop relief supplies to besieged Muslims in eastern Bosnia would almost certainly result in attacks on United States military aircraft.
As President Clinton met to discuss the plan with Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the United Nations Secretary General, Maj.
Gen.
Milan Gvero, deputy commander of the Serbian forces, warned that the use of American aircraft over contested areas of Bosnia would intensify the fighting that has raged here for nearly 11 months.


AIRDROP PROPOSAL GETS ENDORSEMENT OF THE U.N. CHIEF
The Secretary General of the United Nations today endorsed President Clinton's plan to parachute food and medicine into remote areas of Bosnia after Mr.
Clinton assured him that the operation would be fully coordinated with the current United Nations relief effort.
While President Clinton has still not given the final go-ahead for the operation, such a decision appears imminent.
An American airdrop would involve United States military forces in the Balkan conflict more deeply than ever before, although in a humanitarian capacity.
United States Commanders
Administration officials said they reached agreement with the Secretary General.
Boutros Boutros-Ghali, that United States pilots would operate the flights and take orders from United States commanders, but that the operation would be fully coordinated with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations Protection Force, which currently oversee the overland relief efforts.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Arthur Rhodes, pitcher; Luis Mercedes, outfielder, and Manny Alexander, shortstop, to one-year contracts.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Agreed to terms with Chuck Mount and Ricky Rojas, pitchers, on minor-league contracts.


Office Max Selects Meldrum
Office Max Inc. in Shaker Heights, Ohio, an office-products retailer owned by the Kmart Corporation, said yesterday that it had named Meldrum &amp; Fewsmith Communications Inc. in Cleveland to handle its account, which had been at Ross Roy Inc. in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., for the last 13 months.
Billings are expected to grow to exceed $30 million, reflecting the chain's expansion and absorption of the BizMart chain of office products superstores.


When Preservation Becomes Appropriation
To the Editor:
I am disturbed by your Feb. 3 article on the coming of historical preservation to the New York City borough of Queens.
The preservationist movement you depict presents the smug contempt of a self-appointed elite for the concerns of the merchant class.


Wal-Mart Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Classical Music in Review
Manhattan School of Music Philharmonia Orchestra  Manhattan School of Music
The show went on, more or less, on Friday evening, and some talented young musicians took a step or two on the rocky road to becoming troupers.


Let Big Foundations Pay Their Tax Share
To the Editor:
The Administration is talking about shared sacrifice and considering cutbacks for middle-class and working-class people, yet no one mentions taxing some of this country's fattest cats -- the big tax-exempt foundations, such as Ford and Rockefeller.
Shouldn't those extraordinarily wealthy organizations, many with assets in the billions, share the pain the rest of us are expected to endure?


Protest by Students Proves Successful at State College on Long Island


FOOD NOTES
A Harvard Exhibition


Sports of The Times; Smitty Gave Acupuncture On the Ice
NEVER realized just how much I bark out of both sides of my mouth until the other day when I found myself hero-worshipping that old ruffian, Billy Smith, the retired stick-wielding goalie of the New York Islanders.
In recent weeks I have been wringing my hands over violence in boxing, violence in American football, violence in hockey.


Public &amp; Private; Lost in Limbo
There is a political problem baking under the hot sun at Guantanamo Bay, a political problem ringed with razor wire, housed in wooden barracks, living amid rats and scorpions while soldiers watch from guard towers.
But the truth is that all political problems turn out to be people, in one fashion or another.
This one is 267 people, held in a latter-day leprosarium on a United States naval base, waiting for a decision about what will become of the rest of their lives.


Dr. Morris Krugman, A Psychologist, 94, In New York Schools
Morris Krugman, who helped develop psychological services in New York City's public schools, died on Monday at his home in Tompkins Cove, N.Y.
He was 94.
Dr.
Krugman, who started as a chemistry teacher, became a clinical psychologist and rose to become the chief psychologist of the Bureau of Child Guidance.
Later he held posts as the assistant superintendent of schools in charge of guidance and curriculum development and associate superintendent for child welfare.


Arrow Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


SUNY Protest Succeeds As Library Takeover Ends
After weeks of tension that resulted in a student takeover of the library, the president of the State College here gave in to student demands this afternoon, rescinding the layoffs of five professors and restoring a performing arts program that emphasized African-American music and dance.
The 20-hour takeover ended after the president, Dr.
L.
Eudora Pettigrew, sent the students a letter agreeing to two of their three demands.
She refused to reinstate faculty members for a writing center and an English-as-a-second-language program.
Symbolic of Disagreements
For students and faculty members, the library takeover symbolized their disagreements with Dr.
Pettigrew, the first black female president of any State University of New York campus, whose vision of the college's direction has clashed with their own.


Time to Stop the Posturing Over Welfare
To the Editor:
"Caution on Welfare?" (news analysis, Feb. 3), about President Clinton's proposed welfare reform, is appropriately skeptical, but doesn't go far enough to unmask the posturing over this contentious issue.


Cable System to Keep Connecticut Channels
In the face of a public outcry, the cable television system that serves southwestern Connecticut reversed itself today and said it would retain home-grown Connecticut stations that it had planned to drop.
But it left future plans uncertain.
Donna Garafano, a spokeswoman for the system, Cablevision, said tonight that the Connecticut stations would be retained, alongside the New York City stations that it had never intended to drop.


No Berth for Johnson
Sprinter BEN JOHNSON was not selected to Canada's 36-member team for next month's world indoor championships, Athletics Canada announced yesterday.
"He's not on the team; he's not under consideration at all," said Kenneth Irons, a spokesman for Athletics Canada.
The country's ruling body for athletics could have added Johnson to the team despite his withdrawal from last weekend's Canadian championships, because of injury.
But that would have meant bumping BRUNY SURIN or DERRICK SUTHERLAND, named as Canada's two sprinters for the world indoor championships in Toronto March 12-14. (Reuters)


Alleghany Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Matsushita's President Unexpectedly Quits
The president of Japan's largest consumer electronics company, the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company, resigned unexpectedly today, saying he was taking responsibility for a financial scandal and for the sale of hundreds of thousands of defective refrigerators.
The resignation of Akio Tanii, who is 64, comes amid one of the worst fiscal years in memory for Matsushita, which sells its electronics products under the Panasonic, Quasar, Technics and National brand names.


Velarde Is Suddenly a Celebrity of Sorts
Don't blame Randy Velarde if his inclination these days is to look over his shoulder to try to figure out who this larger-than-life superstar is that must be trailing along behind him.
After all, when had Velarde ever entered training camp with the kind of hoopla more accorded a conquering hero?


Perkin-Elmer Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Tartabull Is Hoping To Play 162 Games
It is a new look for Danny Tartabull, to be sure, one that the New York Yankees could easily become quite comfortable with.
The club's highly paid right fielder checked into camp today the picture of health.
It is a far cry from the Tartabull the Yankees saw during much of 1992, when he tried but failed to put together an overpowering season because of ill-timed injuries.
But today, Tartabull, looking fit and trim and declaring himself ready to go, wanted to bury all doubts about his durability.


Merisel Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Trust Gifts to Neediest Cases
Following is a list of trusts and estates that contributed to the current campaign of The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund: TRUSTS


Sudden Detours in Los Angeles Trial
Two abrupt twists halted the progress today in the trial of four police officers accused of violating the civil rights of Rodney G. King.
One defendant sought to have his case severed from the others, and a black juror was accused of making derogatory remarks about the defense lawyers.
Three of the four defense lawyers said they had filed a motion for a mistrial because of the problem with the juror.
A new jury will have to be seated if the motion succeeds, they said.


Howard Mayer Brown Dies at 62; An Expert on Renaissance Music
Dr.
Howard Mayer Brown, a distinguished scholar of Renaissance music and a professor of music at the University of Chicago, died on Sunday in Venice.
He was 62.
A spokesman for the university said the cause was a heart attack.
Dr.
Brown had been in Europe to teach at the University of Basel in Switzerland and to conduct archival research in Italy.


Executive Editor Promoted To Top Post at Boston Globe
Matthew V. Storin was named editor of The Boston Globe today, replacing John S. Driscoll, who will become a vice president of the paper.
Mr.
Storin, 50, had resigned as managing editor of The Globe in 1985 after expressing displeasure with the direction of the paper.
He was brought back last August as executive editor, the No. 2 newsroom position.


Capitals A Level Above Islanders
After his team lost by 4-2 to the Washington Capitals tonight here at Nassau Coliseum, Coach Al Arbour of the Islanders sounded as if he were doing a commercial for toothpaste or for the stuff that seals the rain from wooden decks.
Arbour kept talking about the "invisible barrier" that helped the Capitals to their seventh consecutive victory over all and their fifth consecutive victory on the road.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Lorne Michaels, the executive producer of "Saturday Night Live," misstated the timing of a prime-time music special for which Mr.
Michaels was also executive producer.
It was shown on Sunday night, not Monday.


Two Architects Chosen For U.S. Indian Museum
The Smithsonian Institution has selected two architectural firms to design the National Museum of the American Indian in Washington.
Geddes Brecher Qualls Cunningham, a Philadelphia firm, will design the 260,000-square-foot museum in association with Douglas Cardinal Architect Ltd. of Ottawa.
The museum, which is scheduled to open in 2001, will occupy a site on the National Mall, east of the National Air and Space Museum.
Wesley M. Heilman, vice president of Geddes Brecher Qualls Cunningham, will serve as principal in charge for the museum project.
Douglas Cardinal, who is of Blackfoot ancestry, has been named the museum's principal designer.
Mr.
Cardinal has worked extensively with American Indian groups on designs for housing and education centers.
His recent projects include the master plan for campus of the Institute of American Indian Arts in Santa Fe, N.M., and the Canadian Museum of Civilization in Hull, Quebec, which highlights Indian cultures indigenous to Canada.


Milken Says He Has Cancer
Michael Milken, the former Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. financier who was released from prison last month, has prostate cancer but expects to resume "as active and normal a life as possible," he said in a statement released today.
It is unclear how Mr.
Milken's health will affect the remainder of his sentence for securities violations.
"This is a factor the court has to consider," said Richard Sandler, Mr.
Milken's lawyer.


Nets Can't Find a Groove Against Johnson and Hornets
At precisely the moment when they wanted to establish the tone for a long stretch run into the playoffs, the Nets came up with their worst performance of the season tonight, against the Charlotte Hornets.
The final score, 104-95, was deceptive.
Garbage time began in the third quarter, and the Nets' reserves cut into a 22-point fourth-quarter deficit as much through the ineptitude of Charlotte's bench as their own thrashing.
When the proceedings had mercifully ended, the Nets had dropped to 30-22, with their only solace a chance to forget the whole thing in Boston on Wednesday. 37 Percent From Field
It was a game in which no individual performance stood above the overall futility of the Nets, who shot 37 percent from the field and had 21 turnovers, and were essentially out of the game by the second quarter.


The Party Wasn't Quite Over as Fat Tuesday Sang With Merriment


New Investor Says Debts Are Not Part Of Post Deal
Abraham Hirschfeld, the latest investor in The New York Post, said yesterday that he was to be half-owner of the troubled newspaper with Steven Hoffenberg but that he was assuming none of the millions of dollars of the newspaper's liabilities.
Mr.
Hirschfeld's statement clarified his involvement in The Post, but it left unclear what would happen if creditors of the newspaper demanded payments Mr.
Hoffenberg was unable to make or if Mr.
Hoffenberg's legal troubles made him incapable of continuing to support the newspaper.


2 Divisions Combining At Lucas
The Lucasarts Entertainment Company said today that it would spin off Industrial Light and Magic, its motion picture special effects unit, and Skywalker Sound, its audio recording unit, as a new company to be called Lucas Digital Services.
Lindsley Parsons Jr., a longtime film producer, has been named president and chief executive of Lucas Digital.
George Lucas, owner of Lucasarts, will be chairman of Lucas Digital.


Utility Offering By Utah Agency
The Intermountain Power Agency of Utah tentatively priced $619.7 million of power supply refunding revenue bonds yesterday with a maximum yield of about 5.77 percent for an issue due in 2020.
For investors in a 31 percent tax bracket, the taxable equivalent yield is 8.36 percent.
It would be 9.02 percent for investors in the 36 percent bracket that would be created under President Clinton's tax proposal.
Shorter maturity serial bonds were priced to yield from 2.90 percent for a bond due in 1993 to 4.40 percent for a bond due in 1998, 5 percent in 2003, 5.50 percent in 2008 and 5.65 percent in 2010.
Other long maturities include a bond due in 2013, which is priced to yield 5.70 percent, and another due in 2023, which is priced to yield 5.73 percent.


Dresser Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Colleges Battle Culture And Poverty to Swell Hispanic Enrollments
When Juan Morales graduated from a high school in California three years ago, he set his sights on Oberlin College, a small liberal-arts college in Ohio.
He had no way of knowing what a difficult journey it would become for him, or for Oberlin.
Mr.
Morales had only a C average, but the college, which is known for its academic excellence, accepted him anyway, based on his potential.
He could not afford the $24,000-a-year tuition, so Oberlin supplied most of that.
When he cried twice in his first year because of homesickness and considered leaving, he was buoyed by a Hispanic counselor.


For More Protestants, a New Rite for Lent; A Growing Number of Congregations Accept the Use of Ashes
Pat Rothrock will go to church today to have her forehead marked with ashes.
But Ms.
Rothrock is not one of the Roman Catholics who, along with Episcopalians and many Lutherans, have traditionally streamed into their churches on Ash Wednesday for the ceremony that opens Lent, the 40 days of prayer and fasting leading to Easter.
Ms.
Rothrock is a Methodist, a retired missionary and church worker.
She is among a growing number of Protestants whose congregations are adopting the use of ashes, a symbolic practice once strongly associated with Catholicism.
A Way of Getting in Touch
Last year, the nine million-member United Methodist Church approved a new Book of Worship that added an Ash Wednesday service in which congregants are invited to receive the smudge of ash in the form of a cross on their foreheads.


Police Shooting of Hostage Raises Questions
To the Editor:
Regarding the shooting deaths of a bank robber and his hostage on New York City's Upper West Side, Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly says: "You can train only so much, and when you get involved in a confrontational situation like this, you can't fall back on training" (news article, Feb. 5).


In Central Park, the Skating Is Easier


Consolidated Stores Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  BOROUGH PRESIDENTS SEEK STRONGER ROLE
In the latest assault on the power of City Hall, Borough President Howard Golden of Brooklyn yesterday called on the State Legislature to study ways of giving the five boroughs renewed influence in New York City's government.
His plan won immediate support from the other borough presidents.
B2.
TRIBECA WOMAN SHOT LOADING HER CAR
A 42-year-old graphics designer was shot in the neck on a TriBeCa street after she placed packages in the trunk of her Mercedes-Benz, the police said.
The two gunmen popped opened the trunk and calmly walked away with the packages, which the police said contained only artist's materials, after the shooting.
B3.


No Headline
The West is under siege right now.
We've got no other way to make a living than the areas Clinton wants to tax and raise fees on.
We'll be left selling 20-acre ranchettes to fancy-pants Easterners.
SENATOR CONRAD BURNS,  Republican of Montana, on proposed charges for use of Federal land.  [ A15:3. ]


Review/Opera; A Wild West in Which the Tragic Is Tuned to Sweetness and Tears
"La Fanciulla del West" returned to the Metropolitan Opera on Monday night.
Giancarlo del Monaco's production, new last season, invests Puccini's vision of untamed America with a wintry gloom.
From cavernous barroom to Minnie's remote cabin in the rocks to the lynch mob shivering along the main street of a deserted town, Mr. del Monaco and his set designer, Michael Scott, use palpable discomfort and physical hardship as a backdrop, even an explanation, for an evening of eager brutalities.
Written for the Met and given its premiere in 1910, "Fanciulla" is a radical departure from Puccini's usual operas; and in dramatic coherence, it joins "La Boheme" as the composer's most compelling work.


Insurance Program for New York to Help Pay Nursing-Home Bills
Starting next month, New Yorkers will be eligible to buy insurance that will enable them to receive long-term nursing-home care without exhausting their savings.
The program, which would also cover long-term care at home, is intended to save the state millions of dollars in Medicaid costs because commercial insurers, and not the state, will pay the initial costs of long-term care.
The insurers, in turn, will reap premiums from people who buy the new policies and who otherwise would have relied solely on Medicaid.


Cappuccino Could Be Costing You $2,600 a Year
REMEMBER water when it came from the tap, and coffee when it flowed from pots?
When liquids were consumed with abandon, and not assessed on a cost-per-ounce basis?
Consider the economics, these days, of two of life's formerly cheap and simple pleasures.
If you don't pay attention, you may find yourself spending $7 or so a day on a little cappuccino-and-bottled-water habit.
That may not sound like much, until you start thinking: $50 or so a week; $2,600 a year.
In a decade, that's $26,000, or a down payment on an apartment or a house -- just for the pleasure of that deep, rich coffee, that foam and that bottle.


Gordon de Lima Hamilton; Teacher, 28
Gordon de Lima Hamilton, a coach and teacher, died on Feb. 16 at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.
He was 28 and lived in Manhattan.
His mother, Jean Hamilton, said the cause was Hodgkin's disease.


No Lemieux And Little Excitement
Mario Lemieux was still sidelined, and no one took the spotlight tonight.
His Penguin teammates and their opponent, the Devils, showed little except a penchant for committing silly penalties.
The Devils came away with a 3-1 victory on third-period goals by Stephane Richer and Peter Stastny.
Pittsburgh came away with its fourth loss in its last five games and a mounting need for the return of Lemieux, its scoring superstar, who is still undergoing radiation treatment for Hodgkin's disease, a form of cancer.


Jets Sending a Signal On Talent Searches
In a move that signals an aggressive approach to free agency, the Jets have hired James Harris as an assistant general manager with responsibilities that include scouting and signing veteran free agents as well as college players.
Before joining the Jets on Monday after being interviewed by them over the weekend, Harris, a former quarterback in the National Football League, was the West Coast scout for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers for six years.


Deal Is Reached on Timing of Votes: Cuts and Taxes First, Then Stimulus
Seeking to demonstrate President Clinton's determination to cut old programs before adding new ones, the White House announced today that Congress would vote on a budget resolution supporting the President's proposals to trim spending and raise taxes a few days before it voted on new spending for his economic stimulus package.
Both votes would come by the end of March, White House officials said.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Chuck Berry  Ritz
Chuck Berry's backup band for his concert on Saturday night seemed to know only two rhythms and one song form.
In "Rock-and-Roll Music," the band nearly lost the backbeat.
And it didn't matter one bit.
Because Mr.
Berry, who is 66, still has the gleam in his eye, the friskiness in his voice and the spunk in his guitar lines to play rock-and-roll as if he invented it, which, by many accounts, he did.


Liverpool Tries to Reconcile Murder and a Boy Next Door
Neighbors recall watching him roller-skate past the curving row of tumbledown two-story apartments where he lived with his mother and six brothers, a chubby-cheeked 10-year-old with close-cropped hair who, like so many other boys in the tough Walton neighborhood, seemed much older.
But people in the bleak area say they still cannot see him as a murderer, or get their minds around the idea that the boy who used to run errands for them and play with their own children now stands accused, along with another 10-year-old, of abducting a toddler from a Northside shopping mall, taking him three miles across town and brutally killing him.
Few Do Not Know Names
The disfigured body of 2-year-old James Bulger was discovered Feb. 14 on a railroad embankment in Walton, two days after security cameras in the New Strand mall videotaped him being led away by two unidentified boys.
Only moments before, the victim had become separated from his mother during a shopping trip.


William C. Fitts Jr., 87, A Retired Executive
William C. Fitts Jr., a CBS executive in charge of employee relations for two decades and a lawyer for the Tennessee Valley Authority in the 1930's, died on Sunday in the Hospital of St.
Raphael in New Haven after a brief illness.
He was 87 and lived for the last three years in Guilford, Conn.
Mr.
Fitts worked for CBS from 1950 to 1969, serving as vice president for labor and employee relations and dealing with a number of labor disputes at the network during the two decades.
From 1969 to 1975, he was head of labor and employee relations at the Allied Maintenance Corporation.


Infectious Diseases Spread Fast in Iran, Government Reports
The resurgence of tuberculosis, anthrax and rabies, serious and often fatal infectious diseases, has taken on alarming proportions in Iran, Government officials and Iranian doctors say.
Dr.
Mohammed Ali Rad, head of the Veterinarian Education Council, has warned that "cases of dangerous diseases have risen severalfold" since the Iranian revolution in 1979.


COMPANY NEWS
A.E.P.
INDUSTRIES, Moonachie, N.J., a manufacturer of polyethylene film products, has acquired the assets and industrial products business of Rhodes Plastics Corp. of Linden, N.J., for an undisclosed amount of cash.
NATURE FOOD CENTERS, New York, plans to acquire Nutrition World, the retail division of Sage Enterprises Inc. for $4.75 million.


St. John's, Without Scott, Sinks Hoyas
Their leading scorer and rebounder was reduced to a spectator.
An undersized St.
John's front line, weakened by Shawnelle Scott's painful right ankle, was left to deal with Georgetown freshman Othella Harrington.
The St.
John's response was another in a series of group efforts that have characterized its surprising success.
With the Redmen using a zone defense --
a what?
-- more than at any other time in Brian Mahoney's first season as head coach, St.
John's held on in the final moments to defeat Georgetown, 61-56, and continue the frustration of the Hoya season.


Defying Nature, 5 Skiers Reach Safety
In a remarkable feat of survival, the five cross-country skiers who were missing in the Rocky Mountains since Saturday were found today alive and relatively healthy.
Two of the skiers, Ken Torp and Elliot Brown, walked into a remote trading post about 30 miles south of Aspen around noon today and used a pay telephone to tell their families and the authorities they were fine.


Whittle Executive to Head Home Shopping Network
Gerald Hogan, vice chairman of Whittle Communications, was named president and chief executive of Home Shopping Network Inc. yesterday.
He will take over from Roy M. Speer, who sold his stake in Home Shopping Network to Liberty Media in December.
Libery Media is seeking to buy the remaining Home Shopping shares.
When he sold his stake, Mr.
Speer said he planned to step down as president and chief executive but would remain chairman.


Barbara Redmond Ryan; Volunteer, 59
Barbara Redmond Ryan, a volunteer for social causes, died on Saturday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 59.
Her husband, Allan A. Ryan 3d, said the cause of death was cancer.


Death and Day Care
There's a very large group of American parents who don't talk about "nannies." Instead they talk about the lady down the street who takes in kids for a few bucks a day.
Or they talk, wistfully, about the chances of an opening at a publicly financed day-care center.
They're the working poor -- and, with their children, they're the chief victims of the failure of government at all levels to create a comprehensive system of day care.
Matthew Hintzen, 4 years old, Terrance Fisher, 7, and their grieving families are a tragic case in point.
The two boys died last week when a flash fire raced through the day-care center in Queens run by Eleta Brown.
They were found in the cellar, next to a pile of mattresses and near a non-working smoke detector.


Timely Issues
However mixed Detroit's success has been in keeping up with the car market, auto makers have had a strong sense of timing in supplying the stock market.
General Motors raised $2.1 billion last May by selling 55 million shares at 39; the shares closed yesterday at 37.
Chrysler, at 35 7/8 yesterday, sold 46 million shares on Feb. 3 at 38 3/4, raising $1.78 billion.


Corrections
Because of a production error, the Nasdaq National Market tables in some copies of Business Day yesterday reflected prices from midafternoon trading rather than closing prices.
Pages with the corrected tables can be identified by a "+" symbol alongside the page numbers; readers wishing copies may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Archer-Daniels-Midland Co., Decatur, Ill., a producer of grain and agricultural products, is offering $250 million of 7 1/8 percent notes due in 2013 at 99.736 to yield 7.15 percent through Salomon Brothers.
The noncallable notes are rated Aa-2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and AA- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
P.
H.
Glatfelter Co., Spring Grove, Pa., a paper manufacturer, is offering $150 million of 5 5/8 percent notes due in 1998 at 99.764 to yield 5.93 percent through Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.
The noncallable notes are rated Baa-2 by Moody's and A- by S.&amp; P.


Alexander Hehmeyer, 82, Lawyer For the Family of Marshall Field
Alexander Hehmeyer, who served as legal counsel to Time Inc., the United States Government and three generations of the Marshall Field family, died on Feb. 16 at Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago.
He was 82 and lived in Chicago.
He died of a heart attack, said Virginia Butts, public relations counsel to Marshall Field 5th.


Corrections
A chart yesterday showing last week's top-grossing films included an incorrect revenue figure from the Exhibitor Relations Company, and thus misstated three rankings.
"Army of Darkness" earned $4.4 million, not $5.4 million; it ranked sixth, not fourth.
"The Crying Game" was in fourth place, and "Aladdin" in fifth.


Court Says False Testimony Can Bring Longer Sentence
The Supreme Court ruled unanimously today that criminal defendants who take the stand and testify falsely in their own defense may constitutionally be subjected to additional prison time for obstructing justice.
The decision overturned a ruling by a Federal appeals court in Richmond, which held in 1991 that the Constitution bars judges from imposing an additional sentence under Federal guidelines as punishment for "a disbelieved denial of guilt under oath." The appeals court said that the threat of added prison time placed an "intolerable burden upon the defendant's right to testify in his own behalf."


Two Architects Chosen For U.S. Indian Museum
The Smithsonian Institution has selected two architectural firms to design the National Museum of the American Indian in Washington.
Geddes Brecher Qualls Cunningham, a Philadelphia firm, will design the 260,000-square-foot museum in association with Douglas Cardinal Architect Ltd. of Ottawa.
The museum, which is scheduled to open in 2001, will occupy a site on the National Mall, east of the National Air and Space Museum.
Wesley M. Heilman, vice president of Geddes Brecher Qualls Cunningham, will serve as principal in charge for the museum project.
Douglas Cardinal, who is of Blackfoot ancestry, has been named the museum's principal designer.
Mr.
Cardinal has worked extensively with American Indian groups on designs for housing and education centers.
His recent projects include the master plan for campus of the Institute of American Indian Arts in Santa Fe, N.M., and the Canadian Museum of Civilization in Hull, Quebec, which highlights Indian cultures indigenous to Canada.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
Grand Central Terminal.
The time: a recent evening at rush hour.
I had just taken my seat on an outbound express to Tarrytown.
The doors were still open, the last passengers hurrying aboard when this exchange, apparently between engineer and conductor, came crackling over the public address system.


I.R.S. CHIEF NOMINATED
A Washington lawyer who is a specialist in tax and insurance regulatory law, was chosen to be Commissioner of Internal Revenue.
Business Day, page D2.


A New 'Good Evening' For 'Masterpiece Theater'
It's a tough chair to fill, but someone's got to sit in it.
Three months after Alistair Cooke ever so politely bade goodbye to "Masterpiece Theater," the show's sponsors announced yesterday that Russell Baker would become the program's new host.


Dow Falls on Consumer Confidence Report
The shares of retailers and others that depend on luxuriant spenders withered yesterday in response to a report that consumer confidence wilted earlier this month.
A drop of 19.72 points in the Dow Jones industrial average, to 3,323.27, overstated the market's decline, however.
The Standard &amp; Poor's 500 was off only 0.44 point and Big Board advances outpaced declines, 10 to 9.


NOSHING WITH -- Jerry Nachman; It's Great to Be From New York. Far From.
Here's why Jerry Nachman, former editor of The New York Post, left New York:
"It was a Sunday and my wife, Nancy, and I had two friends in town and we were trying to decide where to have brunch. I wanted Barney Greengrass and Nancy wanted the Popover Cafe, which I hate. It's girl food: chutneys, jams, things with vegetables. Do you know what the main ingredient is in a popover? Air. They also don't take reservations, so you have to wait forever. So, of course, that's where we went."


Plain &amp; Simple; 2Dishes in 20 Minutes
HERE are two recipes that are so simple they can be prepared in less than 20 minutes.
In fact, what takes the longest is cooking the pasta for this dish, wagon wheels with sun-dried tomato sauce.
If you want to speed up the process, substitute fresh tubular pasta for the wagon wheels.
For the side dish of lemony carrots, you can also save time by using already-peeled baby carrots.


Nucor Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Europeans Scorn Charges By Clinton of Aid to Airbus
President Clinton's criticism that European governments subsidized the Airbus aircraft consortium at the expense of American jobs was greeted with scorn here today.
The President's comments, made to workers at a Boeing Company plant on Tuesday, seemed to tighten trans-Atlantic trade tensions over the subsidy issue, which had appeared to be resolved with an agreement last year.


City Council Race Goes Down to Wire
Jane R. Crotty, a Democrat, and Andrew S. Eristoff, a Republican, were locked last night in a close race to represent an East Side district in the City Council, according to unofficial election returns.
At 12:30 A.M., with all the electoral precincts reporting, Mrs.
Crotty had 4,617 votes, or 31 percent of the vote, and Mr.
Eristoff had 4,550 votes, or 30 percent according to the results, which were compiled by The Associated Press.
In all, 14,993 voters turned out for the special election.


Winter, and the Eating Is Warm and Substantive
IN the depths of winter, we need to reward and pamper ourselves.
These hearty dishes are intended to do just that.
All three recipes can be made ahead.
Actually, they are even better when prepared in advance and reheated at serving time.


Omnicom Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Juror's Illness Delays Glen Ridge Sex Trial
A juror's illness has delayed the Glen Ridge sex assault trial until at least Thursday.
The juror's illness already caused the cancellation of court sessions Monday and today.
Late this afternoon, Judge R. Benjamin Cohen canceled Wednesday's session as well after the juror reported that she was not yet well enough to return, court officials said.


Meeting on 1996 Rights
A timetable to negotiate the broadcasting rights for the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta may be determined today at a meeting between BILLY PAYNE, the president of the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games and RICHARD POUND, a vice president of the International Olympic Committee.
"I hope we'll be able to zero in on it," Pound said.
"We want to move toward getting ready." He said bidding will likely occur "no sooner than June, but within a month of then."


Ann Taylor Stores Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


Soccer; World Cup Ticket Sales: A Question of Expertise?
An unrelenting demand for tickets to soccer's 1994 World Cup has left organizers in a real predicament: How do they cater to longstanding soccer fans while keeping enough tickets available to potential supporters from the public at large?
In less than a month, World Cup USA has sold out its allotment of tickets to what it has termed "the soccer community" at three of the nine sites: Foxboro Stadium in Massachusetts, Robert F. Kennedy Stadium in Washington and Soldier Field in Chicago.
The soccer-community sale is virtually sold out at Giants Stadium as well.
Quick Reaction
World Cup USA officials will meet this week to decide how deeply they will dip into the general public's allotment of tickets to satisfy the demand from its most devoted followers.


Nassau to Sue Over Financing Of State-Mandated Programs
The Nassau County Executive said today that he would sue New York State, charging that state mandates on counties, municipalities and school boards to provide services were unconstitutional.
The County Executive, Thomas S. Gulotta, said state-mandated programs account for 70 percent of Nassau's general-fund expenses.
Because the state does not provide the money to pay for the programs, Mr.
Gulotta said, the mandates are, in effect, taxation without representation.


GUATEMALAN FOES HOLD PEACE TALKS
Six months after Guatemala's Government and rebel groups broke off their talks to end the last and most violent of Central America's civil wars, the two sides met again here today voicing cautious hope that some progress might finally be made.
The negotiators seemed to base their optimism in part on a flurry of proposals and counterproposals they have issued since January, when President Jorge Serrano Elias challenged the rebels to place a 90-day deadline on the talks.


CHRONICLE
No matter what else he accomplishes, PRESIDENT CLINTON, an avid jogger, has been a boon to running.
Or so says someone who should know: FRED LEBOW, chairman of the New York Road Runners Club.
In return, Mr.
Lebow announced yesterday, the club would contribute $1,000 toward the construction of a running track at the White House.
"We have seen an enormous growth in running since he became President," Mr.
Lebow said.
"We used to get 40 to 50 new members a week. Now we're getting over 100, and in one week we got 150."


Giving More Than Once to Neediest Cases Fund
In recent weeks, The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund has received scores of checks from contributors who were giving for a second time because they feared that the current campaign would fall short of its goal, forcing charities to turn away thousands of people.
They responded because they envisioned a New York City scarred by cutbacks in social services: fewer soup kitchens for the hungry, no medical care for some poor children and reduced job training for homeless men and women who desperately want to get off the streets.


Theater in Review
Nora's Art  The Kitchen 512 West 19th Street Chelsea Through Sunday Written and performed by Pat Oleszko; directed by Cesar Palma; costumes by Ms.
Oleszko, Robin McKay and Rick Phelps; music by (Blue) Gene Tyranny and Emanuel De Melp Pimento; production manager, Stephen Rueff.
Presented by the Kitchen.
In her zany new vaudeville, "Nora's Art," Pat Oleszko cavorts on a landscape of ballooning Amazons and Gullivers.
Imagine a bubbleheaded indoor underground version of Macy's Thanksgiving Day parade, add a few frivolous frissons, and the show floats on stage at the Kitchen.


Corrections
An obituary on Tuesday about Robert Rafsky, a media coordinator for AIDS protesters, misidentified his former wife and misstated the date of their divorce.
She is Babette Krolik; the couple were divorced in 1991.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.88
2.96
3.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.92
2.96
3.86
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.01
3.06
4.09
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.49
5.64
7.08
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.82
6.93
7.94
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.755
7.80
8.97
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.89
5.99
6.80
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Campus Journal; Students Discover Soul of Engineering by Serving the Disabled
Most people think of engineers as straightforward technicians, not as inventors with creative ideas.
But at Case Western Reserve University here, students put their minds to work inventing all sorts of gadgets, with the goal of making life easier for handicapped people who cannot afford special equipment.
The 2-year-old Case Engineering Support Group, with 36 student volunteers, has produced 18 products, including computer software, rehabilitation equipment and body devices that complement physical therapy.
An elbow brace for a girl with cerebral palsy, for example, encourages her with soft battery-powered beeps to flex one of her arms when she draws it to her chest.
The inventions, which take three months to a year to complete, are given free to patients or hospitals.


Announcement of Nominations by the President
President Clinton announced today that he had chosen the president of the Wilderness Society, George T. Frampton Jr., to be an Assistant Secretary of the Interior.
If confirmed by the Senate, Mr.
Frampton will supervise the National Park Service and the Fish and Wildlife Service.


John Joseph Walsh, a Publisher, Founder of Black Swan Press, 49
John Joseph Walsh, the founder of Black Swan Books, a publisher of important works on literary analysis and art, died on Monday at his home in Redding Ridge, Conn.
He was 49.
His wife, Patricia, said the cause was cancer.


Classical Music in Review
Sergei Schepkin Pianist Weill Recital Hall


Search for Anti-Theft Format Spurs Industry Fight
The retail industry's first attempt to adopt a single technology for electronic anti-shoplifting systems has incited a cat fight between two makers of theft-prevention systems.
The brawl, between the industry leader, the Sensormatic Electronics Corporation, and its rival, Checkpoint Systems Inc., is replete with charges of false advertising, bad faith and irresponsible disclosure.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Lucinda Williams Town Hall
Introducing Lucinda Williams on Saturday night, the evening's host, Vin Scelsa, called her a soul sister, and the description was apt.
Ms.
Williams's richly detailed songs chronicle the hardships and hopes of average people, and her high, warm Southern voice never seems too perfect or too raw, but simply recalls the intimate tones of the gifted singer in everybody's family.


Foreign Maids in Kuwait Fleeing by the Hundreds
White buses, the windows covered by wire mesh, roll nightly into the Administrative Deportation Center at Dasma, a set of low white-brick buildings in the center of Kuwait City.
Dozens of Filipino and Sri Lankan women step off.
The women, who often wait six hours in a chilly alley before they are attended, are some of the hundreds of maids who have fled their Kuwaiti employers to take refuge in their embassies because of what they say are intolerable working conditions.


No Roast Aardvark, No Grilled Zebra, Still, Queens Has an Alphabet Soup
IN Queens, the most ethnically diverse borough in New York, taste buds cannot be jaded.
Indians bake breads until they puff into golden clouds, and Chinese serve up steamed dumplings that burst open with broth on first bite.
Jewish delicatessens cure beef or pastrami with black peppercorns and garlic, and Koreans grill prime beef after marinating it in the Oriental trinity of seasonings: soy sauce, sesame oil and sugar.
The food of Queens, from American seafood to zucchini fritti, offers an A-to-Z primer to the 1,951,590 people from 178 ethnic groups who live in Queens, according to Census figures and Mayor David N. Dinkins's office.


Review/Film; Passions and Repression In a Family Off Balance
"Olivier, Olivier" was shown as part of the 1992 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 25, 1992.
The film, in French with English subtitles, opens today at the Lincoln Plaza Cinemas, Broadway at 63d Street.
Agnieszka Holland, who wrote and directed the popular "Europa, Europa," is in a far less somber mood with her new "Olivier, Olivier," which is entertaining, initially sunny and very spooky.


Rohr Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Tennis; A Tennis Life Begins Again at 30
All Tracy Austin had to do was rummage through her mom and dad's attic.
Because, next to her Bee Gees albums, are her wooden Jack Kramer-Autograph racquets.
"Still got them," her father, George, said today.
"They're getting warped. Another 80 years, and they'll be relics. But I don't throw anything away anymore ever since my mom threw out my baseball cards. I had a Jimmie Foxx, you know."


Lowe's Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Cemex S.A. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New Season, Old Tension For Umpires and League
The chiefs of American League umpiring crews will meet in Tampa, Fla., Thursday, but their National League counterparts do not have a preseason meeting scheduled.
The absence of a meeting for a fourth consecutive year is one of the issues at the heart of the umpires' growing discontent with the National League office.
Another issue should be made public on Wednesday when the Major League Umpires Association is expected to file a lawsuit in United States District Court in Philadelphia charging the National League with breach of the collective bargaining agreement.
The union wants the league office to return to 10 umpires money that was deducted from their paychecks last year in a dispute over airline tickets.


Brown-Forman reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Long Bond Surges On; Yield 6.82%
Treasury bond prices continued their surge yesterday, pushing yields down across the board and leaving many traders marveling at the lowest interest rates they have seen in their careers.
The rally is also giving the Clinton Administration more help than it could have expected, because a sustained decline in long-term interest rates is crucial for the success of the President's economic program.
Lower rates will both stimulate business investment and lessen the debt burden on companies and individuals.


Israeli Expulsions Don't Break Geneva Accords; The Jailers' Tale
To the Editor:
"Israel Says That a Prisoner's Tale Links Arabs in U.S. to Terrorism" (front page, Feb. 17) reads more like Israeli propaganda than news.


Borough Presidents Seek Stronger Role in City
In the latest assault on the power of City Hall, Borough President Howard Golden of Brooklyn yesterday called on the State Legislature to study ways of giving the five boroughs renewed influence in New York City's government.
His plan won immediate support from the other borough presidents.
Mr.
Golden proposed the creation of a Commission on Borough Governance to examine ways to streamline the city bureaucracy and give the boroughs a stronger role in service delivery, planning and budgeting.
His proposition is an effort to reclaim the power lost in the sweeping overhaul of municipal government that eliminated the Board of Estimate.


Ruling for Bosworth
BRIAN BOSWORTH, the former Seattle Seahawks linebacker, is entitled to collect $7 million in insurance from Lloyd's of London for the career-ending shoulder injury he suffered in 1989, a Federal jury in Seattle ruled yesterday.
"It's not the monetary thing at all," Bosworth said.
"To me this was more of a case of principle. I played this game because I loved it."


Smithfield Foods (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Abbey Healthcare Group (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Israeli Expulsions Don't Break Geneva Accords
To the Editor:
I take issue with "Israel Relents -- Will the Arabs?" (editorial, Feb. 3), in which you state that deportations of some 400 suspected Hamas terrorists "violated Geneva conventions on the treatment of civilians in occupied territories." A textual and contextual reading of the Geneva document illustrates that Israel's actions in the West Bank and Gaza Strip are consistent with both the letter and spirit of the relevant Convention articles.


Discovering Art Can Be a Ball


Incentive Plan Seeks to Save G.M. Plant
In a long-shot effort to keep the huge car assembly plant here from closing, New York State officials are knitting together a multimillion-dollar package of inducements for the General Motors Corporation, including financing for the plant's retooling and the building of a companion parts-making plant an hour away.
The state is trying to avert the loss of 3,000 jobs and a $122 million payroll when G.M. closes the plant in 1995.
The loss, wrenching for the local economy, would have repercussions statewide because of its effect on tax revenues.
But executives at G.M. said they knew of no changes in the plan to close the plant.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  U.N. CHIEF BACKS U.S. AIRLIFT


Ecolab reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Putting Some Pop Into Opera, Or, the Met's Got Rhythm, Too
When it opens to the public tomorrow night, Carly Simon's "Romulus Hunt" will earnestly appeal to the generation of children opera will be relying on for its survival.
Ms.
Simon's brief music drama on divorce and joint child custody, commissioned by the Metropolitan Opera Guild and the Kennedy Center, represents a two-year-long attempt by the pop singer and composer to reconcile elements of two musical worlds and their very different audiences.
"Romulus Hunt" is to play for two weeks at the John Jay Theater, 10th Avenue at 59th Street in Manhattan, before moving to the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington in April.


Let's Work With Clinton's Plan
Bill Clinton's economic program is probably the most far-reaching effort ever made by a President to control the Federal budget deficit.
In light of the challenge and opportunity facing him and the country, it is disappointing.
Still, the plan is the only place we have to start, and it needs support.
For those seriously concerned about the deficit, the responsibility now is not to defeat the plan but to try to strengthen and improve it.
Here are some suggestions and observations.


Clinton Picks Lawyer to Be I.R.S. Chief
Margaret M. Richardson, a partner in the Washington law firm of Sutherland, Asbill &amp; Brennan, was nominated by President Clinton yesterday to be the new Commissioner of Internal Revenue.
A specialist in tax and insurance regulatory law, Mrs.
Richardson, who is known as Peggy, has been practicing at Sutherland, Asbill for the last 15 years.


Hoechst Celanese reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


When East Met West and Walking Around Led to Brooklyn
TO gain a sense of place it really helps to walk around a lot.
That is what Hope Cooke did when her world turned bleak and rotten 20 years ago and now, as a result, the 52-year old Brooklyn resident, who is also the last reigning Queen of Sikkim, says she feels more rooted than she has ever been.
"I can honestly say I really know where I am," Ms.
Cooke said in the cozy and sweet-smelling ground-floor kitchen of her 1878 house on the periphery of Brooklyn Heights.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Very Very Circus S.O.B.'s
Two Venezuelan drummers, a Palestinian oud player, a Chinese-American jazz violinist and two singers joined Very Very Circus -- two guitarists, a saxophonist, a French hornist, a drummer and two tuba players -- in what could have been a cross-cultural cacophony on Thursday night.
But the saxophonist and composer, Henry Threadgill, meshed the unlikely collaborators into music that strutted in multiple directions, equal parts of ritual and party, plaintive melody and goofy ebullience.


Iraqi Artillery Is Said to Threaten U.N. Copters Looking for Missiles
In a new challenge to the United Nations, Iraqi forces aimed their guns at the helicopters of two inspectors on Monday, interrupting their search for Scud missiles, officials said today.
The officials said the episode occurred as United Nations inspectors mounted a major air-and-ground search west of Baghdad for hidden missiles and missile parts or missile launchers.


Review/Concert; Shortened Career Musically Examined
The life and work of Ruth Crawford, honored by a Continuum concert at Alice Tully Hall on Saturday night, raise tortuously complex issues about the history of 20th-century music, the status of female composers and the nature of musical innovation.
It should be said at once, before those issues are broached, that Crawford deserves the attention.
Her few works achieve a sharply individual tone, a singular blend of lyrical grace and modernist violence.
"American Visionary" was the tag that Cheryl Seltzer and Joel Sachs, Continuum's directors, chose for the evening.
For once, the phrase applies.
Crawford makes nonsense of the standard chronology of 20th-century music.
Her early works inhabit a lushly dissonant medium derived not from Schoenberg but from Scriabin.
The violin sonata of 1926, performed by Renee Jolles (violinist) and Ms.
Seltzer (pianist), opens with stark dissonances but finds an ecstatic lyrical tone.
It sounds like no other American work of the period.


At long last, the perfect campaign! Oh, wait a second . . .
MORE midcourse corrections than during a thunderstorm over O'Hare Airport!
More alterations than Brook Brothers sees in a month!
More face lifts than in Beverly Hills!
Once, when advertisers replaced familiar campaigns for their flagship brands with new creative work, years would pass before additional changes would be made.
That was particularly true if the switch was the subject of a high-powered publicity blitz.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Chuck Berry  Ritz
Chuck Berry's backup band for his concert on Saturday night seemed to know only two rhythms and one song form.
In "Rock-and-Roll Music," the band nearly lost the backbeat.
And it didn't matter one bit.
Because Mr.
Berry, who is 66, still has the gleam in his eye, the friskiness in his voice and the spunk in his guitar lines to play rock-and-roll as if he invented it, which, by many accounts, he did.


Finding Ways to Deliver a Life-Saving Jolt
Ken Rusk remembers the first time the titanium box in his abdomen did what it was supposed to do -- deliver an electric shock to his heart.
It felt like being kicked in the chest by a horse.
The incident happened early in 1991, about a year and a half after surgeons implanted the device.


Knicks Look Like the Wolves, but Win Anyway
It was boring.
It was sloppy.
It was typical Minnesota Timberwolves basketball.
Too bad for the Knicks, the supposed class of the East, that the game was played at Madison Square Garden because they were almost as dull and as dismal as their pathetic counterparts.
The fans groaned last night when it was announced that Christian Laettner would not play for the Wolves because he had been suspended one game for missing a practice Monday, and some of them continued groaning for the next two hours in view of what happened on the court.
The Knicks saw their 16-point fourth-quarter lead shrink to 2 in the final minute and needed two deep jump shots from Patrick Ewing to avoid embarrassment and emerge with a 95-91 victory.


A Timetable Shift
Seeking to demonstrate its determination to cut old Federal programs before adding new ones, the White House announced yesterday that Congress would vote first on a resolution supporting President Clinton's proposal to trim spending and increase taxes.
Article, page A14.


Clinton's Technology Plan Would Redirect Billions From Military Research
President Clinton's newly introduced plan to bolster industrial technology involves almost no increase in total government spending on research, but it would redirect billions of dollars from military programs to projects involving private industry.
The plan gives a prominent new role to the Department of Commerce, and it could lead to big changes in the way the Defense and Energy Departments carry out their weapons-related research programs.
Yet, as the Government takes a fresh look at its sprawling $73 billion research establishment, it remains unclear how the White House hopes to coordinate the activities of dozens of agencies, how it plans to select which projects to finance and how it intends to evaluate the progress of the overall effort.


No Charges Against Principal in Rape Inquiry
A divided Bronx school board voted last night not to bring disciplinary charges against an elementary school principal who investigators said brutally questioned and humiliated an 8-year-old girl who said she was raped by a school custodian.
In voting not to file formal charges against the principal, Jewel Moolenaar, the board rejected a scathing report by a New York City School District investigator that accused her of conducting a "brutal and humiliating inquiry" that repeatedly brought the girl to tears.


3 Are Acquitted of Murder In Shooting During Riots
Three men were acquitted of murder today in a killing that attracted a lot of attention in last year's riots, the Long Beach shooting of a motorcyclist who had sought to rescue a friend.
But the three were found guilty of assault.
Fabian Nixon, 19 years old, Brent Jones, 17, and Larry Williams, 24, face six-year prison terms when they are sentenced March 24 in the attack on Matthew Haines, 32, who was killed, and his nephew Scott Coleman, 26, who was seriously injured.


George Lovi, 53, Dies; Astronomy Instructor
George Lovi, a writer and instructor on astronomy who was widely known in that field, died on Thursday at St.
Peter's Medical Center in New Brunswick, N.J.
He was 53 and lived in Lakewood, N.J.
The cause of death was cancer of the liver, said his sister, Jane Goldstein.


India at the Edge
A million Hindu protesters are poised to defy an official ban and pour through the streets of New Delhi toward India's Parliament tomorrow.
Fundamentalist violence and the erratic responses of a rudderless Government have brought the world's biggest democracy to the edge.
The two principles that have kept this multireligious society glued together for 45 years, democracy and secularism, now seem to be weakening and allowing it to come unstuck.
The consequences could be horrific, not just for India but for an entire region riven by fanaticism -- from Islamic fundamentalists in Afghanistan to Buddhist nationalists in Sri Lanka.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Feb. 19
Feb. 12
Feb. 21
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.2
6.8
Distillate production, daily
2.8
2.8
2.7
Gasoline stocks
240.4
236.7
230.8
Distillate stocks
118.3
123.3
113.2
Crude imports, daily
5.7
6.2
4.9
Product imports, daily
2.1
2.0
1.4
Crude stocks
329.0
338.1
334.2
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
86.9
86.0
80.1
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Adina B. Szwajger Dead at 75; Pediatrician in Warsaw Ghetto
Adina Blady Szwajger, a pediatrician who struggled to save young lives in the Children's Hospital in the Warsaw ghetto and survived to recount the horrors, died Feb. 18 in Lodz, Poland.
She was 75 and lived in Warsaw.
The cause of death was pancreatic cancer, said Jerzy Warman, a friend in Manhattan.


NORDSTROM TO OPEN OFF-SEASON OUTLET IN PHILADELPHIA
Nordstrom Inc. announced yesterday that it would open its first Nordstrom Factory Direct store, an off-price retail outlet, at Franklin Mills Mall in Philadelphia this May.
It will sell designer labels and Nordstrom's own brand merchandise at discounts of 30 to 70 percent.
Almost a third of its 40,000 square feet will be devoted to shoe sales, an area of concentration for Nordstrom.
Unlike Nordstrom Rack, the successful clearance unit, the new store will not carry clearance merchandise from the company's specialty stores.
Instead, it will carry manufacturers' overruns and end-of-season and out-of-season brand goods.


Woman Shot And Robbed On a Street in TriBeCa
A graphics designer was seriously wounded by a shot to the neck yesterday morning after she placed packages in the trunk of her Mercedes-Benz on a TriBeCa street, the police said.
The gunmen then opened the trunk and calmly walked away with the packages.
"This was a target of opportunity: a middle-aged woman getting into a Mercedes-Benz, putting packages into it," the commander of Manhattan Detectives, Assistant Chief John J. Hill, said during a news conference at the First Precinct station house.


Schott's Chance to Talk
JIM BOWDEN, general manager of the Cincinnati Reds, would like to have owner MARGE SCHOTT address the team's players before she begins her one-year suspension on Monday.
"I have talked to Mrs. Schott this morning, and at that time she had not made a decision as to whether she will or will not come," Bowden said yesterday.
"I called her not to talk about that, but then it came up. I would recommend that she does come and meet with the team."


Keep Japanese Presence in New York City, Dinkins Urges Leaders in Tokyo
At the start of his term, Mayor David N. Dinkins recalled today, he often had to answer critics who complained that the Japanese were buying up New York.
This afternoon, walking from office tower to office tower in downtown Tokyo, Mr.
Dinkins told Japan's leading bankers and business executives that in the 1990's they should hold on to what they bought.
"It is very clear to me that the Japanese presence in our city is absolutely essential to keeping New York a dynamic, global city of opportunity in the 21st century," he told a group of some of the country's most powerful executives today.
And in the face of an unexpectedly severe economic downturn in Japan that is leading many companies to think about selling some of the Manhattan properties they bought in the 1980's, Mr.
Dinkins repeated time and again today that "we want you to stay and to grow in our city."


Howe's Testers Are a No-Show
A glitch developed today in the schedule of mandatory drug testing for Steve Howe.
The glitch did not involve Howe's missing a test, however, but the testers missing the Yankee pitcher.
"Steve is supposed to be tested every other day and they didn't test him today and didn't give him an explanation why," Gene Orza, the associate general counsel of the Major League Baseball Players Association, said by telephone from New York.
"So he was a little concerned about that. Now, as a result, they're going to test him two days in a row. He wouldn't mind doing that, but he would like an explanation as to why they don't test him."


Graves Shifted for His Own Protection
It was an easy way to keep Adam Graves out of trouble, even if his coach swears that wasn't the point.
Monday night in Sacramento, Ron Smith removed Graves from Mark Messier's line and played him with Aleksei Kovalev and Doug Weight, young Rangers who play sporadically.
Graves gave up his No. 11 uniform jersey to Messier when the Rangers captain arrived from the Edmonton Oilers in October 1991 -- a month after Graves left Edmonton to join the Rangers as a free agent -- and he has been all too likely to dash to the defense of his captain and hero whenever an opponent gets a tad too physical with him.
In the last two weeks, Graves has been ejected twice for such behavior.


Is Saberhagen Fit To Sign New Pact?
Bret Saberhagen has thrown without incident through the spring's first week.
His mysteriously troublesome right index finger appears healthy, allowing him to pitch and certainly not preventing him from holding a pen and signing a contract.
"He appears to be throwing free and easy," said Al Harazin, the general manager of the Mets.
"I'm sure we'll be negotiating soon."


Comptroller Candidates Present Cases in Albany
Campaigning intensified today in the idiosyncratic race for State Comptroller as the early favorites, H. Carl McCall and Carol Bellamy, furiously worked the corridors of the State Capitol and the Bronx Borough President, Fernando Ferrer, announced that he was looking at the race.
After being lobbied by Hispanic legislators, Mr.
Ferrer said through a spokesman today that he was "very seriously looking at the position."


No Additions to Hall
REGGIE JACKSON won't have to share his spotlight.
The Hall of Fame veterans committee didn't elect any players yesterday at its meeting in Tampa, Fla., so Mr.
October will have Cooperstown to himself on induction day.
"He will have his day in the stars, so to speak, to perform on the platform by himself," the Hall of Fame president, ED STACK, said.
"I'm sure he'll enjoy that very much."


Results Plus
NORDIC SKIING  Fourth Gold for Norway  Norway won its fourth gold medal of the world Nordic ski championships in Falun, Sweden, yesterday, running away with the large hill ski-jumping team competition.
The Norwegians, led by Espen Bredesen, won by almost 50 points after taking a big lead in the first round.
Also jumping for Norway were Bjorn Myrbakken, Oivind Berg and Helge Brendryen.
Norway's winning total was 821.5 points.
The Czech Republic was second with 772.1 points, followed by Austria.
The victory gave Norway nine medals after eight events, the most in the competition.
Stefania Belmondo of Italy won the women's 10-kilometer cross- country pursuit, just managing to outlast a Russian skier who made a strong closing effort.
Belmondo was timed in 40 minutes 19.0 seconds and beat Larissa Lazutina of Russia by four-tenths of a second, about the length of a ski.
Leslie Thompson of Stowe, Vt., finished 25th for the best American showing.
She was 2:16.6 behind the winner.
Nina Kemppel of Anchorage, Alaska, placed 30th and Dorcas Wonsavage of Farmington, Me., 43d among 68 finishers. (AP) SOFTBALL Strikeout Mark Is Set  The University of California's Michele Granger struck out five Northwestern players in Bakersfield, Calif., yesterday to become the National Collegiate Athletic Association's career strikeout leader.
She has a total of 1,237, breaking the record of 1,234 set by Texas A&amp;M's Shawn Andaya from 1984-87.
A three-time N.C.A.A. single-season strikeout champion, Granger has 81 strikeouts for the year and improved her record to 6-2 with the 8-0, five-inning victory at the San Diego State Spring Classic. (AP) TENNIS  Jarryd Advances  Anders Jarryd of Sweden scored a 6-2, 6-4, victory over eighth-seeded Wayne Ferreira of South Africa, moving into the second round of the $600,000 ABN AMRO World Tennis tournament in Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
Earlier, organizers said Boris Becker, the defending champion, who was seeded No. 1, and Ivan Lendl, seeded No. 3, had pulled out of the event, leaving Goran Ivanisevic as the favorite.
Neither Becker nor Lendl gave reasons for their withdrawals. (AP) Sanchez Gains: Emilio Sanchez of Spain broke his string of three straight opening-round losses, blitzing a wild-card entrant, Brian MacPhie, 6-2, 6-3, to advance in the Purex Tennis Championships in Scottsdale, Ariz.
The $275,000 ATP Tour event lost its defending champion when Derrick Rostagno defeated Stefano Pescosolido of Italy, 5-7, 6-2, 6-2. (AP)


May Department Stores Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


College Hockey Report
Maine  The Black Bears' various unbeaten steaks have come to an end.
Boston University's 7-6 overtime triumph at Orono on Friday ended Maine's undefeated status this season after 32 games, 30 of them victories.
Also concluding were unbeaten streaks of 50 games (46-0-4) at home; 44 regular-season games (40-0-4) and 33 contests (30-0-3) against Hockey East opponents.
Mike Prendergast, Boston University's sophomore forward from South Boston, who had been out a month because of a knee injury, ended all that when his shot went by Mike Dunham at 1 minute 50 seconds of overtime.
Dunham, a United States Olympian a year ago, had been unbeaten for Maine in his last 24 games.
The Terriers overcame a 6-2 deficit.
The next night Maine won, 6-1, and the two referees, Frank Cole and Drew Taylor, called 51 penalties for a total of 150 minutes, both Hockey East records.
There were six 10-minute misconduct penalties, all in the third period.
Four Maine goals came on power plays.
The Terriers never stopped Paul Kariya, Maine's celebrated freshman, who had seven assists in the two games.
Kariya has 44 assists for 58 points, a 2.9 average, in 20 league games.
Penalties?
One, for two minutes.
Rankings
The voters in The Albany Times Union's poll, 12 coaches and 13 news media representatives, still like Maine.
The Black Bears gained 24 first-place votes.
The other vote went to No. 2 Michigan.
Harvard is No. 3; Miami of Ohio, No. 4 and Boston University, No. 5.
Then come Minnesota-Duluth, No. 6; Lake Superior State, No. 7; Wisconsin, No. 8; Rensselaer, No. 9, and Clarkson and Minnesota tied for No. 10.
The poll ran counter to the Central Association standing, which finds Miami of Ohio continuing in first place with a 3-point lead over Lake Superior State and Michigan.
The latter two meet on Friday at Ann Arbor, Mich.
Women's Tournament  College hockey for women is making steady progress, according to Heather Linstad, the Northeastern coach.
"The caliber of players is improving," she said.
"And there are many more opportunties, like our national team and participation in the Olympic festival."
The Eastern College Athletic Association is sponsoring its first women's tournament, which begins tonight with St.
Lawrence (6-6) at New Hampshire (10-4-2) and Princeton (8-7-2) at Northeastern (9-4-2).
Rensselaer  The Engineers are a team to watch as the playoffs near.
They have won 9 of their last 11 games, which included Harvard's only league defeat.
The defense that supports goalie Neil Little gave up more than three goals only once, a 5-2 loss to Vermont.
Rensselaer, second behind Harvard in the ECAC standing and 1 point ahead of Yale, next plays ninth-place Colgate and 11th-place Cornell at home, while the slumping Bulldogs are at Clarkson and St.
Lawrence.
SUNY Tournament  Plattsburgh's Cardinals, the defending Division III champions, swept through the State University of New York league with an 11-0-1 record.
Next comes a four-team tournament Friday and Saturday in a two-game format, with 10-minute mini-games to break ties.
Oswego State (12-12-1 over all and 5-7-0 in the conference) plays at Plattsburgh (19-4-2, 11-0-1), and Fredonia (11-13-1, 7-4-1) visits Cortland State (17-7-0, 8-4-0).
Saves  The largest regular-season crowd in college hockey history, 18,275 spectators at Detroit's Joe Louis Arena, saw Michigan rout Michigan State, 11-1, on Jan. 30. . . .
Iona has clinched first place in the ECAC South group and will be the host team for a playoff game at Rye's Playland Casino on March 3 against an opponent to be named.


Books of The Times; The Klan's War Against Jews in the Deep South
Terror in the Night The Klan's Campaign Against the Jews By Jack Nelson Simon &amp; Schuster. 287 pages.
Publisher.
Jack Nelson was the Atlanta bureau chief of The Los Angeles Times in the summer of 1968 when he got a call in the middle of the night from Roy Gunn, the police chief of Meridian, Miss.
" 'O.K., Jack, get your pencil out,' the booming voice commanded. 'There's gonna be some wailing and gnashing of teeth.' "


PHH Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Wine Talk
Australia has more than 600 wineries.
They produce about 51 million cases of wine a year, or three cases for every person in this country of 17 million.
Since not everybody drinks his or her three cases, some nine million cases are exported.
The United States takes 10 percent of that -- 900,000 cases.
Not much compared with Britain, which takes 32 percent and where more Australian wine is sold than any other kind.
But Britain has no wine industry to speak of and the United States does.


Military Gave Aspin a Riskier Vaccine
Military doctors gave Defense Secretary Les Aspin a typhoid shot known to cause nausea and fever, aggravating a congenital heart condition, instead of a more expensive oral vaccine with fewer side effects, a senior Pentagon official said today.
"It's my understanding that the injection vaccine was used because it's cheaper than the oral one," said Mr.
Aspin's spokesman, Vernon A. Guidry Jr.
"That policy is now being reconsidered."


Personal Health
THE steady stream of well-publicized reports ascribing horrendous health risks to nearly every aspect of modern life, from electric blankets and cellular phones to post-menopausal hormones and now vasectomy, can fill otherwise rational people with feelings of panic and paranoia.
Such reports can leave people longing for the "simple" life of bygone days, when -- keep in mind -- life ended decades earlier and polio, rheumatic fever and tuberculosis claimed more lives than cancer.
Most people see or hear only the headline news when a purported new health threat looms, like last week's report of two large new studies linking vasectomy to an increased risk of developing cancer of the prostate or the report several weeks ago linking the use of cellular telephones to brain cancer.


Slaying of 3 Teen-Agers Sets Off Furor Over Spain's Justice System
The discovery in recent weeks of the bodies of three teen-age girls who had been raped, tortured and then shot has set off protests against lax criminal laws and lenient judges and has brought angry demands for a return of the death penalty in Spain.
Within a little more than a year, five children between the ages of 7 and 9 have also been raped and killed, while pictures of others still missing are starting to appear in airports, food markets and restaurants.


Theater in Review
Phaedra  Pearl Theater Company 125 West 22d Street Chelsea Through March 20 Written by Jean Racine; translated by Margaret Rawlings; directed by Shepard Sobel; stage manager, Liz Dreyer; set by Robert Joel Schwartz; lighting by Thomas C. Hase; costumes by Julie Abels Chevan; sound by Donna Riley.
Presented by the Pearl Theater Company.
WITH: Joanne Camp, Celeste Ciulla, Sheri Galan, Robert Hock, Bella Jarrett, Seth Jones and Sean Pratt.
After 315 years, Racine's tragedy about the ancient Greek queen Phaedra retains an emotional and intellectual power that sends one away from a performance personally troubled.
And the Pearl Theater Company's production of a version by the British actress Margaret Rawlings is a reminder that this great work of France's greatest tragedian can even survive translation from magnificent 17th-century couplets into simple modern English, and a performance that deliberately avoids the grand declamatory style of classic French theater.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Sunday about plans to eliminate Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty misstated the cost of constructing a radio transmitter in Israel.
The amount appropriated by Congress is $255.4 million, not $1 billion.


Market Place; Retailers with strong profits are rewarded with declining stocks.
THE market momentarily punished several retail stocks yesterday, despite strong fourth-quarter results and reports from merchants of good February business.
By the time the stock market had closed, the stocks had recovered some of their footing, although most ended the day with losses.
Oddly enough, some companies that had difficult or lackluster fourth quarters, like the Kmart Corporation and Gap Inc., escaped the roller-coaster ride.


Corrections
An article in the Real Estate section on Sunday about Sony's remodeling of the old A.T.&amp; T. building at 550 Madison Avenue referred incorrectly to Made From Scratch, a bakery in the building's arcade.
The bakery remains open.


Service Group At Yale Ousts Boy Scouts
Dwight Hall, Yale University's student-run community service organization, has denied membership to a Boy Scout troop and Cub Scout pack because of the national Boy Scout organization's policy of barring homosexuals.
Dwight Hall board members voted, 26 to 21, Monday night against re-admitting Boy Scout Troop 111 and Cub Scout Pack 111 as members.
While compromises are being considered, board members agreed to supply the two groups with money, for items like uniforms, and services, like transportation, until a meeting next month.


Bank Money Accounts
Annual effective yields, in percent, on money market accounts, three-month certificates of deposit and six-month C.D.'s expected at selected institutions on Wednesday, Feb. 24,1993.
Some C.D. yields assume reinvestment after maturity.
Yields are based on the method of compounding and the rate stated for the lowest minimum to open an account, but minimum vary.
Higher yields may be offered for larger deposits.
C.D. figures are for fixed rates only.
New York Area
Money
3-mo.
6-mo.
Mkt.
C.D.
C.D.
COMMERCIAL BANKS
Banco Popular
2.78
2.74
3.15
Bank of N.Y.
2.48
2.69
2.79
Bank of Tokyo Trust
2.28
2.25
2.34
Chase Manhattan
2.33
2.38
2.43
Chemical
2.12
2.65
2.70
Citibank
2.02
2.35
2.45
EAB
2.38
2.69
2.79
First Fidelity (N.J.)
2.70
2.75
2.90
Fleet Bank (Conn)
2.55
2.83
2.99
Key Bank of N.Y.
2.43
2.48
2.84
Marine Midland
2.38
2.48
2.58
Midlantic Bank (N.J.)
2.90
2.75
2.90
Nat'l Westminster
2.63
2.48
2.58
Republic Nat'l
2.48
2.63
2.79
Shawmut Bank (Conn)
2.53
2.84
2.99
SAVINGS BANKS
Anchor Savings
2.65
2.89
3.60
Apple Bank Savings
2.58
2.58
2.86
Astoria Fed Savings
2.94
2.84
2.89
Carteret Savings (N.J.)
2.94
3.00
3.25
Crossland Savings
2.65
2.80
3.05
Dime Savings Bank
2.85
2.85
3.06
Emigrant Savings
2.80
2.80
3.05
First Fed (Rochester)
3.05
2.95
3.05
First Nationwide
2.17
2.65
2.80
Greater NY Savings
2.75
2.80
3.00
Green Point Savings
3.00
N.O.
3.25
Home Savings Amer
2.68
2.79
3.05
Hudson City SB (N.J.)
3.00
3.40
3.50
People's Bank (Conn.)
2.73
2.84
3.05
River Bank America
2.90
2.85
3.10
Major Banks Outside N.Y.
Money
Wkly.
6 Mo.
Wkly.
Mkt.
Chg.
C.D.
Chg.
Bank One Texas
(Dallas)
2.58
0.00
2.90
-0.10
Bank of Boston
2.84
0.00
3.04
0.00
Citibank, S.D.
2.86
0.00
3.62
0.10
Comerica
(Detroit)
2.78
0.00
2.89
0.00
Fidelity Bank
(Philadelphia)
2.65
-0.05
2.90
0.00
First Bank
(Minnesota)
2.32
0.00
2.70
-0.00
First Interstate
(L.A.)
2.55
0.00
2.58
0.00
First National
(Chicago)
2.58
0.00
2.79
-0.10
First Union
(Charlotte, N.C.)
2.70
0.00
3.00
0.00
Fleet Bank
(Boston)
2.78
0.00
3.05
0.00
Maryland Natl
2.85
0.00
3.50
0.00
Mellon
(Pittsburgh)
2.63
-0.05
2.65
-0.10
Meridian Bank
(Reading Pa)
2.34
-0.05
3.00
-0.05
National Bank
(Detroit)
2.78
0.00
2.85
0.00
NationsBank
(Tampa)
2.35
0.00
3.10
0.00
Seafirst (Seattle)
2.50
0.00
3.00
0.00
Shawmut Bank
(Boston)
2.74
0.00
3.00
0.00
Texas
Commerce
(Houston)
2.27
0.00
2.94
0.00
Union Bank
(S.F.)
2.63
0.00
2.74
0.00
Wachovia
(Winston Salem,
N.C.)
2.70
0.00
2.95
0.00
N.A. Rate not available N.O. Not offered Source: Bank Rate Monitor  N. Palm Beach 33408


CHRONICLE
If William Howard Taft, Mr.
Bush and, as of Monday, GERALD R. FORD are all on the walls of the Yale Club of New York City, can President Clinton be far behind?
After all, they are all Yale University alumni.
As Robert A. Lindgren, president of the club, put it yesterday, "We have every intention of including every Yale President."


Book Notes
A Joycean Dispute
Lawyers for the estate and a grandson of James Joyce have notified Viking Penguin that they will sue the publishing house if it goes ahead with plans to publish what it has promoted as a newly discovered work by Joyce titled "Finn's Hotel."


Crime Against Tourists Prompts Florida Drive
News accounts abroad about recent incidents of violent crime against tourists in Florida prompted Gov.
Lawton Chiles to form a task force today to fight not only the problem itself but also any perception that the state is experiencing a wave of terror.
Mr.
Chiles told a meeting of about two dozen top tourism and police officials that "tourists are not in any extraordinary danger in Florida," where 40 million people visit from out of state each year.
Those visitors generate spending of $26 billion, making tourism the state's leading industry.


Christopher Meets Palestinians About Deportees
A delegation of Palestinians told Secretary of State Warren Christopher today that they would not return to the negotiating table with Israel until nearly 400 Palestinians deported by the Israelis last December are returned.
Dr.
Haidar Abdel-Shafi, the head of the Palestinian delegation to the peace talks, said after the first round of talks that he held the position that a United Nations Security Council resolution demanding the return of the deportees must be carried out first.


A.T.&amp; T. Signs Pact In China
In a deal that could be worth billions of dollars over the next several years, China agreed yesterday to discuss buying a wide range of equipment from A.T.&amp; T., including switching and transmission systems, cellular telephones, and business phones and computer networks.
Formally, the agreement signed by the American Telephone and Telegraph Company yesterday with the State Planning Commission of China is merely a memorandum of understanding to study possible investments.


Classical Music in Review
Sergei Schepkin Pianist Weill Recital Hall


Alvin Schonfeld; Securities Executive, 74
Alvin Schonfeld, a retired Wall Street executive, died on Monday at the Humana Hospital in Phoenix.
He was 74 and lived in Phoenix.
His son, Robert, said the cause was heart failure.


Sasebo Journal; 'Quiet' Navy Base in Japan: Now, the Shock Waves
Ever since American bombers razed a large part of this once-huge naval port at the end of World War II, the United States Navy has used it as a modest-sized support base, a handsomely situated outpost that some sailors sought out as a refuge from the often wilder American bases spread across Japan.
Suddenly, times have changed, and nobody seems very pleased about it.


Under Fire, Accreditors of Colleges Break Ranks
For most of this century, the accrediting groups who pass judgment on the academic fitness of the nation's colleges and universities did their work in obscurity, traveling around to assess faculty, classrooms, curriculum and so forth, with their ultimate judgments largely unquestioned.
This obscurity was shattered in recent years as the accrediting process came under intense scrutiny by Congress, government officials and educators.
One accrediting group, the Middle States Association, got into trouble with the Federal Government for using "cultural diversity" as an evaluation criterion.
And as vocational and technical schools of dubious quality cost the Government millions of dollars in student loan defaults, questions were raised about their accreditors.


FOOD NOTES
A Harvard Exhibition


A Bald Spot on Top May Predict Heart Risk
Younger men with bald spots on top of their heads may have reason to protect their hearts as well as cover their scalps.
In a study of men under 55, a bald patch in that position was found to be correlated with a slight but definite increase in the risk of heart attack, according to a study being reported today in The Journal of the American Medical Association.
The risk did not hold for frontal baldness or loss of hair from other areas of the scalp.


For Consumers, a Wobbly Faith
A wave of layoffs at some of the nation's best-known corporations shook Americans' faith in the economic recovery earlier this month, raising the specter that consumers will pull back on spending.
The Conference Board's index of consumer confidence tumbled eight points in early February, to 68.5, the New York-based business research group said.
The fall reversed more than half of the surge in consumers' spirits in the two months after the Presidential election, though the index remained well above recession readings of 50 or lower.
Some Question Findings
But retailers and economists said the Conference Board results had to be taken with a large grain of salt.


Nissan Plans Shutdown Of Auto Plant
In another major retrenchment, the Nissan Motor Company said today that in two years it planned to cease automobile assembly in what was once its flagship Japanese factory.
Japanese car companies had invested heavily in new plants in the last few years, only to be faced now with overcapacity as demand continues to shrink.
Nissan's announcement, however, represents one of the first times during the current slump that an auto company has decided to shut down a factory, although Isuzu Motors has said it will give up car manufacturing entirely.
Nissan to Cut 5,000 Jobs
Nissan also said it would cut 5,000 employees from its staff of 53,000 in three years through attrition and reduced hiring.
In announcing the new plans today, the Tokyo-based company also said that the parent company now expects to report an operating loss of $330 million for the fiscal year that ends next month.
That figure represents an increase of more than 75 percent from the loss that Nissan had forecast in November.


Japanese Business Sees a High Cost in Rising Yen
The last time cries of "endaka!" -- the term for the surging strength of the Japanese yen -- reverberated here in the mid-1980's, Japan's economy was booming and the United States was searching for a quick way to reduce its vast trade deficit with Tokyo.
The monetary solution helped a little, but only temporarily.
Now Japan's trade surpluses are growing again, largely because the country's economic slowdown has squeezed the consumption of American goods here to a trickle.
And once again, Japanese officials say they are hoping that a powerful yen will buy them brief political peace in Washington by lowering the trade deficit and with it the pressure for protectionism.


TASTINGS
Hamilton Russell Vineyards 1989 Pinot Noir, South Africa; about $14
Tim Hamilton Russell, a retired advertising executive, has succeeded in making world-class chardonnay and pinot noir at his spectacularly beautiful vineyard and winery at Hermanus, about 40 miles east of Cape Town.
It is the southernmost vineyard in South Africa and the coolest.
This pinot noir was made by Peter Finlayson, Hamilton Russell Vineyards' first wine maker, who now has his own vineyard and winery next door in partnership with Bouchard Aine et Fils of Burgundy.
The Burgundy connection continues: the new Hamilton Russell wine maker is Storm Kreusch-Dau, who works half the year with Prosper Maufoux, another prominent Burgundy wine concern.
As prices have risen steadily for Burgundy, pinot noir lovers have turned to Oregon, California, even Italy, to find worthy substitutes.
This 1989 is the culmination of Mr.
Finlayson's years at Hamilton Russell.
It's got a classic Burgundian gout de terroir -- taste of the soil -- and a lovely bouquet.
But it is in limited supply.


INSIDE
Ruling on Lying Defendants
The Supreme Court held that defendants who testify falsely may be subjected to additional prison time for obstructing justice.
Page A18.
What Ails Aspin: a 35 Shot
Military doctors aggravated the Defense Secretary's heart ailment by giving a 35-cent typhoid shot instead of a $1.90 oral vaccine.
Page A13.
Colorado Skiers Survive
Five cross-country skiers who had been missing in the Rockies since Saturday were found alive and for the most part healthy.
Page A12.
Big Carrot for G.M.
In a long-shot effort to keep a General Motors plant open, New York officials are compiling a multimillion-dollar package of inducements.
Page B1.
Heeding Viewers' Demands
In the face of a public outcry, a Connecticut cable television system will retain home-grown stations that it had planned to drop.
Page B5.


SWEEPING REVERSAL OF U.S. LAND POLICY SOUGHT BY CLINTON
Acting on orders from President Clinton to cut grazing, timber, mining and water subsidies, Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt is trying to roll back more than a century of practices that have promoted the development of the West at Government expense.
While the plan to charge market rates for commercial use of public resources is being billed as an effort to reduce the deficit, its real importance would be to reverse the way nearly 500 million acres of Western land, equal to about one-fifth of the United States, are managed.


60-Minute Gourmet
LAST year, I visited a trout hatchery in Idaho.
Over the years I had tasted Idaho trout, which are widely marketed in this country, but I was never sure why they were so good.
The operation was indeed impressive.
The eggs are hatched in an incubator that is fed by a natural stream that flows from a pristine waterfall nearby.
The baby fish are sent to various freshwater tanks until they reach a certain weight.
They are caught with nets and immediately processed, some flash frozen, others boxed fresh in dry ice and shipped all over the country.
Of course, the fresh product is the best.
But I was impressed with the flash frozen, too, for if the fish are thawed properly and used immediately, they can be excellent.
The French term truite au bleu (blue trout), however, is altogether different.
It refers not to the color, but to the method of preparation.
These fish are alive, usually in ponds or tanks, up to the moment they are cleaned for cooking.
They are usually poached in a court bouillon and served with melted butter or hollandaise sauce.


Lifetime Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Couple Fatally Shot in Car
A man and a woman were shot to death last night as they drove through Flatlands, Brooklyn, the police said.
The couple, whom the police did not identify, were riding in a Jeep-like vehicle near the corner of Avenue J and Schenectedy Avenue shortly after 6 P.M. when they were shot, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
Anthony Barlant.
A 2-year-old boy riding in the rear seat was unharmed, the police said.
Sergeant Barlanti said the woman died at the scene, while the man died several hours later at Kings County Hospital.
The police were seeking a motive for the killing last night and said they had no suspects in the case.


Loss by the Hurricanes Is No Laughing Matter
Oddly enough, it figured.
Expecting a tough time tonight with a University of Miami team that had won six of seven Big East Conference games in Miami Arena this season, Seton Hall promptly turned the game into a laugher.
P.
J.
Carlesimo, the Seton Hall coach, is still trying to assess his team.
He had moaned before the game, "We're the type of team that I never know which team is going to show up."


Ford Motor Co. of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Classical Music in Review
Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center
Alice Tully Hall
The repertory for saxophone quartet is not as limited as one might expect.
Various ensembles around the world have been commissioning works for the basic family of saxophones: soprano, alto, tenor and baritone.
One such is the Swedish Saxophone Quartet, which has incited a strong body of compositions from Scandinavian composers.
Another is the Prism Quartet, which gave the world premiere of Michael Ruszczynski's "Fantasy Quartet" at a Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center concert on Friday night.
Mellifluous and stylistically versatile, the new work made a strong impression; a broad texture of saxophone sonorities emerged.
The players -- Reginald Borik, Michael Whitcombe, Matthew Levy and Timothy Miller -- blended personalities handsomely.


Bank Merger Challenged
An institutional shareholder who is opposing the acquisition of Society for Savings Bancorp of Hartford by the Bank of Boston Corporation said yesterday that other banks were willing to pay more than the existing offer, which is valued at about $200 million.
Michael Price, the manager of the Mutual Shares mutual fund, said he had received "indications of interest" from other banks, but did not identify them.
Accounts managed by Mr.
Price own 635,939 shares of Society, or about 5.4 percent of the outstanding stock.
Robert Beggs, a Society spokesman, said the bank had not received any such expressions of interest, but declined to comment further.


Catholics Turn to Courts In Cases of Priestly Abuse
A Poughkeepsie priest's sexual abuse of a young man has led to a suit against the Archdiocese of New York, one of a growing number of cases in which Roman Catholics are turning to the courts, rather than the church, to deal with abusive priests.
The suit seeks $25 million from the priest, who pleaded guilty in October to sexually abusing the youth, and $25 million more from the archdiocese.
The complainants contend that archdiocesan officials put the priest in charge of a youth group knowing that he had abused other youths in a previous assignment.


Russians Make Ballet of Swans, Yet We Call Them a Nuisance
To the Editor:
In "The Swan, Multiplying Prolifically, Becomes an Ugly Duckling" (news article, Feb. 3), you observe that "Despite their grace and beauty, swans are not only mean and aggressive toward other birds but also potentially dangerous to humans."


WENDY'S INTERNATIONAL (N)
Wendy's International Inc. ended a strong year with a fourth-quarter profit 35 percent higher than in the comparable period of 1991, the company announced yesterday.
For the fiscal year, which ended on Jan. 3, the Dublin, Ohio, company re corded a 26 percent increase in profits, a rise partly attributable to more restaurants.
During 1992, Wendy's added 235 outlets, bringing the company total to 4,010 open or under construction at the end of the year.


Track and Field; Devers Takes Balanced Approach
Gail Devers practiced indoors today here at the Brennan Recreation Center at Seton Hall, where the sun could not irritate her skin and where her coach, Bob Kersee, was trying hard not to irritate anybody.
"He wouldn't waste it now," Devers said.
"But when he wants to, Bobby is the only one who can push me and get me mad."


Administration Completing Plan To Ease Rules on Bank Lending
President Clinton and Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, said today that the Administration and banking regulators were completing a plan to ease banking regulations to encourage more lending, especially to small businesses.
According to interviews with officials in the Administration, Congress and the Federal Reserve, the plan would make it easier for bankers to lend to people they know based on the borrower's character rather than a strict analysis of their collateral, cash flow or credit history.
The plan would also lessen paperwork and ease other restrictions for small-business loans.


Is VW Wooing G.M. Cost Cutter?
The General Motors Corporation's new purchasing chief, Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, who has shaken suppliers and the United Automobile Workers union with his cost-cutting initiatives, is being courted by Volkswagen A.G., auto industry executives said today.
The German auto maker and G.M. would not officially confirm the reports, but German Government and automotive circles are abuzz with talk that Mr.
Lopez may accept a top executive position at Volkswagen as part of broader management changes coming in mid-March.


Economic Scene; Clinton's plan pales before the 900-pound health-care gorilla.
A MAJORITY of Americans polled thinks President Clinton's economic plan is just dandy.
And why not?
While both the Senate Finance Committee chairman, Daniel Patrick Moynihan, and the Republican leadership may hear the clatter of Mr.
Clinton's no-middle-class-tax pledge being thrown out the window, the dominant sound is a collective sigh of relief that the President is asking for less than a dollar a day from the typical family.
The catch is that the dollar is only "a modest down payment," in the words of Henry Aaron, an economist at the Brookings Institution.
Health care is the 900-pound gorilla of deficit finance.
And unless Washington curbs the animal's appetite or sharply raises taxes to keep it supplied with bananas -- or both -- the deficit will break records by the end of the century.


Guaranty National reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


High-Level Grumbling Over Pace of Appointments
Some Cabinet officers and others in the Clinton Administration are expressing frustration with the time-consuming efforts by the White House to add diversity and otherwise influence selections for top Government posts.
Some of the Cabinet members have told others that they blame fine-tuning by the White House for compounding a process that is already slower than that of President Clinton's comparable recent predecessors.


Illness Again Delays Glen Ridge Sex Trial
Resumption of the Glen Ridge sexual assault trial was delayed today until Monday at the earliest because of the continued illness of a juror.
Aides to Judge R. Benjamin Cohen declined to discuss the nature of the illness, which has now forced cancellation of the trial for a week.


There's A History Behind the Slopes
People have been skiing in North America since the mid-1800's and for centuries in the Alps and Scandinavia, so it is not surprising that there are numerous ski museums around the world as well as a new association for ski history buffs.
Mason Beekley, a New Hartford, Conn., businessman, had been collecting books on skiing since 1945 when it occurred to him that many of the significant figures in recent ski history were growing old and that their recollections of events could die with them.
With that in mind, in 1991 Beekley founded the International Skiing History Association, which now has 700 members in 14 countries.


High Court Limits U.S. Power to Take Property in Drug Cases
The Supreme Court today rebuffed the Justice Department's assertion of sweeping power to confiscate property tainted in any way by an illegal drug transaction.
The Court voted 6 to 3 that a New Jersey woman who bought a house with money the Government later traced to her boyfriend's drug dealing was entitled to defend herself as an "innocent owner" against the Government's efforts to seize the house under a 1978 drug forfeiture law.
The woman, Beth Ann Goodwin, of Rumson, insisted that she did not know that the gift of $240,000 from her boyfriend was the result of his marijuana trafficking.


Yields Are Slightly Lower On Money Market Funds
Money market fund yields were off slightly last week, as investors, confused by monetary and fiscal policy in Washington, sought safety in money funds.
"The large inflow into money market funds is coming from the stock market and is just being parked temporarily," said Walter Frank, chief economist at The Money Fund Report, an Ashland, Mass., newsletter.


William Kammerer, Physician, Teacher And Volunteer, 80
William H. Kammerer, a physician and professor who was an expert in rheumatology, died on Feb. 17 at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Indianapolis.
He was 80 and lived in Culver, Ind.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


HCA-Hospital Corp. of America reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pups Don't Bark; Birds Don't Chirp
HERE'S something for children of parents who feel beleaguered by pleas for more pets around the house: their very own pet store.
Introduced by Kenner, the Littlest Pet Shop is a suitcase-like hinged plastic box equipped with shelves and compartments that can be filled with toy puppies, guppies and kitties, as well as a couple of chameleons.
The pet shop, which can be considered a starter set (think of it the same way you would an empty dollhouse), is $18.99.
It does come with a pair of lovebirds and a check-out counter with a tiny cash register.
But realize they are there only to whet the appetite.
Extra items -- and there are loads of them, of course -- are $4.99, $5.99 and $6.99.
They include turtles, mice, hamsters and a hamster house, a bunny in a basket and a toucan with a cage.
A dog bed, pet carrier, tree stump and other pet paraphernalia are also available.


Indecent Disclosure
There's a big problem with proposed new Federal legislation to curb the influence of lobbyists.
The lobbyists aren't rallying against it.
That means Congress, aided and abetted by President Clinton, is getting ready to commit a giant hoax.
This hoax has a title: the Lobbyist Disclosure Act of 1993.
A more apt title might be the Congressional Freebies Preservation Act.
The measure, expected to be moved on today by the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee, is a blueprint for concealing how favor-seeking special interests bestow benefits on members of Congress and their staffs.


A Wright Fan, by Way of Tokyo
SHIN TAKAMATSU, the Tokyo architect who has offices around the world, was on his way to San Francisco from Berlin and was passing through New York to talk about the retrospective of his work (25 architectural models and more than 500 drawings) that opens next Thursday and runs to June 6 at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art.
"The scale on which New York is built is fascinating to observe," said Mr.
Takamatsu, who last visited about five years ago.
He is more involved with large commercial commissions, but he has kept an interest in designing furniture for the home.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Marina  The Ballroom 253 West 28th Street Chelsea Through Tuesday
The appearance of Marina, a 37-year-old singer, songwriter and guitarist in the Ballroom's annual Brazilian series is the closest the festival has come this year to acknowledging the existence of a younger, rock-oriented generation of pop personalities.
And at Tuesday's opening-night performance, the singer, whose last name is Lima and whose style has only fleeting ties to traditional Brazilian music, exuded a chilly charisma.


8 Children Found Alone In Apartment
Eight children ranging in age from 13 months to 15 years were found dirty, partly clothed and without food in a roach-infested Brooklyn apartment yesterday by an attendance taker who went to find out why two of the children had not been in school for more than a month, the police said.
The two girls and six boys were removed by the police from the apartment on the second floor of 1391 Sterling Place, in Crown Heights, and taken to St.
Mary's Hospital for a checkup.
The refrigerator in the apartment was empty, and one youngster told an officer that he had not eaten in five days.


Serbian Forces Halt Land Convoy Taking Aid to Besieged Bosnians
As the Clinton Administration worked on details of its plan to airdrop relief supplies to isolated towns in Bosnia, Serbian forces halted a convoy of supplies today in an apparent signal of their determination to block overland deliveries.
A United Nations convoy of 12 trucks carrying food and medicine to the besieged Muslim town of Gorazde in eastern Bosnia was held all day at a Serbian military checkpoint at Rogatica, 20 miles to the north.
United Nations relief officials in Sarajevo said workers had told them by radio that the Serbian nationalists were inspecting the contents of each truck carton by carton.
Only six of the trucks had been inspected by nightfall, they said.


Piano Schools for Adults
To The Home Section:
Your perceptive article on adult piano study  [ "Adults Who Take Piano Need Teachers With the Right Touch," Jan. 21 ]  neglects to mention any but the 92d Street Y among New York's community music schools.
I teach at both Henry Street Settlement and Turtle Bay Music School.
Bloomingdale House of Music, Greenwich House, Harlem School of the Arts and Third Street Music School Settlement are other schools in Manhattan where adults are welcome.


Review/Television; Just an Irish-American, Blowing Smoke
"Denis Leary: No Cure for Cancer" had an Off-Broadway run of several months last year.
Now, trimmed slightly and directed by Ted Demme, it can be seen as a one-hour special on Showtime.
Tonight's broadcast is at 9:30.
On the surface, the thirtyish, pleasant-looking Mr.
Leary might momentarily be confused with Andrew Dice Clay.
There's the black leather jacket, the deep inhaling of cigarettes and a style of delivery that tends toward rant.
But that's just the surface.
Mr.
Leary is not a clod exploiting various forms of bigotry.
He's a nice Irish-American guy from Boston who is determined to be as tough and stoical as his father, even if it kills him.
And the way he is puffing on those cigarettes, it just might.


George Town Journal Their Prison Island: U.S. Policy Maroons Cubans
When Angel Garcia set out recently for Florida from the southern coast of Cuba in a stolen, overcrowded lobster boat, he figured that if he was picked up at sea it would be by the Cuban authorities, who would arrest him, or by the United States Coast Guard, which would rescue him.
Instead, with the rotting 60-foot wooden boat leaking badly, Mr.
Garcia was forced to direct the vessel toward the nearby Cayman Islands, where a private scuba-charter boat towed it the final 15 miles to harbor.


United Asset Management Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Eric Clapton Wins 6 Grammys With His 'Unplugged' Album
A self-effacing Eric Clapton won six Grammy Awards, sweeping the pop and rock categories, at last night's 35th annual awards ceremony in Los Angeles.
"I was convinced that this wasn't worth releasing," Mr.
Clapton said of his album "Unplugged," a live performance originally telecast on MTV, which was chosen as album of the year and best male solo rock performance.
"There were better songs," he said of "Tears in Heaven," the elegiac ballad for his dead son that was named record of the year, best pop vocal and song of the year.
Mr.
Clapton thanked "my son for the love he gave me and the song he gave me." The relaxed version of "Layla" that appears on "Unplugged" also won an award as best rock song.


Review/Dance; From All Angles, a Lesson In the Geometry of Love
Have you ever walked around while carrying your chum or mate upside down, at a tilt, overhead, wrapped around various parts of your body or cantilevered from a shoulder?
Where others will rush in and see a crash course in weight lifting, a dance poet like Erick Hawkins will reach for the ineffable or the epiphany in such images.
In his latest work, "Each Time You Carry Me This Way," Mr.
Hawkins comes up with a bold new dance piece that exuberantly celebrates the human body in the extreme.
The chaste and sensuous unite here as naturally as they do in other Hawkins choreography, but the end product is different, a marriage of the subtle and the startling.


Corrections
An article on Friday about a benefit for the Actors Studio listed its founders incorrectly.
They were Elia Kazan, Cheryl Crawford and Robert Lewis.
Lee Strasberg served as artistic director from the founding of the organization in 1947 until his death in 1982.


Security Device Ruling Delayed
The board of the National Association of Record Merchandisers has postponed a decision on which type of theft-prevention technology its 850 members should use until it obtains the results of an additional study.
The trade group is trying to pick a standard for antishoplifting technology.
It is choosing between devices that use radio frequency and acousto-magnetic formats, and has set up a committee to recommend one.
The group's board, which had been expected to announce the choice yesterday, instead said it would meet in a week to consider the new review.


15-Year-Old Dies in Attack In School Hall
A 15-year-old student fatally stabbed a classroom rival at a Manhattan junior high school yesterday after a long feud between them flared into a deadly quarrel over a pair of sunglasses, authorities said.
The killing occurred between classes in a hallway crowded with students and teachers.
It was the second fatal stabbing inside a public school this year, and prompted calls by the Manhattan Borough President, Ruth W. Messinger, and teachers' union leaders for increased school security.


Bonds Steps Onstage for Career's Second Act
Barry Bonds, dressed for his first workout as a member of the San Francisco Giants, walked into the team's Scottsdale Stadium dugout today and said, "It's cloudy."
The weather or your future, he was asked.


Protectionism Doesn't Help Balance of Trade; We Must Manufacture
To the Editor:
In "Car Import Duty Can Only Hurt U.S. Economy"(letter, Feb. 7), Michael May seems to argue that America's economic position is improved if it imports automobiles without some form of control.
The consumer will save $1 billion (no basis provided for that number), the trade deficit will help pay the Federal deficit and lower the interest rate.


A Screenwriter Profits From His Years of Pain
Bo Goldman should be on top of the world.
He has won two Academy Awards for his screenplays, he is one of the most respected writers in Hollywood and, at 60 he is about to start directing his first movie.
But Mr.
Goldman, who wrote the screenplay for "Scent of a Woman," is in pain.
Raw, seemingly permanent pain.
And the fact that he has been nominated for an Oscar for the moviehardly assuages the pain.
"People ask me, 'Are you surprised?' " he said.
"I'm always surprised when anything good happens to me.


People
*
Geoffrey Frost, senior executive vice president and director of marketing planning at FCB/Leber Katz Partners, New York, was promoted to the new position of executive vice president and managing partner for worldwide creative resources at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding International.
Mr.
Frost, 43, will continue to be based in New York. *
Holly M. Detels was named to the new position of international coordinator and media strategist at Lintas Media Systems International, New York, a worldwide media unit being formed to coordinate projects for Lintas Worldwide.
She was previously media supervisor at Initiative Media, Hamburg, Germany.


I.B.M. Plans Layoffs in New Cutback
I.B.M. said yesterday that it expected to lay off some employees when it eliminates 500 jobs at its corporate headquarters next month.
The layoffs would be the first ever for the computer maker, which has a 79-year tradition of virtual lifetime employment.


Rioting by Warlord's Supporters Creates Havoc in Somali Capital
After two months of relative calm, the Somali capital exploded in violence today, as thousands of partisans of a major warlord stormed the streets, looting, burning tires, hurling rocks and menacing foreigners.
The rioting paralyzed the city, stopping traffic at the seaport and the airports, and choked some streets in a spree of looting and destruction.
More important, it appeared to be a major setback to a rapid withdrawal of American soldiers and to a United Nations takeover of the foreign troop presence, which is scheduled for April.


CSS Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


George M. How, 35, An Architect, Is Dead
George M. How, an architect who helped to design the new NASA headquarters in Washington, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 35.
The cause was AIDS, said his companion, Oren Makov.


West's Drought Ends, the Political Terrain Altered
With yet another winter storm having pounded the West Coast Tuesday, creating mudslides, urban flooding and towering snow drifts in the High Sierra, the drought that has punished the West for six years has come to a drenching end.
After two months of relentless rains and snows, Gov.
Pete Wilson made it official today by declaring the drought over because the reservoirs are expected to reach 90 percent of average for the month by April.
"The end of rationing does not mean the end of conservation," he said.


Books of The Times; Murders and Regrets in Southern California
The Cheshire Moon  By Robert Ferrigno  285 pages. William Morrow &amp; Company. $20.
Quinn is haunted by "the mini-mart killing." This is how he recalls it a little way into Robert Ferrigno's gripping new novel, "The Cheshire Moon." As a reporter for The Los Angeles Times-Herald, he had once discovered that the District Attorney of Long Beach was about to use a phony witness to convict a small-time thief named Groggins charged with raping and murdering two Long Beach State University students.
When he broke the story, the jury found Groggins innocent, and Quinn was nominated for his second Pulitzer.


Homecare Management reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


New Momentum for the Race to Refinance
All across America, corporate managers, municipal officials and homeowners are scrambling to take advantage of the sharp decline in long-term interest rates to levels that most have never before seen.
They are trading in their old debt for new, and in some cases are cutting their interest costs in half, a move that will save them money and give the economy a lift.
The race to refinance, under way for more than a year, gained new momentum in the last week as investors focused on the deficit-cutting plans in the economic program President Clinton presented to Congress.
The rate on 30-year Treasury bonds, a commonly used yardstick, has plunged below 7 percent for the first time in 16 years.
On Tuesday it hit 6.82 percent.
Yesterday, the bonds finished the day at 6.88 percent.
Lower Rates 'Like Magic'
"Declining interest rates over time are like magic," said Allen Sinai, the chief economist at the Boston Company.
"They never fail eventually to revive a sick economy so long as inflation remains quiet."


Swank Inc. (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Let the Dance Begin, Say the Free Agents
The band is warming up.
The dance floor is polished.
The party that National Football League players have been awaiting for several years -- unrestricted free agency -- is about to begin.
From March 1 through July 15, there's going to be a lot of courting and dancing between unrestricted free agents -- veterans with at least five years' experience whose contracts have expired -- and the 28 N.F.L. teams.
But the first tune from the band, the trumpeting of so-called franchise and transition players, has struck a sour note, and most N.F.L. teams are apparently prepared to sit this one out.


CHRONICLE
Gov.
LOWELL P. WEICKER JR. of Connecticut was talking to a business and industry association in Hartford yesterday about the budget problems the Clinton Administration faces when he mentioned that he is writing his autobiography.
The book, which Little, Brown later confirmed was planned for 1994 publication, will be a collaborative effort with BARRY SUSSMAN, author of "The Great Coverup: Nixon and the Scandal of Watergate," which Little, Brown put out last year.


Manpower Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


DOOR MAY BE OPEN FOR ABORTION PILL TO BE SOLD IN U.S.
The president of the French company that makes the abortion pill RU486 told the Commissioner of Food and Drugs today that he believed the drug should be made available in the United States, the Commissioner said.
The Commissioner, Dr.
David A. Kessler, and the pharmaceutical executive, Edouard Sakiz of Roussel-Uclaf, held a meeting in Rockville, Md., that may signal the first step toward bringing the abortion drug to market in the United States.
Dr.
Kessler said Mr.
Sakiz was willing to discuss how the drug could be brought to market by another company or research institution under an agreement with his company.


Europeans Lend Satellite to U.S. For the Weather
A satellite borrowed from Europe has moved into position to monitor the weather over the United States, joining the sole remaining American spacecraft making high-altitude weather readings, Government officials said today.
The European satellite Meteosat-3, in a 22,300-mile-high orbit above the equator, completed its move from a position over the Atlantic coast of South America to the Pacific side on Sunday, they said, and began routine operations today.


Review/Theater; Out of the Blues, a Legendary Singer
Robert Johnson met the devil at a crossroad and sold his soul for the sake of his music: that's what some people believed.
How else could one explain the guitarist's sudden transformation from mediocrity to genius?
The Johnson legend grew after his death in 1938, as did his reputation.
Following a series of rediscoveries, most prominently by the Rolling Stones and Eric Clapton, he is now accepted as a seminal figure in the history of blues.
The playwright Bill Harris has taken Johnson's music and what is known of his secretive life and woven them together with a story of his own invention.
The result is "Robert Johnson: Trick the Devil," a high-spirited and often rhapsodic search for the musician's soul.


Mulroney Quits Post in Canada; Urges 'Renewal'
Brian Mulroney, Canada's 18th Prime Minister, who solidified free trade with the United States but failed to reinforce unity between English- and French-speaking Canadians, announced today that he is retiring after eight and a half years in office.
The Canadian leader, who has been dogged by a weak economy, high unemployment and the lowest support in opinion polls for any Prime Minister in this century, said he was stepping down to make way for a leadership convention in mid-June and a rapid makeover of his Progressive Conservative party for elections this fall.


Affordable Child-Care
To The Home Section:
[ "Finding a Nanny Legally: Agencies Can Help Lift the Burden," Jan. 28 ]  paints a far rosier picture of the child-care options legally available to American families.


Protectionism Doesn't Help Balance of Trade; Semiconductors
To the Editor:
"Mickey Kantor's Historic Task" (editorial, Feb. 2) misstates the semiconductor industry's position on tariffs and trade liberalization.


A New Worry: Going to Work Can Be Murder
In New York City, the leading cause of death on the job is not construction accidents, car crashes or machinery malfunctions.
It's homicide.
The Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics, in its first detailed analysis of work-related fatalities, found that 69 percent of the 177 New York City workers who died of injuries sustained on the job in 1991 were victims of homicide.
The number of slain workers, the bureau found, far exceeded those who died from causes like transportation accidents, falls, fires and explosions.


Is Harrick's Coaching Job in Jeopardy?
The coaching future of JIM HARRICK at U.C.L.A. apparently will be determined by a lot more than just wins and losses.
Chancellor CHARLES YOUNG, speaking publicly about Harrick's situation for the first time, said that academics, team conduct and adherence to National Collegiate Athletic Association regulations are equally as important as winning.


For Those Who Like to Sweat, Some New Gadgets to Help
MANUFACTURERS of sports equipment look forward to spring because stores begin stocking their shelves with products for the upcoming outdoor seasons.
But it is at midwinter trade shows, where buyers meet wholesalers, that new equipment first appears in public.
The largest of the trade exhibitions is the Super Show, which was held this month in Atlanta.
More than 90,000 retailers and manufacturers attended the show, which was spread over 2.2 million square feet of space and 9,000 booths at four locations.


Trial to Start Today in Los Angeles Beating Case
Last-minute legal hurdles were cleared and all the alternate jurors were seated today in the Federal trial of four Los Angeles police officers accused of violating the civil rights of a black motorist, Rodney G. King.
That set the stage for opening statements on Thursday.
In separate rulings, the judge rejected one officer's assertion that his lawyer might have a conflict of interest and denied a defense allegation that a black juror might be biased in the case.


Skiers Who Survived Ordeal Get the Celebrity Treatment
Something akin to a hero's welcome greeted the five cross-country skiers who made their way to safety on Monday after surviving a harrowing four-day ordeal in the mountains near Aspen.
Television interviewers marveled at the bravery of the survivors, who lost their bearings in a blinding snowstorm and were feared trapped by an avalanche.
And a luxury hotel in Aspen invited one of the skiers, Ken Torp, to be its guest of honor.


Granite Construction (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New L.I. Mosque Fills Spiritual and Social Needs
At first, there were only three, and they prayed in the basement.
Now there are more than 500, and they have moved from a modest house in this suburban village to a mosque across the lawn -- finished this month despite a lack of money and the consternation of neighbors who at first did not care much for the faithful in a basement, much less in a mosque in their backyard.


Missed Event Costs Jordan and Pippen
MICHAEL JORDAN and SCOTTIE PIPPEN of the Chicago Bulls were each fined $10,000 by the National Basketball Association yesterday for missing a news conference during the All-Star Weekend.
The N.B.A. vice president of operations, ROD THORN, said in a statement that the fines were for "failing to appear at the media availability session" on the Friday before the All-Star game.
The game was played on Sunday.
It was not known why Pippen missed the news media session, but Jordan reportedly was playing golf.


Review/Music; Pitching a Large Voice to a Small Space
In a relatively few years, Susanne Mentzer has established herself as a consistently satisfying presence in the international opera network.
This reviewer knows her from performances at the Metropolitan Opera and in Santa Fe, but the American mezzo-soprano also takes her major roles from Covent Garden to La Scala and beyond.
Playing to an audience less than 10 percent the size she might expect at the Met (several hundred as opposed to nearly 4,000), Ms.
Mentzer explored the intimacies of Weill Recital Hall on Friday night, seeking with varied success to adjust operatic scale to the very different demands of the song recital.


For an Artist, Accomplishments Suddenly Made Her a Target
To her two attackers, Bonnie Bear, a graphics designer who was shot in the neck on Tuesday morning, must have looked like an easy mark, perhaps a wealthy out-of-towner loading the trunk of a silver Mercedes-Benz bearing Pennsylvania license plates.
But friends with that theory who live on the two-block street in TriBeCa where she was shot said that she is not wealthy, and has lived for more than a decade on the street, which most residents had always considered safe.
The car, the symbol of wealth that may have attracted the attackers, was not really even hers, they said.


Joyner-Kersee to Miss Meet
At the insistence of her husband, Jackie Joyner-Kersee has withdrawn from the USA/Mobil track meet at Madison Square Garden on Friday and will not be eligible for the world indoor championships in Toronto in two weeks.
Joyner-Kersee had originally been entered in both the 60-meter hurdles and the long jump.
But Bob Kersee, her coach and husband, said that Joyner-Kersee was only in "one-race shape," and that was not good enough for him.


Microsoft Trademark Setback
In a case that echoes earlier fights over terms like "Light Beer" and "the Pill," the Federal Government has issued a preliminary decision denying the Microsoft Corporation a trademark for the word "Windows" on its hugely successful computer program by that name.
If it is upheld, the decision by the United States Patent and Trademark Office, which Microsoft will appeal, would be a big blow to the software giant.
Microsoft dominates the market for programs that provide the basic instructions on I.B.M.-compatible personal computers.


And the Grammy Winners Are...
Here are the winners at the 35th annual Grammy Awards ceremony last night in Los Angeles:
Single Record: Eric Clapton, "Tears in Heaven"


Astec Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


British Premier Backing Clinton On the Airdrops
President Clinton won the backing of Prime Minister John Major of Britain today for America's proposed airdrop of relief supplies into Bosnia.
But the two leaders clashed on another key issue as Mr.
Major appeared to reject American complaints that the Europeans were unfairly subsidizing their civilian aircraft industry.


E'Town Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Conseco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A front-page picture caption in The Living Section yesterday, with a cross reference to an article about Russell Baker's selection as host of "Masterpiece Theater," omitted the identity of the girl with Mr.
Baker.
She was his granddaughter Laura Baker.


National Standard Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Head of Nuclear Forces Plans for a New World
Here on the frozen Midwestern prairie, one of America's senior generals is devising a new strategy of nuclear deterrence.
Neither President Clinton nor Defense Secretary Les Aspin has been advised yet, but Gen.
Lee Butler and his planners at the United States Strategic Command, the nerve center of America's nuclear strike force, are in the early stages of building and testing computer models that could enable the President to aim nuclear weapons at third world nations that threaten the interests of the United States or its allies.


First, Islanders Pack Up Then Head Out Happy
Too much of a good thing isn't too good.
In hockey, that includes home ice, where the Islanders have played five consecutive games and 11 of their last 14.
They haven't played a road game since Feb. 12, at Madison Square Garden, and they haven't been in a hotel since Feb. 3, in Toronto.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about the auteur theory of movie directing misidentified a Jonathan Demme film.
It is "Melvin and Howard," not "Howard and Me."


Norex America reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Seibels Bruce Group (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


PARENT &amp; CHILD
ADOLESCENCE often brings special problems and stresses to children with chronic diseases like asthma or kidney failure.
Their illnesses may make them feel like outcasts at a time when they most wish to fit in with their peers.
Even a visit to a fast-food restaurant can be acutely embarrassing to an adolescent who can't eat the same things as his or her friends.
The teen-age years are marked by ambivalent and awkward struggles for independence.
Having a chronic disease puts a different twist on that adolescent need to separate.
Whether the illness thwarts a child's emotional growth or enhances it depends in part on how parents handle the situation.


Protectionism Doesn't Help Balance of Trade; What Textiles Want
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 2 editorial discussing the agenda for the new United States Trade Representative, Mickey Kantor, presents a distorted picture of where the United States textile industry stands on two vital issues -- the North American Free Trade Agreement and the Uruguay Round of trade negotiations.


Russia's Big Sell-Off of Companies Gains Speed
The famous State Department Store on Red Square, best known by its Russian acronym, GUM, formally became private more than two years ago, when the trading company that leases the building was divided among the workers and the city.
But now any Russian get a piece of GUM, a covered mall that houses many shops, including branches of some well-known Western retailers like Galeries Lafayette, Escada, Samsonite, Benetton, Lego and Estee Lauder.


Protectionism Doesn't Help Balance of Trade
To the Editor:
Protectionists will undoubtedly seize on the news that Japan's export surplus last year soared to some $130 billion (news article, Feb. 5) to justify "getting tough" -- threatening further to restrict our imports unless Japan opens its markets to us.


Chesapeake Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Piano Schools for Adults
To The Home Section:
Your perceptive article on adult piano study  [ "Adults Who Take Piano Need Teachers With the Right Touch," Jan. 21 ]  neglects to mention any but the 92d Street Y among New York's community music schools.
I teach at both Henry Street Settlement and Turtle Bay Music School.
Bloomingdale House of Music, Greenwich House, Harlem School of the Arts and Third Street Music School Settlement are other schools in Manhattan where adults are welcome.


Compression Labs (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Britain-China Talks Reported on Hong Kong Issue
Confidential talks are under way between Britain and China on Hong Kong's future, the local government said today, but one of the best-kept secrets here is whether the talks are making any headway.
The negotiations are technically only talks about whether or not the two sides should talk, but even that suggests a sharp improvement in the climate.
The local stock market has generally surged over the last week in part because of rumors of the discussions -- and because of hopes that China will stop threatening to damage Hong Kong's economy out of annoyance with British policies.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Agreed to terms with Kenny Lofton, outfielder, on a four-year contract.


Kinetic Concepts (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Assembly Revenue Figure Is at Odds With Cuomo's
Releasing its forecast for New York State's economy, the State Assembly said today that the state's revenues in the fiscal year beginning April 1 would be $550 million higher than Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has predicted.
In putting out a number so at odds with the Governor's, the Democratic-controlled Assembly has thrown down the gauntlet in what is already shaping up to be a brutal battle over next year's budget, which is due on March 31.
The Republican-led Senate has yet to release its revenue estimates, but they are expected to be even higher than the Assembly's, perhaps by as much as several hundred million dollars.


Coca-Cola Will Expand Into the Interior of China
The Coca-Cola Company expanded its status as the world's leading producer of soft drinks this morning by signing an agreement in Beijing with the Chinese Government to build or upgrade 10 bottling plants in the interior of the country.
The deal will enable Coca-Cola to move well beyond the coastal regions of China, where it has had a relatively strong presence, and build what it hopes might eventually become one of its largest national markets.


Samuel Zuckerberg, Manufacturer, 82
Samuel Zuckerberg, a manufacturer in Manhattan's garment district who led fund-raising campaigns for Jewish charities, died on Tuesday at Long Island Jewish Hospital in New Hyde Park.
He was 82.
He had a heart attack at his home in Flushing, Queens, said his son, Harvey.


Hexcel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rodriguez Helps Hunter Capture CUNY Title
Hunter College finished off its perfect season in the City University of New York Athletic Conference by dominating an undersized Medgar Evers squad, 104-73, last night for the Hawks' second consecutive title.
Hunter (24-3, 13-0), ranked 12th in the nation in Division III, displayed offensive balance for much of the evening as its leading scorer and playmaker, Shawn McCartney, encountered early foul trouble that kept him on the bench for much of the game.


Jaclyn Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Alka-Seltzer Plus To Foote, Cone
Miles Inc., Elkhart, Ind., has selected Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Chicago to handle its Alka-Seltzer Plus cold remedy account, industry executives who insisted on anonymity said yesterday.
Billings were estimated at $25 million to $30 million.


Harland (John H.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Novell Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


Mastercard tries to change its image in a campaign by Ammirati.
SHHHHH.
Quiet, please.
Dr.
Ammirati and Dr.
Puris, with a consultation from Dr.
Fleischman of "Northern Exposure," are about to attempt a most risky surgical procedure, an advertiser imagectomy.
The patient is Mastercard International, which came to Ammirati &amp; Puris in August to seek treatment for serious symptoms developed during the five years it was cared for by Lintas New York.
The Mastercard identity had grown sluggish, particularly compared with vibrant images enjoyed by rivals in the intensely competitive credit card market like Visa International and Discover.


Uncovered Short Sales Are Up 2.6% on Nasdaq
The number of Nasdaq shares sold short and not yet covered rose slightly from mid-January to mid-February, the National Association of Securities Dealers said yesterday.
Short interest in all Nasdaq securities totaled 477.2 million shares in the period, up nearly 2.6 percent from the previous month's level of 465.2 million.


Bond Set in B.C.C.I. Case
Robert A. Altman, law partner of Clark M. Clifford, the former Defense Secretary, was ordered yesterday to post a $500,000 unsecured bond while awaiting trial in the Bank of Credit and Commerce International scandal.
Justice John A. K. Bradley of State Supreme Court in New York said he had ordered the bond because Robert S. Bennett, Mr.
Altman's lawyer in the Federal B.C.C.I. case in Washington, had asked Judge Joyce Hens Green to forbid Mr.
Altman to leave her jurisdiction.


Aerovox Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Year to Jan 2


Howe Drug Tests Resume
The drug testing of Steve Howe resumed today, as expected, clearing up a glitch in which the company charged with testing the pitcher missed its appointment with Howe.
"We're satisfied that the program is in force," said Steve Greenberg, the deputy commissioner.
"Steve Howe's is the most rigorous testing program in professional sports. It is mandated and it will be maintained. To the extent that there are glitches, we'll work them out. They are minor and they will be resolved."


Parker &amp; Parsley Petroleum Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Word on Rodman: Gone. But Where?
Dennis Rodman of the Detroit Pistons will be traded on Thursday, according to several team executives.
But the big question is: Where?


Royal Appliance Mfg. Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fleetwood Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 24


California School Chief Is Placed on Probation
The California Superintendent of Public Instruction was sentenced today to four years' probation for violating the state's conflict-of-interest law and was ordered to repay more than $330,000 to the state.
The Superintendent, Bill Honig, was convicted on Jan. 29 of four felony counts for entering the state into contracts that benefited the Quality Education Project, a not-for-profit organization headed by his wife, Nancy.


Dice Are Still Rolling From a 1992 Gamble
One can debate whether it is a deal of the scale that can topple an organization's front office regime.
For the moment, though, it is beyond dispute that it is a deal that could make or break the Mets in 1993.
The transaction was filed with major league baseball's New York City offices Aug. 27, 1992: the Mets sent David Cone to the Blue Jays for Jeff Kent and Ryan Thompson.
Baseball was jolted, the sport's looming October drama was about to be altered, the telephone lines on the radio shows were lighted for weeks.


A Skittish Rally Raises the Dow 33.23 Points, to 3,356.50
Seldom has the stock market had a rally as joyless as yesterday's.
The Dow Jones industrial average was up 33.23 points, or 1 percent, to 3,356.50, and most other averages rose proportionally more, but few analysts let themselves cheer.
The market's jagged performance of late -- often hanging on every White House rumor or pronouncement -- left few so bold as to say whether the rally would continue.


Autodesk Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Go-Video Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Robert Tompkins Handville, Freelance Artist, 68
Robert Tompkins Handville, a freelance artist who designed postage stamps and covers for Sports Illustrated and other magazines, died on Monday at Barnstable County Hospital in Pocasset, Mass.
He was 68 and lived in North Eastham, Mass.
He had Parkinson's disease, his family said.


McDaniel Is Fined for Throwing Elbow
Forward XAVIER McDANIEL of the Boston Celtics was fined $3,500 by the National Basketball Association for elbowing CARL HERRERA of the Houston Rockets in the head.
The incident occurred during the fourth quarter of a game between the Celtics and the Rockets Feb. 18 at Houston.


Some of the Greatest Things Since Sliced Bread
IT's been an entire century since the first electric kitchen made its debut at the World's Columbian Exposition in Chicago.
On display in 1893 were an electric water heater, range, saucepan, coffee pot, tea kettle and chafing dish.
Soon after, manufacturers like General Electric and Westinghouse began what was to become a cascade of electric appliances, including toasters, blenders, waffle irons, hot plates and mixers.


Hurley Will Have His Day on Court
Duke is expected to retire the No. 11 jersey of senior point guard BOBBY HURLEY before Sunday's home game against U.C.L.A.
The honor is expected to come before the No. 9 Blue Devils play the Bruins on national television.


Boonton Electronics (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Simmering Argument Despite Two Similar Pasts
John Rodriguez and Angel Jimenez shared common problems that could have bound them as friends.
The two 15-year-olds were both in a special-education program for emotionally troubled students at Junior High School 25.
Both came from families that have struggled to overcome financial troubles while trying to give their children an education.
Both seemed to be searching for a place for themselves on the Lower East Side.
Somehow, they wound up enemies, consumed by the sort of adolescent rivalry that sometimes explodes if left unchecked.
School officials and classmates said the stabbing of Mr.
Jimenez was a final confrontation in a feud between the two youths that had been simmering since September.
No one claimed to know how the bad blood began.


A Defender of Redcoats Sets Out to Polish Their Image
IAIN HAIGHT-ASHTON loyally puts on a red-coated uniform of the British Colonial army when he participates in re-enactments of Revolutionary War battles, and he always knows what to expect from the spectators.
"You're one of the bad guys, huh?" comes the inevitable comment.


CCP Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Liqui-Box reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Wallace Computer Svc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Rally Halts as Prices Fall Sharply
Prices of Treasury securities fell sharply yesterday, raising the yield on the 30-year bond to 6.88 percent, from 6.82 Tuesday.
The decline halted a rally that began last week and pushed down the 30-year yield by 26 basis points to historic lows.


Calendar: Folk Art and Antiques
One Man's Vision
Museum of American Folk Art, Feld Gallery at Lincoln Square, Columbus Avenue at 65th Street; (212) 977-7298.
"Bob Bishop: A Life in American Folk Art" is an exhibition of more than 100 works acquired during Mr.
Bishop's 16-year tenure as director of the museum, which ended with his death last September.


Subways Should Allow Newsstands Back In
To the Editor:
In a time of economic crisis for New York City's tabloid newspapers, the Transit Authority could give them an improved shot at survival by simply encouraging the return of news vendors to the city's subway platforms and stations.


Columbia Teachers College President to Quit
P.
Michael Timpane, the president of Teachers College at Columbia University for almost a decade, said yesterday he will relinquish his post in June 1994.
Mr.
Timpane, who is 58, said now was an opportune time to announce his departure because enrollment at the college is up and the teaching profession is enjoying a better reputation than a decade ago.


Sports of The Times; It's Not The Boss, but Good Guess
EXPECTATIONS for the appearance of Halley's comet probably pale in comparison to the hoopla surrounding the second coming of you know who.
And the accompanying buzz is discernible not only within the news media, but also among the Yankee players, management and coaching staff.
No, no, not that second coming.


CHRONICLE
YOUSUF KARSH, the photographer who has made portraits of every United States President since Herbert Hoover, has a yearning to do -- who else? -- Bill Clinton.
"I would like to photograph him as soon as possible, before he realizes all the burdens he has to shoulder and they begin to show," Mr.
Karsh said yesterday.


Longs Drug Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  HINDUS BARRED FROM PROTEST  More than 45,000 Hindus across India have been arrested as they tried to travel toward New Delhi in response to a call from the main Hindu political party to join a demonstration against the Government.
A1  CANADIAN LEADER TO RESIGN  Brian Mulroney, Canada's 18th Prime Minister who solidified free trade with the United States but failed in efforts to reinforce unity between English and French-speaking Canadians, announced that he was retiring after eight-and-a-half years in office.
A1


HOME IMPROVEMENT
WITH wallpapering, as with so many home decorating projects, obtaining professional results calls for knowing some refined procedures besides the basics.
Virtually every room has at least one feature that can give a novice pause.
Here are some hints for coping with common trouble spots.
INSIDE CORNERS These are corners where walls meet.
For best results, measure to the corner from the edge of the preceding strip at the top and at the bottom.
Add half an inch to the larger measurement and then cut a strip of wallpaper to that width, saving the remaining piece unless it is less than two inches wide.


Some Examiners Found to Abuse Fed Code
The Federal Reserve Board's Inspector General has called for an overhaul of the Fed's ethics program after discovering that some of its bank examiners had borrowed from the same institutions they were regulating.
In a January report to the board of governors, the Inspector General did not assert that there were widespread abuses by examiners.
But he said the Fed's ethics program was so fragmented and its rules so confused that it might be hard to detect abuses if they occurred.
The report was first disclosed today in The American Banker, a trade publication.


Critic's Notebook; Rating the New Administration as Talking Heads
Herewith a rundown on the styles of some Clinton Administration first-stringers who have appeared on television this month to talk about the economy or avoid talking about it.
George Stephanopoulos  Director of Communications
His tube-friendly persona is enhanced by the memory of his predecessor, Marlin Fitzwater.
Granted, comparisons of good looks are irrelevant as well as invidious in matters of state, but television is television.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BIG B INC., Birmingham, Ala., a drugstore chain, said yesterday that it would buy 45 Treasury Drug stores in Georgia from the J. C. Penney Company's Thrift Drug subsidiary.
The price was not disclosed.


New York Unemployment Fund About to Run Out
The fund used to pay unemployment benefits in New York State will run out of money this week, and a Cuomo administration official today proposed a significant increase in business taxes to keep the system solvent.
New York is the fifth state whose unemployment insurance fund has gone into the red since the start of the national downturn in 1990.


Rio Algom Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Future Now Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Caldor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


Rangers Make Mistake And Canucks Cash In
After playing more than 55 minutes of strong hockey, the Rangers made one mistake tonight that cost them a victory here at the Pacific Coliseum.
Aleksei Kovalev lost the puck inside his blue line with less than five minutes to play.
Vancouver's Peter Nedved gained control of it and skated straight for John Vanbiesbrouck in goal.
Nedved then netted the puck for the Canucks' second goal in a minute-and-a-half span, turning a onetime Rangers advantage into a 5-4 victory for the Canucks.


Mr. Mulroney Steps Down
Prime Minister Brian Mulroney of Canada may be unpopular at home, but he has been a good friend to the U.S., a close ally on global issues and a strong partner in demolishing trade barriers.
Some Canadians say he is
too
friendly with Washington, but that's only one of his problems.
He also faced an election this year, a long, deep recession and low standing in the polls.
An astute politician, he decided it was time to get out.


Try Time Stuffing: GetaLotMoreDone
IS the person at the other end of the telephone listening raptly, concentrating on your conversation?
Most people want to think so, but it's probably not true.
Chances are that this person is opening mail, writing checks, filing a nail or making a bed.
But why not?
Chances are, you're doing some of those very same things.
The "doing two things at once" syndrome is so commonplace that few people are aware they're engaging in it.
They riffle through magazines while watching television, compose letters in their minds as they walk, dictate as they pedal the exercise cycle, and use lap-top computers as they listen to music on airplanes.


Cheers From States for Clinton's Plan
President Clinton's economic plan is drawing praise from a bipartisan collection of governors and from experts on state fiscal policy, who say that for the first time in years Washington has stopped trying to shift costly programs to the states.
Of two dozen Governors who responded to inquiries over the past week, Democrats uniformly approved of the President's plan, and even Republicans who opposed it on the ground that it would increase taxes on income and energy nevertheless welcomed its proposed infusions of Federal money.


Foodarama Supermarkets reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


More Mischief From Maradona
Just five months after ending a forced absence from professional soccer, DIEGO MARADONA's latest actions have placed his future with Seville in serious doubt, the club chairman, LUIS CUERVAS, said yesterday in Madrid.
Maradona angered Seville officials last weekend when he returned from an match in Argentina and just hours before the club's game.
After a listless performance, the striker flew back to Argentina early Monday without permission from the club.


Nets Take A Meeting, Then Take A Break
The All-Star break is over, but the Nets are still playing like they're on spring break.
The atrocity in Charlotte on Tuesday served as an elbow to the gut, bringing them from the beach and back to the court.
They played better against Boston tonight but lost, 103-88.
This is not the same Nets team that went into the break on a roll.
There was a serious sense of urgency here.
Not panic, only urgency.
The Nets know the road is rough ahead, with games coming up against New York and Chicago.
So the team began the afternoon with a players-only meeting to try and sort out why they've started the second half of the season so incredibly sluggish.
Oddly enough, the Celtics had a team meeting of their own on Tuesday night and a closed practice only hours before the game tonight.


Rugs That Make The Room
EIGHT designers invited to put together vignettes at Darius, a newly opened antique rug emporium at 38 East 57th Street, are all members of Interior Design magazine's Hall of Fame.
That is the common thread of a display at Darius tomorrow through to March 11.
"We've been in the business for five generations," said Darius Sakhai, whose family also has a store downtown and who asked the designers to use one of the store's rugs in setting up their miniature room settings.
Ten percent of the proceeds from rugs sold (priced from $5,000 to $200,000) will be donated to the Foundation for Interior Design Education Research, he said.


Japan Accuses 4 Concerns of Rigging Bids
Japan today filed its first criminal charges against companies accused of engaging in the widespread practice of rigging bids for Goverment contracts.
The bid rigging has been a source of trade tension because foreign companies complain that it prevents them from winning contracts from national and local governments in Japan.
The United States in particular has been pressing Japan to step up its actions against bid rigging and other collusive practices.


New Predictor Found for Giant Waves
Scientists say they have found a better way to predict when earthquakes will produce the deadly ocean waves known as tsunamis.
The technique, they add, could save lives by providing timely warnings to the inhabitants of low-lying coastal areas.
Last year, catastrophic tsunamis up to 65 feet high killed some 2,500 people in Nicaragua and Indonesia, sweeping away whole villages.
In some cases, local people felt no warning rumbles in the earth before being struck by waves.


Lofton Paid Handsomely for '92 Statistics
Center fielder KENNY LOFTON got one of the richest contracts given to a young player when he agreed with the Cleveland Indians on a $6.3 million, four-year deal yesterday.
Lofton hit .285 last year and set an American League rookie record by stealing 66 bases.
He had 15 doubles, 8 triples, 5 homers and 42 runs batted in and was second to Milwaukee's PAT LISTACH in rookie of the year voting.


Business Records reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Telephone &amp; Data Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mr. Coffee (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Suspect, 18, Is Arrested In Murders of 6 in Bronx
An 18-year-old man arriving at the Bronx County Building to appear in a drug case yesterday morning was arrested and charged with the murders of six people in a Mott Haven apartment on Feb. 14, the police said.
Elliot Lopez, of 730 East 161st Street, was arrested by detectives as he entered the building at 10:30 A.M.
Mr.
Lopez was charged with six counts of murder and six counts of conspiracy to commit murder.
The police said they were looking for at least one more suspect.


Marshall Sparks UConn
Connecticut's Donyell Marshall blocked two shots and scored 5 points in the last 18 seconds of play tonight as the Huskies defeated Boston College, 69-64, for their sixth straight victory.
The triumph left Connecticut alone in third place in the Big East with a 9-6 record, two games behind the leader, Seton Hall, which the Huskies play Saturday afternoon in Hartford.


Don't Use Video Games To Diagnose Epilepsy
To the Editor:
In "Video Games Can Serve to Diagnose Epilepsy" (letter, Feb. 2), Dr.
Barbara Coven advocates that Nintendo should "not alter its games to reduce flashing light." I am a neurologist who specializes in epilepsy, and Dr.
Coven's opinion can only come from her inexperience with "light sensitive epilepsy."


Malcolm Allen, 57, A Manager of Shows
Malcolm Allen, a general manager and company manager for dozens of Broadway and Off Broadway productions including "A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum" and "My Fair Lady," died on Monday at Beth Israel Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 57.
The cause of death was lung cancer, said a friend, Les Schecter.


Let's Not Turn Korea Into a Trouble Spot
To the Editor:
"North Korea Rebuffs Nuclear Inspectors, Reviving U.S. Nervousness" (news article, Feb. 1) is interesting because your report's contents diffuse much of what is implied in your headline.


Donaldson &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Horn &amp; Hardart reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Chancellor Girds to Fight Bronx Board
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez moved yesterday to overrule a Bronx school board that refused to begin disciplinary proceedings against a principal accused of brutally humiliating an 8-year-old girl who said a custodian had raped her.
With a backdrop of denunciations of the school board by parents and public officials, the New York City Chancellor summoned the community board to his office at 4 P.M. tomorrow for a "reconciliation meeting," the first formal step in a process through which Mr.
Fernandez can take over the local board's function.


Reeves Hints At Return By Taylor
Dan Reeves, the Giants' new head coach, said today that Lawrence Taylor wanted to keep playing football, assuming he continued to recover from a torn right Achilles' tendon.
During an informal luncheon and 90-minute talk with reporters, Reeves also said he hoped to decide by Monday whether his quarterback would be Jeff Hostetler or Phil Simms.
And he said the Giants had not yet decided who their franchise player and two transition players would be in the coming free-agency period, or even whether they would name a franchise player.


U.S. Outlines Concern Over North Korean A-Arms
The new Director of Central Intelligence warned today of a "real possibility" that North Korea has made enough material for at least one nuclear weapon but is hiding the production from international inspectors.
North Korea is refusing to open suspect plants to outside scrutiny, and the Director, R. James Woolsey, said United States intelligence had "every indication" that Pyongyang is seeking to disguise evidence of its nuclear-weapons program.
North Korea, he added, represents "our most grave current concern."


SEOUL GIVES POWER TO CIVILIAN LEADER
Kim Young Sam took the oath today as this land's first nonmilitary President in more than three decades.
He delivered a fiery inaugural address in which he accused the generals who had preceded him of leading the country into a "dark political night" of corruption and economic malaise that would require a major redirection of Government policies.


DEERE PLANS TO EXPAND PRODUCTION THIS YEAR
Deere &amp; Company, the world's largest producer of agricultural machinery, told shareholders yesterday at its annual meeting in Moline, Ill., that it would expand production this year for the first time since 1990.
Hans W. Becherer, chairman and chief executive, said output would grow 5 percent this year, thanks to sharp reductions in inventories at dealers, renewed buying from American farmers and the appeal of new products.
Growth would be even stronger, he said, but for declines in the European market, where debates about the level of farm price and production supports have made farmers cautious about investing in new machinery.


Teaching Inner-City Youths a New View


Home Video
Television films headed for the video store do not usually play in movie theaters, but this week there is an exception.
"Guncrazy," Tamra Davis's acclaimed film about two young killers on the loose, appeared on the Showtime cable channel in October, and yesterday it was released on tape by Academy Entertainment.
The movie has also been playing in about a dozen theaters nationwide for more than a month.
Video releases normally aren't compatible with theater runs, but there is hope that "Guncrazy" will again defy the rule and survive on the big screen.


Europeans Welcoming U.S. Help in the Balkans
Even before President Clinton's expected announcement of a decision to airdrop relief supplies to civilians in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Western European leaders welcomed it today as a sign that the United States was not going to leave them alone with the seemingly impossible task of stopping the war in the Balkans.
Both the French and British Foreign Ministers called Mr.
Clinton's move "good news" today, and Prime Minister John Major of Britain met with Mr.
Clinton in the White House.
But European leaders also see risk as well as consolation in the President's decision.


Middleby Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Rumor Millings
Wall Street fortunes are made and lost these days on reports and sheer rumors about what President Clinton will do next.
Tuesday's did-you-hear was about a supposed plan to cap the rates on credit cards and other consumer financing.
Credit card stocks like Advanta tumbled, only to rebound yesterday after the rumor died with a White House denial.


Buzz Buys L.A. Style
Buzz magazine, a monthly Los Angeles magazine, has acquired the assets of L.A.
Style from the American Express Company.
Terms were not disclosed.
Buzz, a publication begun two years ago, will incorporate some parts of L.A.
Style beginning in May, and L.A.
Style will cease publication after April.


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day on Tuesday about the Sunbeam-Oster Company referred incorrectly to four appointments.
The additional title of corporate senior vice president was given to James J. Clegg, president of household products; Richard D. Davidson, president of outdoor products; James K. Thomas, president of specialty products, and Richard T. Wissing, president of international.
They were already presidents of operating groups.


Coventry Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Christopher Leaving Mideast; No Date for Talks
Completing his first tour of the Middle East as Secretary of State, Warren Christopher is to leave the region on Thursday with no agreement on a date for resuming the peace talks.
But during his weeklong trip that took him to Israel, Egypt, Jordan, Syria, Saudi Arabia, Lebanon, Cyprus and Kuwait, Mr.
Christopher was able to elicit support at every stop for returning to the negotiating table as soon as possible, raising the possibility that the talks could start again as early as April.


Modest Growth for '93 Forecast by Greenspan
Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, told Congress today that the economy was growing more slowly than in the second half of last year and that its momentum was still not strong enough to be self-sustaining.
"The basic momentum of the recovery," he said, is "not yet secured" because of cutbacks in military spending and strains created by large business and household debt.


Mohawk Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Accounts
*
Borden Inc., Columbus, Ohio, said W. B. Doner &amp; Co., Southfield, Mich., would retain its estimated $10 million snack-food account, which trade publications had speculated would move to another agency.
Borden also assigned Doner a new line of snack foods that it will begin test-marketing in the spring.


Culp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Greece Investigates Arms Smuggling Case
The Greek Government said today that it had ordered its embassy in Nairobi to begin an immediate investigation into assertions that a Greek-flag ship has violated United Nations embargoes on Serbia and Somalia.
It said the investigation had been ordered by the Greek Foreign Ministry after a report in The New York Times that the Greek-registered ship Maria, with a cargo of arms for Somalia, had sailed from Serbia and was en route to the Kenyan port of Mombasa.
On the way it reportedly changed its name to Vana 1 to avoid detection.


INDIAN POLICE SEIZE TENS OF THOUSANDS TO BLOCK PROTEST
More than 45,000 Hindus across India have been arrested as they tried to travel toward the capital in response to a call from the main Hindu political party to join a huge demonstration later today aimed at forcing the Government to resign.
For the first time in decades, the center of this city has been sealed off from the rest of the country by heavily armed troops and miles of steel pipe and barbed wire barricades in an effort to prevent an enormous demonstration by supporters of the Hindu party.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Altan  Symphony Space
Traditional Irish music has such extensive roots yet is so hospitable to contemporary adaptation that every band that looks to the past for inspiration has to determine its own particular balance between old and new.
Altan, a Dublin-based quintet that sold out Symphony Space on Saturday evening, leans heavily toward the old without being fussily purist about it.
Although the group occasionally performs original songs in a traditional mold, the bulk of its repertory consists of obscure Gaelic songs, many of which were taught to the members personally by older musicians.


Crotty Holds Small Lead In East Side Council Vote
With unofficial returns showing them separated by only 77 votes out of almost 15,000 cast in a special election, two candidates for a City Council seat on the East Side of Manhattan will have to wait more than a week to learn who won.
The Board of Elections will not begin to count the hundreds of absentee ballots likely to decide the race until next Thursday, after it counts the machine ballots, a spokeswoman for the board said yesterday.


Ralston Unit Names BBDO Europe
Ralston Energy Systems in Geneva, the Ralston Purina Company's European battery unit, named BBDO Europe in Paris to handle its consolidated account, with billings estimated to exceed $25 million.
BBDO already handles Ralston's Mazda and UCAR European battery brands, with combined billings estimated at $8 million to $10 million.


Latest Austin Victory Puts Bite in Comeback
Tracy Austin's time warp continued today.
Paired against an accomplished player -- No. 12-ranked Katerina Maleeva -- Austin moved her opponent like a pendulum, weathered a midmatch slump and won for the second time in two afternoons, 6-2, 2-6, 6-3.
"Last time I played a top 15 player? Maybe Martina in the final of Hilton Head," Austin said.


Market Place; Insiders didn't take much of a gamble with Argosy Gaming.
IN any business, a regional monopoly can be a very profitable thing.
At least until competition arrives.
Such competition is on the horizon for the Argosy Gaming Company, which now has a monopoly on casino gambling in the St.
Louis area through its Alton Belle riverboat, which docks in Alton, Ill., just up the Mississippi River from St.
Louis.
But whatever the fate of the company, the insiders, including Jimmy Connors, the tennis star, have already cleaned up.


60-Day Notice on Layoffs Undercut, G.A.O. Says
Few workers who lose their jobs because of plant closings or layoffs are given advance notice, despite a worker-protection law enacted in 1988, according to a study by the General Accounting Office.
Exemptions intended to assure passage of the Worker Adjustment and Retraining Act, passed after a wave of plant closings in the late 1980's, appear to account for the law's failure to cover much of its intended work force, the report said.
But even when factory closings or layoffs seemed clearly to fall under the law, more than half of employers did not file the required notices, said the report, which was issued on Tuesday.


Sullivan Dental Products (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Woman Is Slain at a Courthouse; Death Linked to 6 Bronx Killings
A woman accompanying her husband to the Bronx County Building for his court appearance yesterday was shot and killed by a man in a camouflage jacket and a bulletproof vest, the police said.
Ninety minutes earlier at the courthouse, the police had arrested a suspect in the execution-style killings of six people in the Bronx on Feb. 14.
Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said the department was investigating whether the shooting was linked to those slayings.


Fred Norman, Arranger, 82
Fred Norman, an arranger who worked with major jazz orchestras and vocalists, died on Friday at St.
Luke's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 82.
His niece Ruby Johnson said the cause was pneumonia.


Vehicle Sales Increase 8.7% In Midmonth
Sales of domestically produced vehicles rose 8.7 percent in mid-February, reflecting a steady recovery of automotive demand, particularly among buyers of light trucks.
Sales of pickups, mini-vans and sport-utility vehicles rose 26.5 percent, to 123,361, in the Feb. 11-20 period, compared with the period a year earlier.
Car sales were weak, dropping 1.3 percent, to 171,799.


Barrett Resources (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lifeline for Bosnia
President Clinton recognizes what some of America's allies prefer to deny -- that the people of Bosnia may starve long before peace can be negotiated.
That's why he's about to throw the Bosnians a lifeline, dropping supplies by air to relieve the suffering.
The airdrops would provide a necessary antidote to marauding Serbian militias whose strategy is to "ethnically cleanse" towns and villages by starving out their inhabitants.
And it answers those who would engage in endless negotiations at the expense of immediate help.
But this cannot be a one-shot, token effort.
It has to bring sustained relief to all of besieged Bosnia.


Allied Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BankAtlantic reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pop and Jazz in Review
Borah Bergman, and Essential Music
Merkin Concert Hall
The American experimental tradition over the last century has produced everything from strange visionaries to flawed self-promoters, ascetics and self-assured renegades.
Working on the margins of culture away from the relentless selling of the mainstream has given composers the license to create freely, but in obscurity.
On Thursday night, the World Music Institute put on a surprisingly varied show that brought together the modern margins in the form of the pianist Borah Bergman, and the historical margins in the form of compositions by William Russell, John Cage and others played by the group Essential Music.


Gerard P. Meyer, 83, An Editor and Teacher
Gerard P. Meyer, a poet, author, editor, teacher and book collector, died on Tuesday at the Glengariff nursing home in Glen Cove, L.I.
He was 83 and lived in Greenvale, L.I.
For many years, Mr.
Meyer wrote scripts for educational radio and television programs for students on subjects like Shakespeare and the United Nations.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.88
2.91
3.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.94
2.92
3.92
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.04
3.01
4.00
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.64
5.49
6.98
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.88
6.82
7.84
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.79
7.75
8.87
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.92
5.89
6.78
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Arnold E. Beermann, Newspaper Executive, 68
Arnold E. Beermann, a retired advertising executive for The New York Times, died on Monday at St.
Francis Hospital in Roslyn, L.I.
He was 68 and lived in Queens.
The cause of death was non-Hodgkins lymphoma, his family said.


Pop and Jazz in Review
The Message
Village Vanguard  178 Seventh Avenue South (at 11th Street)  Greenwich Village  Through Sunday
The formidable young band paying tribute to the drummer Art Blakey at the Village Vanguard is in the strange position of playing exceptionally hard-swinging music that in no way lives up to the potential of the musicians on the bandstand.


Coffee Rebounds on News Of Error in a Key Statistic
Coffee futures prices rebounded strongly yesterday after the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange said it had accidentally overstated a key statistic for three days.
The inflated figure had prompted speculation that a large amount of coffee might be delivered against the March contract.
That prospect may have cut buying interest on Tuesday, when coffee prices fell sharply.


Oklahoma Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for 12mos to Jan 31


Coffee Rebounds on News Of Error in a Key Statistic
Coffee futures prices rebounded strongly yesterday after the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange said it had accidentally overstated a key statistic for three days.
The inflated figure had prompted speculation that a large amount of coffee might be delivered against the March contract.
That prospect may have cut buying interest on Tuesday, when coffee prices fell sharply.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The sharp decline in long-term interest rates has prompted corporations, homeowners, states and municipalities to refinance debt, which will save money and help the economy.  [ Page A1. ]
Congress is expected to approve an economic stimulus by early April.
But tax increases and spending cuts will not be voted on conclusively until this summer at the earliest.  [ A16. ]


NEIMAN MARCUS GROUP (N)
The second-quarter performance of the Neiman Marcus Group, one of the nation's most prestigious specialty retailers, demonstrated that there is still an appetite for pricey premium merchandise in America.
Sales growth in the quarter at the company's Neiman Marcus and Bergdorf Goodman stores and catalogue business were stronger than at competitors.
Sales in stores open at least one year, considered a better indicator of a retailer's performance, were up a strong 9.1 percent in the quarter that ended Jan. 30.


Events: Gardening Talks and Classes
Guides, Classes and More
New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard
, Bedford Park section of the Bronx; (718) 220-8777.
A six-session program to train volunteers as docents for children visiting the garden starts next Thursday.
Information is available by calling (718) 220-8983.


Digital Systems International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dell's Stock Price Plunges After Forecast
The stock of the Dell Computer Corporation plummeted nearly 17 percent today after analysts said an earnings projection for the current fiscal year raised worries that the fast-growing maker of personal computers had quietly reduced its long-term profit goal to below 5 percent of sales.
The projection by Dell's chief financial officer was part of the company's announcement that it had withdrawn an offering of four million new common shares because its stock price fell sharply recently and because declining interest rates now made borrowing more attractive.


Matsushita Electric Industrial Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dolco Packaging reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Interface Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3


AT WORK WITH: Matt Groening; The Fun of Being Bart's Real Dad
MATT GROENING would like to tell you a few things about his family:
His father, Homer, is not bald.
His sister Lisa does not play the saxophone.
His sister Maggie is not mute.
His mother, Margaret, though, used to have "huge hair."


VF's Ex-President Replaces Founder as Gitano's Chief
The Gitano Group Inc., the financially troubled jeans manufacturer, announced yesterday that it had hired Robert E. Gregory Jr., the former president and chief operating officer of the VF Corporation, as its chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Gregory has replaced Morris Dabah, who will become chairman emeritus of the company he founded.


Heart Condition Will Force Aspin to Reduce Work, Pentagon Says
Defense Secretary Les Aspin will have to reduce his work schedule because of his heart condition and will perhaps need a pacemaker to deal with the ailment, a senior Pentagon official said today.
Doctors are considering a variety of therapies, from stronger medication to a pacemaker, for the ailing Defense Secretary, said the Pentagon official, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
Mr.
Aspin, 54, has been hospitalized since Sunday after experiencing breathing problems.


Chromcraft Revington (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Scitex Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


States Warm to a Government Vaccine Effort
Pediatricians and state health officials said today that if government agencies bought and distributed all childhood vaccine, they could significantly increase the protection of children against diseases like measles, polio and whooping cough.
The Clinton Administration is considering such a plan, under which Federal and state agencies would buy all vaccine and distribute it free to public clinics and private doctors.


CCL Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
The Market Indicators charts at the head of the stock tables in Business Day on Tuesday included incorrect closing figures in some editions for four Standard &amp; Poor's indexes.
The industrial index fell 0.33, to 498.36.
The transportation index rose 1.08, to 369.67.
The utilities index rose 4.14, to 171.46.
The financial index fell 0.07, to 42.09.


Baldwin Piano &amp; Organ (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Democrats Aim for Vote by April On General Budget and Job Plan
Clinton Administration officials and Democratic lawmakers expressed confidence today that by early April Congress would approve a general budget framework and measures to give the economy a quick stimulus.
The tougher part of President Clinton's economic plan, tax increases and spending cuts intended to lower the budget deficit, will not be voted on conclusively until this summer at the earliest and possibly not until the fall, the officials and lawmakers said.


Alpnet reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pottery And Such On Display
THE DAVIS &amp; LANGDALE COMPANY usually deals in 18th-, 19th- and 20th-century American and English paintings and works on paper, but its owners, Cicely Langdale and Roy Davis, have also been interested in the British Arts and Crafts movement.


A New Kind of Housing That Brings People Together
CRUISING along Interstate 80, Charles Durrett smirked at all the Legolike condominiums that clutter the hillsides from Oakland to Sacramento.
"Nothing but big fat roads leading to big fat houses," he said.
"I saw a sign once for this one development that said, 'Live and Shop.' And it showed a happy couple with a
mall
in the background."
Such anti-consumerism may sound strident, if not strange, especially from a developer like Mr.
Durrett.
But it's common among those who reside in co-housing complexes, increasingly popular communities that combine the privacy and amenities of 80's-style condo living with the togetherness and frugality of a 60's-style commune.


United Cities Gas (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Litton Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


No Headline
"Deterrence may not work in the old Soviet-American terms, but I'm convinced that having nuclear weapons still matters. It's not a mistake that Saddam Hussein never used chemical or biological weapons in the Persian Gulf war." -- GEN.
LEE BUTLER, United States Strategic Command.  [ B7:5. ]


Architecture Exhibition Of Vernacular Design
Centerbrook Architects in Essex, Conn., has designed a house in Maryland with columns made of oak tree trunks that are two and a half feet in diameter, and another house in the Berkshire Hills in Massachusetts, where the main rooms are in what appears to be a barn, the office and meditation room in a silo, and the garage in a shed.
These two projects, one whimsical, the other serene, are among the subjects of 92 photographs and six models that make up "Centerbrook: Reinventing American Architecture," an exhibition at the architecture gallery of Roger Williams University in Bristol, R.I.
It is the fifth annual show at Roger Williams devoted to an architectural firm whose body of work has never before been exhibited.


K-Swiss Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Clinton Track: New Turn In Story of Quarter-Mile Loop
Bill Clinton may not be particularly fast, sleek or graceful when he goes jogging along the streets of his adopted hometown, but a number of private citizens think enough of his athletic abilities to help finance a running track at the White House.
Construction of the track, which has been caught up in as much drama here as the national budget, was temporarily halted but is to resume Monday.
The track is expected to be completed by March 15.


Employee Bonuses
Temperatures may be cold, but Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Chicago warmed up its close to 600 employees by awarding each a bonus check for $100, after taxes.
In a memo, Mitchell T. Engel, executive vice president and managing director at the Chicago office of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications, said the bonus was to congratulate the staff on what he called an outstanding performance last year for clients like Coors, Citibank and Kraft.


Corrections
A chart yesterday with the Personal Health column, about ways to assess a treatment's risks and benefits, incompletely stated the assumptions underlying an estimate of changed life expectancy for a woman given estrogen replacement therapy.
The figures were for a woman who had had a hysterectomy and who received estrogen alone.


Bill on Violence Against Women Is Offered in Congress


INSIDE
Setback for Microsoft
Microsoft lost an initial decision in its bid to trademark the word "Windows," the name of its widely used computer software product.
Page D1.
Student Fatally Stabbed
A 15-year-old fatally stabbed a rival at a Manhattan school over a pair of sunglasses, officials said.
Page B1.
Stone Age Supernova
A star as bright as a full moon lit the sky 340,000 years ago and may have disrupted life on earth.
Page D23.
Eric Clapton, Winner
The singer and songwriter won six Grammy Awards, sweeping the pop and rock categories.
Page C15.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY WOMAN SLAIN AT BRONX COURTHOUSE
A woman accompanying her husband to his court appearance on a drug case was shot and killed by a gunman clad in a camouflage jacket and bulletproof vest inside the vestibule of the Bronx County Building, the police said.
The police were investigating whether the killing was linked to the slayings of six people in a Bronx apartment on Feb. 14.
A1.


Oil-Dri Corp. of America (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Alberta Energy reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Bridge
Some plays that are abysmally stupid when looking at four hands may turn out to be brilliant when looking at just two.
Consider, for example, the North-South club combination in the diagramed deal.
The textbooks will tell you that if you need five tricks you should finesse the queen, but that if four will suffice you should cash the ace and later lead toward the queen.
The one play nobody should consider is the lead of the queen.
For "nobody," read "almost nobody." This deal was played in October in Perth, Western Australia, in the early stages of a national championship.
North-South climbed to a highly optimistic contract of three no-trump, which would have been beaten in short order by a diamond lead and had very poor chances after the actual spade lead.


Davis Cup? Stars Say They'd Love to, but . . .
The roster for the defending world champions of Davis Cup tennis, Team USA, now reads like "And Then There Were None." But there's no mystery here.
Politics (last year's team is critical of the United States Tennis Association's every move) and logistics (last year's team doesn't want to play on Australia's grass in March) are the culprits in this mass desertion.


Weprin Drops Lobbyists From Poker
Asserting that he did not want to do anything that could be perceived as improper, Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin announced today that he would no longer play poker with lobbyists in the capital.
"When I think about it, I have a certain responsibility in my position as Speaker," said Mr.
Weprin, a Queens Democrat whose job makes him one of the most powerful lawmakers in the state.
From now on, when he wants to play poker, Mr.
Weprin said, "I'll go in and see who's playing, and if one of them is a lobbyist, I'll say, 'Gee, nice seeing you; I'm going to bed.' "


Japanese Cars Get British Accents
The Japanese auto makers, having entrenched themselves in the United States, are turning to what is perhaps the world's most hotly contested and most promising market: Europe.
Following the same basic strategy that helped push their share of the United States market to 30 percent from 20 percent during the last decade, Toyota, Nissan and Honda are starting to produce cars in large numbers in Europe.
They are building efficient new plants in British towns like this one in the English Midlands, home to a $1 billion Toyota factory that opened in December.
The goal, as it was in the United States, is to sidestep "voluntary" quotas that limit their exports from Japan.


U.S., Seeing Progress, Acts to Restart Peru Aid
The Clinton Administration will take part in a $2 billion loan program for Peru and is moving toward extending economic aid to that country, officials said today.
Administration officials said the loan would be used to help Peru become current on loans to multilateral financial institutions like the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
The officials added that the loan would be the first economic aid given to Peru since the United States cut off aid to protest President Alberto K. Fujimori's seizure of nearly dictatorial power in April.


More Trouble for Dell


CHRONICLE
Just in case there's anyone left in California who hasn't gotten the message about physical fitness, there's a new messenger.
Gov.
PETE WILSON announced yesterday that he was appointing ARNOLD SCHWARZENEGGER as chairman of his new Governor's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports.
Other members of the council will include Sugar Ray Leonard, Tracy Austin, and Bruce Jenner.


French Skater Decides To Stay Within Lines
It was early on a gray European morning and the conversation quickly turned to the one subject guaranteed to transform Surya Bonaly into a chatterbox: the United States.
"Have you been to Magic Mountain?," she asked excitedly.
"What about Disneyland? Universal Studios? What about Sea World? Was there a skating show at Sea World when you went?"


New Spring Training Drill: Schott Talk
Cincinnati Reds General Manager JIM BOWDEN met with the team to discuss players' concerns about owner MARGE SCHOTT and the use of racial slurs that got her suspended for a year.
Bowden, Manager TONY PEREZ and Reds front-office personnel met for 95 minutes with the players on the first day that the full squad was due in the training camp in Plant City, Fla.


Intermet Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Knicks Get a Call And Starks Delivers
A lot of calls went against the Knicks tonight, but the last call went their way.
And as a result, New York pulled off one of its greatest escapes of the season, overcoming a 13-point deficit with six and a half minutes to play to stun the Milwaukee Bucks.
After Danny Schayes was called for fouling John Starks with 2.6 seconds to play, Starks made both free throws to give New York a dramatic 91-90 victory at the Bradley Center.
It was a game that saw Pat Riley ejected for the first time as New York's coach with 9:27 left to play, but the Knicks still rallied and overcame what had been a horrendous performance for three and a half quarters.


Flow International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Hancock Fabrics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Morgan Smith, 83; Photographer who Chronicles Harlem
Morgan S. Smith, who photographed American black leaders and celebrities and the life and culture of Harlem, died on Feb. 17 at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 83 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


Lakehead Pipe Line Partners reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


London Panel Rejects A Jewish Ritual Fence
A local planning committee in northwest London, citing evironmental reasons, refused permission tonight to a group of Orthodox Jews who wanted to construct boundary poles to demarcate a six-square- mile area in which certain Sabbath restrictions could have been relaxed for members of their religious group.
The Orthodox Jews had hoped to create England's first eruv, in which the definition of a home is extended to an entire community by marking that community with clear boundaries.
Within an eruv, activities that otherwise would be proscribed, such as carrying objects or pushing a baby carriage, are allowed, because the whole community, in effect, becomes home.


Let's Not Turn Korea Into a Trouble Spot; Continued Deterrence
To the Editor:
In "Where's Clinton on Asia?" (Op-Ed, Feb. 8), Chalmers Johnson notes the Clinton Administration needs a clearly delineated policy on Asia.


Court Considers Question of Aid To Deaf Student
With a sign-language interpreter translating the proceedings for the young man at the center of the case, the Supreme Court wrestled today with the constitutional implications of using government money to pay for such an interpreter in a parochial school.
Is an interpreter simply a neutral "window of communication," enabling a deaf child to get the education of his choice, as the lawyer for an Arizona family maintained?
Or, in the context of a parochial school, does the interpreter inevitably convey a religious message and thus play an impermissible role for someone paid with public funds, as the lawyer for an Arizona school district argued?


Biscayne Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bowe-Holyfield: Kenya Could Be Site
Riddick Bowe's goodwill tour made its latest stop yesterday in Rome, where the heavyweight champion visited Vatican City and exchanged greetings with the Pope.
But what about Evander Holyfield?
So far, nothing.
In fact, the only new news is that Bowe's manager, Rock Newman, is now suggesting that a Bowe-Holyfield title fight, if it happens, could take place in Kenya.


Essay; The Bill &amp; Boris Show
At a recent Moscow luncheon hosted by the Russian Foreign Minister, Andrei Kozyrev, an octogenarian former summiteer summed up his host's political-diplomatic dilemma:
"If you seem to walk in lockstep with America," said Richard Nixon, "you give a weapon to your political opponents to beat you over the head. If you don't, the American opponents of aid to Russia will beat you over the head. That's why Foreign Ministers seldom get elected President."


Home Alone at Justice?
Despite having no Attorney General, the Justice Department has handled one major controversy with distinction.
Stuart Gerson, a Bush appointee sitting as Acting Attorney General, made a gutsy, fair call last week siding with Representative Harold Ford of Tennessee, who faces retrial for bank fraud, in his quest for a new jury.
The decision reversed the Bush Administration's position in the case, causing a Federal prosecutor to quit and some of Mr.
Gerson's former colleagues to accuse him of playing politics with the law.
To the contrary, it was the independent action of a lawyer with little to gain politically.


Report Details School Superintendents' Salaries
A task force appointed by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that at least 26 public school superintendents received cash retirement packages of $100,000 to $230,000 in the last three years.
The report on those payments, which are separate from the superintendents' pensions, is likely to fuel debate over school administrators' salaries.
In a sweeping review intended to find examples of excessive compensation for public officials, the task force also found that the majority of superintendents in New York City, Westchester County and on Long Island earn annual salaries of more than $100,000, well above the state average of $81,000.
New York City's Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, receives the highest salary, $195,000.


Foreign Affairs; Balkan Strategy, Part I
This column will explain U.S. interests and policy options in Bosnia and what I think should be done.
The next will show how to get other nations to join in stronger, though limited, action.
Why is Bosnia so important?


Vencor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Integrated Health Services (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wyle Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Vision-Sciences Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Castle Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Results Plus
TENNIS A Surprise Entry Wins Ralph Kok, No. 767 in the world rankings, came to the ABN AMRO tournament in Rotterdam, the Netherlands, expecting to work in a tennis equipment stand and see some matches.
Instead, he wound up playing and winning a first-round match yesterday.
The rookie Dutchman scored a 6-4, 6-4 victory over a German, Patrick Kuehnen, nearly 700 places above him in the rankings.
Kok got his unexpected place in the tournament when Boris Becker pulled out because of the flu. (AP)
HOCKEY 4 Goals for Mogilny Aleksandr Mogilny scored four goals, bringing his league-leading total to 60, and an assist as the host Buffalo Sabres beat the Detroit Red Wings, 10-7, last night.
Detroit's Steve Yzerman assisted on the Red Wings' first goal for the 1,000th point of his National Hockey League career, then added a goal and two more assists.
Pat LaFontaine also had a five-point night for the Sabres, giving him sole possession of the league scoring lead with 109 points.
He had been tied with Pittsburgh's Mario Lemieux, who has been out of the Penguins' lineup for the past six weeks because of Hodgkin's disease. (AP) Flyers 5, Whalers 2: Kevin Dineen had two goals and an assist, and Eric Lindros scored twice as the Philadelphia Flyers beat the Whalers in Hartford. (AP)


A Stone Age Supernova May Have Breathed Fire
Two teams of astronomers have turned up evidence that a star as bright as the full moon exploded into view 340,000 years ago and that its dazzling radiation could have disrupted earth's protective ozone layer and sunburned our Stone Age ancestors.
Studying a very faint pulsating star believed to be a remnant of this stellar explosion, Italian and American astronomers have concluded that the supernova occurred relatively near the solar system.
Besides blasting the earth with light and high-energy radiation, the explosion is believed to have created a huge bubble of hot, thin gas, the edge of which is near the solar system.


Enter the Once and Future King
George Steinbrenner is having fun again.
He is in demand again and he is loving it, no matter how valiantly he tries to disguise it.
There are still four days left before his two-and-a-half-year baseball suspension ends and he returns to power with the Yankees, but it seemed more like four minutes yesterday while a busy Steinbrenner hustled around his midtown hotel suite.
The telephone has been ringing incessantly and the appointment book has grown thicker as March 1 approached and memory of Steinbrenner's $40,000 payoff to Howard Spira for damaging information on Dave Winfield grew dimmer.
Steinbrenner has gradually crawled back into the public eye and his name, face and words have been bounced around New York for fans to remember just who the Boss is.
How could they ever forget?


Garden Q. &amp; A.
First-Aid Plant
Q.
I burned my hand on a pot in a friend's kitchen, and she immediately covered the area with a soothing stem from what she called a "burn plant." I'd like one too -- what is it? -- Francine Bacon, Philadelphia


Burglar Is Charged With 3 Rapes and Robberies
A convicted burglar who escaped from a halfway house in Connecticut last October was charged today in three rapes and robberies here over a six-day period.
The authorities also said he was the only suspect in the murder of a young woman who was attacked in her apartment on Monday night.
The Union County Prosecutor, Andrew K. Ruotolo Jr., said all the crimes occurred within a three-block radius in the city's Crescent Historic District, near the place where the accused, James Lamont Cousar, 27, was staying.


Coltec Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Theater; The Afro-Cuban Gift To American Pop Music
Too often when American pop history is being discussed, the Afro-Cuban contribution is either ignored or given short shrift.
But as "Nostalgia Tropical," an exuberant new revue at Playhouse 91 pointedly demonstrates, it is almost impossible to overstate the influence of the culture that produced the rumba, the cha-cha, the mambo and the conga.
These dance rhythms and their echoes and offshoots have been so thoroughly absorbed into contemporary music that they are often taken for granted or referred to by vague catch-all terms like "Latin flavored."
"Nostalgia Tropical," which is a joint presentation of the Intar Hispanic American Arts Center and the Light Opera of Manhattan, is a show with an agenda.
Part cultural history lesson, part oldtime Havana floor show, it is a survey course of Afro-Cuban music from the 1920's, 30's, 40's and 50's offered in the guise of a staged nightclub act.
The show may have a split personality, but its twin goals of teaching and entertaining mesh comfortably under the direction of Max Ferra.


Blackburn Award Winner
Marlane Meyer, a playwright who lives in New York, has won the $5,000 first prize in the 15th annual Susan Smith Blackburn Awards competition.
Her winning play, "Moe's Lucky Seven," was commissioned by the South Coast Repertory Company in Costa Mesa, Calif., and concerns the relationship between Eve and the Serpent.
The second prize, $1,000, went to Jane Anderson of Los Angeles for "Hotel Oubliette," a drama about two hostages in a cell in the Middle East.
The play had its premiere last summer at the Williamstown Theater Festival in Massachusetts and starred Hal Holbrook and Steven Keats.
The Blackburn Awards are given annually to women for theater works of outstanding quality.
Ten other finalists each received $500 each.


Art in Review
Sophie Calle Leo Castelli Gallery 420 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through March 6
In recent years the French artist Sophie Calle has made a splash with works that combine Conceptual performances with overtones of detective fiction.
For one project she followed a stranger around Venice, documenting the event in photographs and texts; for another, she worked as a hotel chambermaid and gathered stories about the guests.
In this show, Ms.
Calle is concerned less with surveillance and more with questions about art and perception.


Options to Cataract Surgery Stressed
Patients with cataracts and their doctors should consider a range of options other than surgery, a panel of experts said today.
The independent panel, convened by a Federal agency to develop cataract treatment guidelines for doctors and other health-care workers, said patients should consider visual aids and other treatments before choosing surgery to remove a cataract, a cloudy film on the lens of the eye.


Judge Devises Instructional Penalties
A local judge who says jail is no longer a deterrent is trying to teach first-time nonviolent offenders a lesson by, among other things, sentencing them to write book reports and, in one case, to go to the zoo.
"I wanted him to get the idea that that could be him locked up and confined, and see how bad that was," said the judge, Joe B. Brown, referring to a drug offender whom he had ordered to stand in front of a gorilla cage for an hour.
"It got to him."


Swank Inc. (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Animal Advocates Win Court Ruling
Animal rights groups won a significant court victory today when a Federal judge in Washington struck down the Government's rules on the treatment of laboratory dogs and primates, finding that they were too lenient.
If the ruling by Judge Charles R. Richey of Federal District Court survives an appeal, it would affect thousands of university and corporate research centers across the nation by requiring them to meet more stringent standards for the care of laboratory animals.


A G.M. Jobless Fund Runs Out; the 2d Is Solvent
A $1.7 billion fund paying benefits to about 14,000 laid-off auto workers at the General Motors Corporation will run out of money on March 1, almost seven months before the automobile union's three-year contract with G.M. expires, the company said today.
But G.M. and the United Automobile Workers union said a second jobless benefits fund would take over payments, so no one would be left without checks.


Corrections
Two pictures in Business Day on Tuesday with an article about the Polish banking system bore incorrect credits.
The photographer was Witold Jaroslaw Szulecki.


Hotel Dining Regains Glow Of Long Ago
OVER the last decade, hotel restaurants have been the most fickle of suitors.
Usually attractive, elegant and inviting, they can deliver a sublime experience one day and six months later turn out humdrum food that puts lobby coffee shops in a favorable light.
The reasons for such instability vary: peripatetic chefs, the strain of running round-the-clock kitchens and cost-cutting dictated by far-off corporate headquarters.
Now the good news: hotel restaurants are on a roll, both around the nation and in New York City.
Moreover, prices are more reasonable than they were in the high-rolling 1980's.


People
*
Regina Kelley, senior associate research director at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, New York, was promoted to director of research and planning at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi North America, succeeding Penelope Queen, who resigned.


COMPANY BRIEFS
DIXONS GROUP P.L.C., London, has acquired Vision Technology Group Ltd., which owns the PC World chain of computer stores in England, for $12 million.
GENERAL MOTORS CORP., Detroit, will suspend production at its car assembly plants in Ypsilanti, Mich., and Wilmington, Del., for one week starting Monday because of slow automobile sales.


Restaurants
Given the numbing sameness of so many new restaurants in New York City -- cookie-cutter Italian trattorias, predictable French bistros and how-much-can-you-eat homey American dining rooms -- it is exhilarating to see a venture as original as Vong, the new Thai-inspired restaurant on Third Avenue at 54th Street.
Before going there, however, it's best to put aside your notions of New York Thai food.
Vong is to Manhattan's mom-and-pop Thai restaurants what the Carnival cruises are to the Circle Line.
Big, bold and stagy, Vong holds no claims to culinary verisimilitude.
When was the last time you saw foie gras with mangoes in an Eighth Avenue Thai dining room?
"It's my interpretation of French and Thai," says Jean-Georges Vongerichten, the chef and owner, whose varied background includes two years of cooking in Bangkok.
Given his track record -- four stars at Lafayette and three stars at the mobbed Jo Jo -- no wonder Vong is the hottest ticket in town.


Florio Is Defied On the Banning Of Assault Guns
TRENTON, Feb. 25 -- The New Jersey Assembly voted today to get rid of a ban on most semiautomatic assault-type weapons in defiance of Gov.
Jim Florio, who wants the state to have the toughest gun law in the nation.
The Assembly overrode the Governor's veto of a bill that would have repealed the sweeping ban on firearms he pushed through the Legislature in 1990.
In a statement later today, Mr.
Florio called the vote a "sneak attack against sanity."


Review/Art; How Beautiful Is Small and Vice Versa
For lazy art lovers, which means some of us all of the time and probably everyone in February, the Seventh Regiment Armory in Manhattan is the place to be this weekend.
The fifth annual "Art Show," organized by the Art Dealers Association of America, is in progress, and through Monday evening, 64 dealers from uptown, downtown and around the country are cozily and conveniently ensconced under one roof.
The place is knee-deep in art that runs a gamut of styles from the last three or four centuries, with a great deal of emphasis on early European and American modernism, less on very recent contemporary art.
A cornucopia of media is represented, including painting and sculpture, drawings and prints in particular abundance, photography, assemblage and kinetic constructions.


Editorial Notebook; An Emergency That Need Not Be
Congress thought it had solved the problem of expiring unemployment benefits when it passed an "emergency" law last July.
The law was designed to prevent future emergencies by giving states the power to enact extra benefits when they were needed.
But the states did nothing and now Congress finds itself forced to do it all over again.
It's an example of how Washington politicians can get caught up in problem-solving that solves nothing.
The new bill is clearly needed.
It provides up to 26 extra weeks of support for jobless workers who exhaust their current benefits and still can't find work.
It is first on President Clinton's action list for boosting the economy, and not a moment too soon.


Woman and Son, 2, Are Found Slain In Staten Island Apartment
A 27-year-old mother and her 2-year-old son were found shot and bludgeoned to death yesterday in their apartment in New Brighton, Staten Island
The two, Theresa Jones and her son, Tom-Tom Moriarity, had moved to Staten Island after being left homeless by Hurricane Andrew in Florida last year, neighbors said.


Charles Callison, Conservationist And Audubon Leader, Dies at 79
Charles H. Callison, former executive vice president of the National Audubon Society and a major figure in the conservation movement, died on Tuesday at University Hospital in Columbia, Mo.
He was 79 and lived in Jefferson City, Mo.
His wife, Amy, said the cause was complications following open-heart surgery.


Meeting Is Set With Jackson
Major league officials are scheduled to meet with the Rev.
Jesse Jackson on Friday in Washington in a session designed "to increase the level of dialogue" over the sport's minority-hiring practices, a high-ranking baseball executive said today.
That dialogue has heated considerably in the wake of a letter that Jackson, the president and founder of the Rainbow Commission for Fairness in Athletics, sent on Feb. 19 to Jerry Reinsdorf, chairman of the Chicago White Sox and one of two owners who serve as liaisons to Jackson's group.


Surgical Care Affiliates Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


State Panel Urges Regulations for Sex Clubs
A panel that advises the state on AIDS policy recommended yesterday that New York City close commercial sex establishments if they refuse to comply voluntarily with state health regulations intended to reduce transmission of the AIDS virus.
The AIDS Advisory Council said in a written report that such places offer "a substantial risk" for transmission of H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, as well as sexually transmitted diseases, but that they could also be used to educate patrons on the risks of sex without condoms.
The panel recommended that the businesses be required to display educational materials and distribute condoms.


New Boston Garden Plan Finally Gets Green Light
After being deluged by calls, letters and petitions from sports-minded Bostonians, the Massachusetts Legislature passed a bill tonight allowing construction of a new sports arena to replace the 65-year-old Boston Garden, home of the basketball Celtics and the hockey Bruins.
The agreement clears the way for construction to begin in June on a $160 million arena, which will offer fans air-conditioning and seats with better views.
The project will employ 700 construction workers.
Earlier Plan Collapsed
The Legislature's action came less than two weeks after plans to replace the Garden collapsed when the developer backed out of the deal, contending that politicians had made unfair last-minute changes in the contract.





Cleopatra Is a No-Show


Vunduzi Journal; Rebels With a Quandary: What's the Cause Now?
The young sentry who first confronts visitors to this rebel zone in central Mozambique, up an overgrown dirt road that has just been cleared of land mines, wears camouflage fatigues over mud-caked bare feet.
His companions loll in the shade of a wild fig tree, to which they have affixed tattered pictures of their ultimate leader, Afonso Dhlakama -- a little snapshot of Mr.
Dhlakama as guerrilla commander in a red beret, and a newer campaign poster of the leader as world-traveling politician, looking somber in a business suit.


SCANDAL IN ITALY RUNS DEEPER STILL
Italy's rapidly widening corruption scandal gnawed further into the country's business and political elite today with the resignation of a leading politician, the arrest of one of the country's richest industrial barons and the apparent suicide of a Government official implicated in the affair.
Despite this new buffeting, Prime Minister Giuliano Amato survived a parliamentary confidence vote he had called to try to restore credibility to a fragile coalition Government rocked by the resignations of senior ministers and by his own Socialist Party's association with financial scandal.


Nunn Is Arrested
The World Boxing Association supermiddleweight champion, MICHAEL NUNN, was arrested on an alcohol and weapons charge early yesterday after being pulled over in Orion, Ill., police deputies said.
Nunn, 29, of Davenport, Iowa, was freed after posting $100 bond.
Deputies said two containers of beer and a 9-millimeter handgun were found in the car.
Both charges are misdemeanors. (AP)


Southwest Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


S.E.C. Cites Japanese on Violations
The Securities and Exchange Commission said today that the American branches of some of Japan's biggest brokerage firms had violated securities laws by reimbursing the losses of favored customers, hiding millions of dollars in foreign-exchange losses and fraudulently buying Treasury securities at auction.
Three companies settled, paying fines of hundreds of thousands of dollars and agreeing to the suspension of current or former executives.
In the instances of covering customer losses, the clients were not identified.
Face Additional Actions
In a case that top S.E.C. officials said was far more serious, a fourth company, the Nikko Securities Company International, was charged in a New York Federal court with deliberately hiding $18 million in foreign exchange losses.
Richard C. Breeden, S.E.C. chairman, said future complaints against the firm's top officials were certain to be filed later.


Women Don't Yet Form Law School Majority; Best for the Work, Alas
To the Editor:
"A Lawyerly Search for a Good Lawyer," your Feb. 13 "Washington Memo," says recent events have "reinforced the arguments" of those who would rid the Government of lawyers.
The lead sentence cites Shakespeare, Dickens and Dan Quayle.
Shakespeare did indeed write, "The first thing we do, let's kill all the lawyers." He put the line, however, in the mouth of Dick the Butcher, a follower of Jack Cade, and Cade is a notorious loser ("Henry VI, Part Two," Act IV).
Dickens, a superb novelist, was hardly a deep thinker.
Dan Quayle is, of course, Dan Quayle.


Black &amp; Decker Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mayflower Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Canadian Jorex reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Ionics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ruling on Death Row Dooms Innocent Man
To the Editor:
In "Deadly Justice" (editorial, Feb. 1), you underestimate the real damage of the Herrera decision, in which the Supreme Court cleared the way for the execution of a man, without requiring any court hearing to consider newly discovered evidence tending to prove his innocence.
Mischaracterizing that evidence as "mostly affidavits from relatives pinning the crimes on the defendant's dead brother," you found the decision the "easiest to justify" of three death penalty cases decided the same day.


A Little Ignorance Helps Dutch Player Rout Austin
Tracy Austin finally played someone who had hardly heard of her today, and the result was disastrous.
Stephanie Rottier, a Dutch teen-ager, treated Austin like just another 30-year-old, drilled a barrage of untouchable backhands and put Austin back into the bridal shower business with a 6-1, 6-0 thrashing.
"I heard she won two U.S. Opens," said Rottier, 76th in the world, of Austin.
"I read it in the paper."


Mutual Declines
Bergstrom Capital has been one of the best-performing closed-end mutual funds for years, based in part on the terrific performance of Amgen, the biotechnology company.
This one stock makes up about a third of Bergstrom's portofolio, according to Thomas J. Herzfeld, whose Miami advisory firm bears his name.
As Amgen toppled yesterday, Bergstrom did too.


Nordson Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Clinton to Meet Yeltsin
President Clinton and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia scheduled their first summit meeting for April 4 in a third country still undisclosed.
The meeting reflects what officials said was Mr.
Clinton's desire to support Mr.
Yeltsin as he faces challenges to his programs.
Article, page A3.


The Islanders Are Left Muttering
Thanks to the many Philadelphia players obtained in the Eric Lindros trade, the Quebec Nordiques have suddenly become one of the best teams in the National Hockey League.
They are third over all and 3 points behind the league-leading Montreal Canadiens, with a game in hand.
So their 6-4 victory over the Islanders tonight wasn't exactly an upset.
It was Quebec's sixth victory in succession and its seventh consecutive result without a defeat.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  CLINTON ANNOUNCES AIRDROP  President Clinton said U.S. military planes would soon begin parachuting relief supplies to all three warring factions in remote areas of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a good-will gesture aimed at inducing them to return to the negotiating table.
A1  Serbs allowed U.N. relief trucks to reach a Muslim town in Bosnia.
A8


Farah Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 5


Virginia Curbs Handgun Sales
The Virginia Legislature tonight passed a bill that limits gun buyers to one handgun purchase a month unless the local police approve additional purchases.
The bill is aimed at changing the state's status as a "gun supermarket" for drug dealers from the Northeast.
Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder campaigned for a strict one-handgun-a-month provision but has agreed to sign the compromise bill.


The Spoken Word
BLACK HISTORY CELEBRATION, American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 79th Street.
"African-American Folk Music: A Legacy Deferred," a presentation with poetry, dance, slides and video, featuring C. Scoby Stroman, a dancer; Sunday at 2 and 4 P.M.
Also, "African Influence in Jamaican Religions," a lecture by Everton St.
Patrick McPherson; and "Maroon Societies," a lecture about the formation of runaway-slave societies, by Nashornea Lindo, an artist and manager of educational programs at the New York Public Library's Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture.
Tomorrow and Sunday, 1 to 4:30 P.M.
Admission by contribution: $5; $2.50 for children.
Information: (212) 769-5315.
BRAZILIAN MUSIC SERIES, the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Chelsea.
"The Babiau Beat: From Candomble to Caetano," a lecture with music and slides that explores the music of Brazil, including works by Gilberto Gil and Caetano Veloso.
Presented by Pamela Bloom, a travel writer and music critic, with an appearance by the Brazilian singer Marina.
Tomorrow at 4 P.M.
Admission: $15; $7.50 for students.
Information: (212) 244-3005.
FILM AND LECTURE, Karen Horney Clinic, 329 East 62d Street, Manhattan.
A screening of Josef von Sternberg's 1935 film "Crime and Punishment," and a discussion led by Eugene B. Papowitz, a professor of psychoanalysis.
Sponsored by the Association for the Advancement of Psychoanalysis.
Today at 7:30 P.M.
Admission by contribution: $7; $4, students and the elderly.
Information (212) 838-8044.
ORGANIZED CRIME IN ITALY: PREVENTION AND REPRESSSION, New York University, Casa Italiana, 24 West 12th Street, Greenwich Village.
A panel discussion, in English and Italian with simultaneous translation, with Giuseppe Ayala, magistrate and member of the Italian Parliament; Luigi Rossi of the Italian Ministry of the Interior and head of Criminalpol, an Italian police organization; Gen.
Mario Nunzella of the carabinieri, the Italian national police force; Gian Maria Fara, a sociologist and president of the Instituto Studi Poltici Economici e Sociali who studies organized crime in Italy, and Ronald Goldstock, director of the New York State Anti-Organized Crime Task Force.
Today at 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 998-8730.
FICTION READING, Lewisohn Hall, Columbia University, 116th Street and Broadway, Morningside Heights.
Readings by A. M. Holmes, author of "The Safety of Objects"; Randall Kenan, author of "Let the Dead Bury Their Dead," and Dani Shapiro, author of "Fugitive Blue." Today at 7:30.
Free.
Information (212) 854-3774.
POETRY ON CORNELIA STREET, Cornelia Street Cafe, 29 Cornelia Street, Greenwich Village.
Readings by Frazier and Stephanie Russell.
Sunday at 7 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 989-9319.
"HARLEM KIDS SYMPHONY," Davis Hall, City College of New York, West 135th Street and Convent Avenue, Hamilton Heights.
A reading of scenes in progress from "Harlem Kids Symphony," a musical based on the Harlem School of the Arts and its founder, Dorothy Maynor; it was developed by Hiromi Sakamoto, a Japanese film maker.
Members of the Harlem School of the Arts will appear, and Joyce Dinkins is the host.
Free.
Today at 7:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 650-7100 or (212) 926-4100.
TV REMINISCENCES, 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
Robert Krulwich, an economics correspondent for WCBS-TV, will speak about "Misadventures in Television." Sunday at 7:30 P.M.
Admission: $15.
Reservations: (212) 996-1100.
SLIDE SHOW AND WALKING TOURS, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street.
Lectures: $3.
Walking tours: $12 ($10 for students and the elderly).
Discussion: $5.
Information: (212) 431-0233.
ART AT THE MET, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street.
Sunday: "Thomas Eakins," by Diana Linden, at 11 A.M.
"Manet and Historical Execution," by Hubert Von Sonnenburg, at 3 P.M.
Unless otherwise noted, lectures are free with museum admission: $6; $3 for children and the elderly.
Information: (212) 535-7710.


Studies Say Mammograms Fail to Help Many Women
New analyses of data from around the world have failed to show that women under age 50 benefit from mammograms, confirming a Canadian study published late last year.
The new data, reported at a two-day meeting of experts on mammography sponsored by the National Cancer Institute, add fuel to a growing debate over whether the cancer institute and the American Cancer Society should change their guidelines recommending that women in their 40's have mammograms every one to two years to detect breast cancers.
Women were told that regular mammograms would save their lives.
Some Cancers Missed
Instead, the new analyses found that the women in their 40's who had mammograms had the same death rate from breast cancer as those who did not have the screening.


Duplex Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


Dull Devils Get Sharp Treatment
The goaltending sharpness of Craig Billington and the steadiness of the Devils defense, displayed two nights ago in Pittsburgh, were nowhere to be found here tonight.
Combined with the desperate play of the Flyers -- front-runners to be one of the two Patrick Division teams to miss the playoffs -- and a loss appeared to come naturally for the Devils.


Diary Said to Reveal Bank's Tactics in Iraq Case
The chairman of the House Banking Committee said today that a diary kept by a senior official of an Italian bank under investigation for its role in arming Iraq showed how bank executives had been determined to use political influence to avoid prosecution.
Representative Henry B. Gonzalez, the Texas Democrat who heads the committee, said the bank official's diary detailed many of the steps taken to persuade officials in the Bush Administration that they should not indict the bank, Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, which is owned by the Italian Government.


Maiden Voyage, Smooth Sailing
Warren Christopher isn't known for dramatic gestures, but he does have a reputation for competently managing complex and dangerous crises.
He used his first overseas voyage as Secretary of State to tackle two big challenges on the foreign policy agenda -- reviving the stalled Middle East peace talks and reaching out to Russia and its embattled President, Boris Yeltsin.
The results, jointly announced yesterday in Geneva by Mr.
Christopher and his Russian counterpart, Andrei Kozyrev, were encouraging, not least because they indicate that President Clinton has decided not to stiff-arm foreign policy.
On April 4, Presidents Clinton and Yeltsin will meet at a site not yet disclosed.
Delegates to the Mideast peace talks have been invited to reconvene in Washington the same month.


Art in Review
Judith Shea Max Protetch Gallery 560 Broadway, at Prince Street SoHo Through March 20
For several years, Judith Shea has conducted a losing battle to modernize the classical tradition, her bronze sculptures, often larger than life, veering uneasily from Venus de Milo to Rodin to George Segal.
Ms.
Shea's latest efforts eschew bronze for wood and draw on humbler sources -- folk sculpture, dolls, the cigar store Indian and the shop window mannequin -- while recouping the Egyptian simplicity that informed her early work.
The resulting pieces, four in handcarved pine with horsehair and one in cast steel, are the most commanding and emotionally complex she has made.
In addition, the idiosyncratic feminist subtext that has always lurked within Ms.
Shea's work is clearer.


Corrections
A music review on Wednesday about the chamber group Continuum misstated the age of the composer Gyorgy Ligeti.
Mr.
Ligeti, who is to be honored in a birthday tribute next month, will be 70, not 80.


No Headline
"'A dog is man's best friend' is an old adage which the defendants have either forgotten or decided to ignore." -- JUDGE CHARLES R. RICHEY, ordering better treament of lab animals.  [ A12:3. ]


PENNEY (J.C.) CO. (N)
The J. C. Penney Company, a department store company that caters to Middle America, spent last year crawling out of the hole it had languished in for almost a decade.
The company posted strong earnings gains throughout the year, including an increase of more than 900 percent in its fourth-quarter profit.
Penney took $395 million in charges in the fourth quarter of 1991; without the effect of the charges, the company would have showed a 24.6 percent increase in earnings for the fourth quarter of 1992.


The Pistons Make a Deal, But It's Not For Rodman
Dennis Rodman was the Detroit Piston most likely to be traded, but he wasn't.
Now the Pistons, who failed to deal Rodman, must deal with the consequences for the remainder of the season.
Instead of trading Rodman, the talented 31-year-old forward who has courted controversy all season, the Pistons settled for sending forward Orlando Woolridge to the Milwaukee Bucks in exchange for guard Alvin Robertson.


Clinton Suggests 'Sin Tax' Increases May Be Used to Finance New Health-Care Plan
President Clinton strongly suggested for the first time today that he would propose higher taxes on tobacco to pay for his health-care program, and his advisers said they had long planned for such a tax.
Mr.
Clinton addressed the idea of a tobacco tax increase as he continued his drive for support for his economic proposals.
He appeared with two dozen business and labor leaders who endorsed the overall program that he presented to Congress last week.


Lewis Dispute Settled
A money dispute that threatened the May 8 title defense of the World Boxing Council heavyweight champion, LENNOX LEWIS, against TONY TUCKER has been resolved and the fight will go ahead, the W.B.C. president, JOSE SULAIMAN, said. (Reuters)


Thomas Mullarkey, Investment Banker And Benefactor, 59
Thomas F. X. Mullarkey, a partner at Lazard Freres &amp; Company, former chairman of the board of Fordham University and a philanthropist, died yesterday at his home in Locust Valley, L.I.
He was 59.
The cause of death was brain cancer, said Thomas Wise, a spokesman for Lazard Freres.


Communications Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


With a Tour of Damaged Beaches, Officials Call for Aid
Warning that Long Island's fragile ecology and tourist-dependent economy are at risk, political and business leaders called today for a joint Federal and state effort to help repair the coastal damage from this winter's stormy weather.
Staging a media blitz to draw attention to the devastation, the Nassau and Suffolk County Executives, Thomas S. Gulotta and Robert J. Gaffney, led reporters and photographers on a two-and-a-half-hour helicopter tour of the South Shore from Jones Beach, where sand was being trucked in to rebuild the dunes, to Westhampton Beach, where a new inlet, created by a northeaster in December, is now nearly half a mile wide and growing.


Continental Savings of America reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


2d Trial Begins In Beating Case In Los Angeles
A second trial of four police officers accused in the beating of Rodney G. King began today with new showings of the now-famous videotape and a forceful prosecution statement that focused on the same evidence that failed to persuade a jury in a state trial last year.
In the most dramatic break from that trial, Assistant United States Attorney Steven D. Clymer told the newly seated jury that Mr.
King would take the stand to tell his version of the 81-second beating in which he was struck more than 50 times with batons, kicked and jolted with an electric stun gun.


2d Opinion for Hearst
The all-America running back GARRISON HEARST of Georgia wants to consult with more specialists before deciding whether to have a knee operation before the National Football League draft.
The Georgia medical staff believes Hearst tore the ligament when he hyperextended the knee in practice during the 1991 season. (AP)


Archbishop George Browne, 59; Liberian Tried to End Civil War
Archbishop George D. Browne, the leader of the Episcopal archdiocese embracing six West African nations, died on Feb. 14.
He was 59.
Archbishop Browne, a resident of Monrovia, Liberia, died in a hospital in Milwaukee, where he had gone to visit relatives and for medical care.


No Prejudice Within the Pinstripes, Say Yankees
In a week in which baseball found itself again being pushed by the Rev.
Jesse Jackson to account for its minority-hiring record, the Yankees pointed today to an affirmative-action program that the club said had been moving forward without the benefit of outside pressure.
"Our track record has been very oriented to hiring minorities," Joe Molloy, general partner of the Yankees, said.
"We have an affirmative-action plan. We use minority businesses, both in New York and in Tampa, where we have a full-fledged operation. Our travel agency for our Tampa operation is Asian-American owned."


Books of The Times; For the Arabs in Israel, A Continuing Dilemma
Sleeping on a Wire Conversations with Palestinians in Israel By David Grossman Translated by Haim Watzman. 327 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.
The evocative title of David Grossman's latest book refers to the anomalous position of the Palestinians who live in Israel, a position the author likens to that of the performer in a precarious high-wire act.
The Palestinian acrobat stands paralyzed in the air, glancing "out of the corner of his eye to the audience below, which never stops shouting its warnings and its anger. Jewish shouts, Arab shouts -- he dares not make a false move."


Debate Over Religion Tests a Town's Faiths
As some tell it, religion wasn't a big issue in this comfortable, ethnically diverse Buffalo suburb until last fall.
Then the school board unveiled a new policy to help children get along better.
That's when parents began shouting at one another and wondering which side their neighbors were on.


G.O.P. Vows to Cut $100 Billion From Clinton's Spending Proposal
Amid a flurry of political bickering, Senator Bob Dole, the minority leader, said today that Senate Republicans would develop an alternative economic package that would slash $100 billion from the spending increases proposed by President Clinton.
Mr.
Dole bristled at accusations by the Clinton Administration that Republicans are being obstructionists in criticizing the Clinton program without proposing specific cuts of their own.
"It certainly does not make Republicans want to jump up and support the President if we have somebody in the communications department saying we are doing nothing but whining or carping," Mr.
Dole said on the Senate floor.


INSIDE
Drug Companies' Profits Criticized as Excessive
A Congressional study asserts that drug companies are making excessive profits in comparison to other high-risk industries, in part because of a lack of price constraints on perscription drugs.
Page D1.
The Voices of Warren, Mich.
The Reagan Democrats in one town who voted for Bill Clinton still back him, if cautiously.
Page A16.
Animal Rights Victory
A Federal judge ordered more stringent rules on the treatment of laboratory animals.
Page A12.
Aspin Leaves Hospital
Defense Secretary Les Aspin returned to work after treatment for a heart problem for which he is expected to get a pacemaker.
Page A16.


1993 Grammy Winners
Here are the winners at the 35th annual Grammy Awards ceremony Wednesday night in Los Angeles:
Single Record: Eric Clapton, "Tears in Heaven"


Art in Review
Alan Herman O. K. Harris Gallery 383 West Broadway (near Broome Street) SoHo Through tomorrow
Duane Hanson's hyper-real sculptures of ordinary people would be at home in Alan Herman's equally convincing tableaux.
Mr.
Herman, who also works as a stage designer, is adept at marshaling drab furniture and trivial objects into slices of life so realistic that they simply seem to have been cut from everyday interiors and set down in the gallery.
They are also so precisely composed and redolent of their absent owners that they function a little like peopleless portraits.


Alexander Energy (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Handleman Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  BRONX KILLINGS LINKED TO LOVE RIVALRY
The shootings of six people in a Mott Haven apartment and a young mother at the Bronx County Building were twin acts of revenge rooted in a simmering rivalry between two young women over a man, the police said.
A1.
Starting with two nicknames, the police built a case against suspects in the Mott Haven slayings.
B2.
Friends and neighbors described the woman killed on Wednesday as beautiful and quiet.
B2.
STUDENT DEATH SHAKES SPECIAL-ED SYSTEM
The slaying of a special-education student left those who worked with the victim and the youth suspected of stabbing him groping to understand how the special-education system, set up to identify and help potentially violent students, could have failed so badly.
B3.
NEW STATUS FOR AFRICAN BURIAL GROUND
The Landmarks Preservation Commission voted to create the African Burial Ground and the Commons Historic District, from the southern tip of City Hall Park to the north side of Duane Street, including part of Foley Square.
B3.
AIDS PANEL URGES END TO SOME SEX CLUBS
A panel that advises New York State on AIDS policy recommended that New York City close commercial sex establishments if they refuse to comply with health regulations intended to reduce transmission of the AIDS virus.
B3.
Schools are cleaner and in better condition, a report said, but where physical-plant conditions are bad, they are very bad.
B3.
A 27-year-old mother and her 2-year-old son were found shot and bludgeoned to death in their apartment in New Brighton, Staten Island.
B3.
REGION
ASSEMBLY VOTES AGAINST GUN BAN
The New Jersey Assembly voted to get rid of a ban on semiautomatic weapons, in defiance of Governor Florio who wants New Jersey to have the toughest gun law in the nation.
In a statement, Mr.
Florio called the vote a "sneak attack against sanity." A1.
SHOREHAM FUEL TO GO TO PENNSYLVANIA
The $5 billion Shoreham nuclear power plant lurched a step closer to it final demise as the Long Island Power Authority announced that it had found a home for the plant's partially spent nuclear fuel.
Instead of shipping the 100 tons of fuel to France, as originally proposed, the authority will pay the Philadelphia Electric Company $45 million to take it.
A1.
BUFFALO SUBURB AT WAR OVER RELIGION
As some tell it, religion wasn't a big issue in the comfortable, ethnically diverse Buffalo suburb of Williamsville until last fall.
Then the school board unveiled a new policy to help children get along better.
That's when parents began shouting at one another and wondering which side their neighbors were on.
B5.
AID FOR BATTERED BEACHES SOUGHT
Warning that Long Island's fragile ecology and tourist-dependent economy are at risk, political and business leaders called for a joint Federal and state effort to help repair the coastal damage from this winter's stormy weather.
B5.
Chronicle B4
Our Towns by George Judson B5


Surprise: Elliot Is the Giants' Franchise Player
In a surprising move yesterday that placed free-agency restrictions on three of their top players, the Giants designated offensive tackle Jumbo Elliott as the team's franchise player and outside linebacker Carl Banks and inside linebacker Pepper Johnson as transition players.
Elliott's two-year contract and Banks's one-year contract have expired, so they would have become unrestricted free agents on Monday, free to sign with any National Football League team under the new free-agency system.
Johnson is under contract through 1993 and did not have to be protected this year.


Farm Credit System reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A creative talent at a big agency jumps ship for 'entrepreneurial' shop
A PROMINENT creative executive is returning to her roots.
Cheryl Heller, who ran a small, innovative Boston-based agency specializing in design before joining Wells Rich Greene BDDP in New York, has left there after nearly three and a half years.
She is taking the new position of executive vice president and executive creative director at Frankfurt Gips Balkind, a New York shop that offers clients design and other services as well as traditional advertising.


CLINTON ANNOUNCES AIRDROPS TO BOSNIA WILL BEGIN SHORTLY
President Clinton announced today that United States military planes would soon begin parachuting relief supplies to all three warring factions in remote areas of Bosnia as a good-will gesture aimed at inducing them to return to the negotiating table.
Pentagon officials said the operation would be short and could begin as early as Sunday.
It will involve C-130 Hercules transports flying at night, and at around 10,000 feet -- lessening their chances of being hit by ground fire but also lessening the accuracy of the drops.


Review/Film; Relationships, Distressed And Very Distressed
"The Last Days of Chez Nous," Gillian Armstrong's new Australian film, is about a crucial summer in the lives of Beth (Lisa Harrow), a successful author of apparently not-great novels, her French husband, J. P. (Bruno Ganz), who increasingly feels he doesn't measure up to Beth, and Beth's younger sister, Vicki (Kerry Fox), newly returned from a long stay in Europe and pregnant.
Somewhat more peripherally, it's also about Beth's teen-age daughter, Annie (Miranda Otto), and Beth's old dad (Bill Hunter), who's not exactly a barrel of laughs but more easily tolerated than the others.
Everyone except Dad and Annie seems to be coming apart at the seams.
Relationships aren't working.
J.
P., who resents Beth's self-assurance and success, has been having an affair with a younger woman.
Beth knows that she's losing J. P., but can't help being efficient as well as caring.
Vicki also resents Beth but depends on her as a surrogate mother.
The days and nights at Chez Nous, the family's terrifically picturesque little house in a Sydney suburb, just across the bay from the city, are filled with occasions of forced gaiety that never quite hide all of the hurt feelings.


Accounts
*
Circus Circus Enterprises, Las Vegas, Nev., to Stranger &amp; Associates, Los Angeles, to handle advertising for its Luxor hotel and casino scheduled to open in October.
Stranger was awarded the account, with billings estimated to exceed $3 million, in a review that also included Pallas Advertising, San Francisco, as the other finalist.


Sounds Around Town
Acoustic and Electric
Meat Puppets, the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, East Village, (212) 219-3055.
Long before it was fashionable, the Meat Puppets were promoting a kind of nouveau-hippie youth revolution.
Over the course of 12 years and nearly as many releases, this Arizona trio has meandered from hardcore to country to grunge and back again, switching between long, dizzy guitar improvisations and head-banging, hair-shaking metal; the lyrics are odes to a perennial state of pleasant confusion.
Tonight and tomorrow night, the Puppets play an acoustic set at 9, which will highlight some of the melodic subtleties of their countryish side; their electric set, at midnight, might come off like a cross between Pearl Jam and the Grateful Dead.
Admission: $10.
Bodeco at CBGB
Bodeco, CBGB, 315 Bowery, at Bleecker Street, East Village, (212) 982-4052.
There's nothing quaint, cute or five-and-dime about Bodeco's brand of rockabilly.
Greasy as a truck-stop burger and bumpier than a high-speed ride in the back of a pickup, this band of Louisville wild men eschews retro contrivances in favor of gristle, marrow and the occasional backwoods yowl.
Choice cuts from "Bone, Hair and Hide," Bodeco's 1992 release on the independent label Homestead, include "Hong Kong, Mississippi," "Holy Rollers Rockin' in a Killin' Machine" and "Casillero del Diablo." Also on tomorrow night's bill are the Friggs, an all-female dance-party garage band, and the Lyres, longstanding defenders of the late-60's punk ethic.
Music starts around 9:30 P.M.
Admission: $8.
Distortion With Melody
Polvo, Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J., (201) 798-4064.
These days, no self-respecting young guitar band would go far without packing a little distortion, but Polvo dispenses with it more sparingly than most.
Substituting flowery melodic phrases for chopped-up chords, and relegating monotone vocals to the back seat, Polvo emphasizes atmosphere over action, obscurity over clarity.
Most of the band's songs seem to be about sitting around the house, but lyrics aren't really the point here; it's the hazy, pretty guitar lines that are supposed to ignite the imagination and take the listener along on the ride.
Tomorrow at 10 P.M., with Sleepyhead and Girls Against Boys.
Admission: $6.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
With the prospect of a new energy tax, executives in many industries are beginning to contemplate how to adjust their business strategies, pricing policies and operating plans.
Some industries where energy costs are significant could be severely affected.
Others could be helped.
Auto makers, for example, estimate that higher gasoline prices will spur sales of smaller cars.  [ D1. ]
Some of Japan's biggest brokerage firms were accused of violating securities laws in the United States.
Yamaichi, Daiwa, Nomura and Nikko were charged with reimbursing the losses of favored customers, hiding millions in foreign-exchange losses and fraudulently buying Treasury securities.  [ D1. ]


Shift on Congressman's Trial Stirs Fury at Justice
While awaiting the confirmation of a new Attorney General, the Clinton Administration has run the Justice Department through a hybrid management team led by a conservative Republican holdover from the Bush Administration and a former Arkansas law partner of Hillary Rodham Clinton.
The lashed-together arrangement, intended to be jettisoned as quickly as possible, has jelled into semi-permanency over the weeks as Stuart M. Gerson, Mr.
Bush's former head of the civil division, has settled in as Acting Attorney General.


Arthur J. Santry Jr., 74, Is Dead; Headed Combustion Engineering
Arthur J. Santry Jr., a retired business executive and yachtsman, died on Wednesday at a hospital in his hometown, Greenwich, Conn.
He was 74.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


CHRONICLE
FRANK ZAPPA has often cited Edgard Varese as an inspiration.
Eight years ago, when JONATHAN HAAS, a co-director of the Music Today Ensemble and a percussionist, noticed close similarities between a recording of a Zappa composition and a work by Varese, the proponent of atonal and electronic music, he wrote to Mr.
Zappa and suggested putting on a concert featuring both works.
Tomorrow, after misunderstandings and resistance from concert promoters and producers, the two works -- Mr.
Zappa's "Perfect Stranger" and Varese's "Deserts" -- will be played, along with other compositions, in a concert called "The Music of Frank Zappa" at Avery Fisher Hall.
The musicians will come from the Music Today Ensemble, the Orchestra of Our Time and several rock groups.
The program will include premieres of two Zappa works.


Washington at Work; An Idealist's New Task: To Revamp Health Care
He made radical changes in the curriculum at Brown University.
He led a band of young idealists working for social change in Brockton, Mass.
He tried unsuccessfully to make his home state of Rhode Island into a laboratory for his theory of industrial policy.
And now he is trying to revamp the nation's health-care system.
Ira C. Magaziner is President Clinton's senior adviser for policy development.
But he works mostly for Hillary Rodham Clinton in her effort to devise a plan to control health costs and guarantee health care for all Americans.


Toy Caldwell Jr., 45, a Founder of the Marshall Tucker Band
Toy Talmadge Caldwell Jr., a founding member of the Marshall Tucker Band, died in his sleep on Wednesday at his home in Moore, S.C.
He was 45.
The Marshall Tucker Band, named after the piano tuner who owned the band's rehearsal hall, made 14 albums of easygoing Southern rock from 1973 to 1984; two sold more than a million copies each, and seven sold more than 500,000.
Mr.
Caldwell was the group's guitarist and main songwriter.
Among the group's best-known songs were "Heard It in a Love Song," "Can't You See," "Take the Highway" and "This Ol' Cowboy."


Bank of Montreal reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Aspin, Told to Slow Down, Returns to Work to Await Pacemaker
Faced with crucial policy decisions, Defense Secretary Les Aspin returned to work at the Pentagon yesterday hours after leaving a hospital in Washington where he had been treated for a serious heart condition since Sunday.
Mr.
Aspin, 54, is not expected to regain his full strength for at least another week, and he has been advised to have a pacemaker implanted in the next two weeks.


Sounds Around Town
Zahn Sings Leigh
Sara Zahn in "Young at Heart," Eighty-Eight's, 228 West 10th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 924-0088.
Carolyn Leigh, 28 of whose songs (including "Young at Heart") are featured in Sara Zahn's new act, wrote the sauciest lyrics this side of Cole Porter.
In her serenely measured performances, Ms.
Zahn, whose previous acts have looked deeply into the theater songs of Leonard Bernstein and Charles Strouse, focuses on Leigh's craft and lets the sex speak for itself.
The program features a number of unpublished gems and has one conceptual coup, a version of "Real Live Girl" sung as a lullaby to a baby.
Show time is tonight at 8:30 P.M.
There is a $10 cover charge and a two-drink minimum.
Uganda in America
James Makubuya and the Kiyira Ensemble, Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, (212) 362-8719.
The only traditional Ugandan group of its kind in the United States, the Kiyira Ensemble makes its New York debut in a concert of the African country's traditional songs of work, courtship and entertainment.
The instrumentation features local adaptations of the lyre, harp, xylophone, thumb piano and one-string fiddle.
Mr.
Makubuya, the director of the nine-member group, is a master of several of the instruments.
Show time is Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Musical Pairs
David Staller, the Oak Room at the Algonquin Hotel, 59 West 44th Street, Manhattan, (212) 840-6800.
A strong theatrical baritone with a courtly manner and a well-stocked larder of show-business anecdotes, Mr.
Staller is performing two shows this weekend at the Oak Room.
"It's Easy to Remember: The Words and Music of Rodgers and Hart," tonight and tomorrow night at 9:30, covers many of the team's great ballads.
Its centerpiece is a comic re-enactment of the scene from the Maurice Chevalier-Jeanette MacDonald movie "Love Me Tonight," in which "Isn't It Romantic?" was introduced.
"Noel and Cole," at 11:30 P.M. both nights, affectionately contrasts the songwriting careers and personalities of Noel Coward and Cole Porter, whose wit and elegance have always linked them stylistically as Anglo-American cousins.
There is a $25 music charge and a $10 drink minimum for each show.


Mutual Funds Draw a Rush Of Investors
Mutual funds that invest in municipal bonds are taking in cash from Americans at the fastest pace in history.
And so are funds that invest in common stocks.
"On the bond side, it's muni-mania," Bruce Speca, an executive with the TNE Fund Group, said yesterday.
He said February would be the best month ever for his group, largely because of the surge in sales of municipal bond funds.


No Way to Pick a Comptroller
There's no sense in pretending otherwise: The process to select a successor to New York State's Comptroller, Edward Regan, is highly undemocratic.
No election, no public participation, just a predetermined vote by a heavily politicked Legislature.
The procedure, dictated by the State Constitution, is not about to change.
Fortunately, Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin has persuaded his colleagues to open the process to some scrutiny by questioning the candidates at a public hearing.
The State Legislature, led by a Democratic majority strongly influenced by Mr.
Weprin and Gov.
Mario Cuomo, will make its selection after Mr.
Regan formally resigns in late April.
The Comptroller, who's leaving after 13 years to take a college position, did a generally competent job and was at his most impressive when he pushed the Governor and Legislature to reform sloppy and wasteful borrowing practices.
Would he have done so if he owed his job to the people he challenged?
Not likely.
But the current process guarantees that his successor will owe the Legislature and governor.


TVWeekend; Now Look, We're Talking Serious Comedy Here
'Katie and Eilish' Discovery Channel, Sunday at 1 P.M.
"Katie and Eilish" is a very quiet, very moving documentary about Siamese twins born in rural Ireland in 1989, and about their parents' anguish over whether to risk an operation to separate them.
Carried originally on British television and shown in part earlier this month on "20/20," the sensitively made hourlong report manages to touch the heart without resort to the grosser effects of many American heartstring-tuggers.
You come to see the little girls, joined from shoulder to hip and sharing two legs, one pelvis, one large bowel and one bladder, through their parents' eyes.
For Mary and Liam Holton, Katie and Eilish are two distinct individuals, full of life and promise.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 15 about the vast collection of Islamic art owned by Nasser D. Khalili misidentified a London art publication.
It is The Art Newspaper, not The Art Newsletter.


The Art Market
A Deal in Spain
At first, the deal was simply a rental.
An option to buy didn't seem to be in the cards.
But now it appears the Spanish Government will be able to acquire one of the world's greatest private art collections: more than 800 works belonging to the Swiss billionaire Baron Hans Heinrich Thyssen-Bornemisza and his family.
The collection, whose works date from the 13th to the 20th century, has been valued by Sotheby's at nearly $2 billion.


Corrections
A picture caption last Saturday with a rock review about techno performers misidentified the artist shown.
He was Keity of the English group Prodigy.


CHRONICLE
WILLIAM E. SIMON, the former Treasury Secretary, and his wife, CAROL, have pledged $2.5 million to help Drew University build a gymnasium, the university announced yesterday at ceremonies on its campus in Madison, N.J.
The gift will be the third largest in the 125-year history of the university.
Its president, THOMAS H. KEAN, the former New Jersey Governor, announced that the $11 million structure would be named the William E. and Carol G. Simon Forum and Athletic Center.


Review/Music; New Ways Of Honoring Tibetans' Old Ways
There were a number of times during "The Great Miracle Prayer Festival" at Town Hall on Wednesday night when a listener might have wondered whether the events on stage had much to do with the annual Tibetan Buddhist celebration of the same name.
For 2,000 years, as part of the festival, monks have performed prayers and religious ceremonies and celebrated with the people; this benefit for Tibet House was meant to be a contemporary continuation.
But what relationship did that traditional celebration have, for example, with Allen Ginsberg chanting his poem "Thoughts Sitting Breathing" in a long crescendo, beginning with his fantasy of young adolescent boys and ending with a scatological, 1960's-style protest song attacking the Pentagon?
Or with Nawang Khechog, a Tibetan-born musician, playing a giant didjeridoo -- an Australian aboriginal instrument resembling an Alpine horn -- and dedicating his sounds to the preservation of indigenous peoples everywhere?
Or with Laurie Anderson telling a story about her trip to Mexico in the 1970's, when the Mayan tribe she was visiting gave her a name meaning "Ugly One With the Jewels" (the jewels being her contact lenses)?


'Strategic' Goats Gobble Up Trade Subsidy
Here on a stony meadow in West Texas, at the end of 10 miles of unpaved road through mesquite-covered, coyote-infested scrub land, several hundred bearers of a strategic commodity of the United States of America are gathered.
They are goats.


New York Police to Get Training in How to Testify
To help improve police credibility on the witness stand, the New York Police Department will revise its officers training program to put a special emphasis on courtroom demeanor and appearance.
The city department is responding to a recommendation from Brooklyn prosecutors, who like other law enforcement officials have been troubled by what they say is a growing reluctance of jurors in the city to believe the testimony of officers.


Court Restricts Phone Device As Police Tool
In a ruling that could affect hundreds of organized-crime and narcotics investigations across New York State, the state's highest court ruled today that judges have been too lenient in allowing the police to use devices that can identify telephone numbers and even listen in on calls.
The ruling has already caused three district attorneys in New York City to stop using the devices.
And prosecutors said the ruling could prompt appeals arguing for suppression of evidence gathered from the devices, called pen registers.


Fernandez Doesn't Dwell On Health
Baseball is a noncontact sport that has broken Tony Fernandez up pretty well.
His medical chart, in fact, reads like a Blue Cross-Blue Shield nightmare:


National Bank of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Sunday Night Taped, With Bill Murray
ESPN is making sporting use of Bill Murray, the insouciant comedy star and celebrated dancer of the Pebble Beach Sand Trap Tango.
Murray will discuss golf and baseball Sunday night on "SportsCenter," but more importantly, he will be a presenter and performer March 4 for the cable network's first ESPY Awards, for excellence in athletic performance.
Thirty-three awards voted upon by fans will be handed out by such diverse stars as Dustin Hoffman, Mariel Hemingway and Tim McCarver.
Dennis Miller will be the host for the show, which airs from 9 to 11:30 P.M., Eastern time.


Fear of a Confrontation Empties Delhi's Streets
Flashing identity cards to grim policemen at barricades that had sprung up overnight across the city in an attempt to halt a right-wing protest, tens of thousands of residents tortuously inched their way to work today.
But it was clear from the wide-open streets and nearly empty offices that most people preferred to stay at home today.


Kellwood Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


In Justice, Rescind the Order on Haitians
To the Editor:
"Cuban Refugees Are Rescued at Sea" (photo caption, Feb. 6) reports that 21 passengers on a 20-foot boat tried to sail to Miami from the Bahamas.
The photo shows some of them aboard the Coast Guard patrol boat that rescued them.


Women Don't Yet Form Law School Majority; Right to Reproduce?
To the Editor:
Several years ago, at a conference of women lawyers, the subject of joint custody legislation was on the agenda.
The group was opposed, taking the position that at the time of divorce, the child should live with the person with whom he or she had spent the most time.


Boston Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


In New Jersey, Inmates Help Shore Up Dunes


49ers Pick Their Man: Young Is The One
With one eye on their football future and one on the bottom line, the 28 National Football League clubs prepared for the era of free agency yesterday by exercising special exemptions to keep control over selected players when the marketplace opens on Monday.
Quarterback Steve Young of the San Francisco 49ers and defensive end Neil Smith of the Kansas City Chiefs were among 10 stars designated as franchise players, effectively removing them from the pool of some 350 veterans who will be free to negotiate with other clubs in just three days.


Computer Shares Lead Most Stocks Higher
Computer stocks animated both the Big Board and Nasdaq trading yesterday, easily overpowering an opposite tug by a few medical and biotechnology issues.
The Nasdaq composite index advanced 4.61 points, to 667.07, a proportionally much larger gain than the rise of 8.64 points in the Dow Jones industrial average, to 3,365.14.


American Oil &amp; Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Abroad at Home; Lessons of Yugoslavia
President Clinton's planned airdrops of food and medicine to besieged villages in eastern Bosnia have been called little more than symbolic.
That is true.
Planes flying at 10,000 feet to avoid ground fire will not be able to get many relief packages near their intended recipients.
But symbols matter, and this one may matter a good deal.
For the airdrops send a message to the Serbian forces besieging those villages that the United States cares -- that it does not like the idea of aggressors trying to starve and shell people out of their homes.


On My Mind; The Struggle For India
The struggle for India goes on as it has almost without pause for 4,000 years.
Time and again the struggle has changed the history of the world, causing great empires to rise and fall in Asia and Europe.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Georgia Pacific Corp., Atlanta, is offering $250 million of 8 1/4 percent debentures due in 2023 at 99.25 to yield 8.318 percent through Salomon Brothers.
Noncallable for 10 years, the debentures are rated Baa-3 by Moody's and BBB- by S.&amp; P. and Duff &amp; Phelps.
*
New Jersey Bell Telephone Co., Newark, is offering $100 million of 7 1/4 percent debentures due in 2023 at 99.596 to yield 7.283 percent through First Boston.
Noncallable for 10 years, the debentures are rated triple-A by Moody's, Standard &amp; Poor's and Duff &amp; Phelps.
*
New York Telephone Co., a subsidiary of Nynex Corp., is offering through Salomon Brothers $200 million of 6 1/2 percent notes due in 2005 at 99.43 to yield 6.57 percent.
The noncallable notes are rated A-2 by Moody's and A by S.&amp; P. and Duff &amp; Phelps.
*
Pacific Bell, a unit of Pacific Telesis Group, San Francisco, is offering $325 million of 6 1/4 percent notes due in 2005 at 97.939 to yield 6.50 percent through Lehman Brothers.
The notes are rated Aa-3 by Moody's, AA- by S.&amp; P. and AA by Duff &amp; Phelps.
*
Praxair Inc., Danbury, Conn., an industrial gas producer, is offering $300 million of 6 3/4 percent notes due in 2003 at a price to yield 6.844 percent through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
The issue is rated Baa-2 by Moody's and BBB by S.&amp; P.
*
Potomac Electric Power Co., Washington, is offering through Salomon Brothers $40 million of 7 1/2 percent, 35-year first- and refunding mortgage bonds at a price of 99.385 to yield 7.55 percent.
The bonds are callable in 10 years.
Underwriters also priced $78 million of 6 1/2 percent 15-year first-mortgage bonds at 98.403 to yield 6.67 percent through Bear, Stearns.
Both maturities are rated A-1 by Moody's and AA- by S.&amp; P. and Duff &amp; Phelps.
*
Rockland Electric Co., a unit of Orange and Rockland Utilities, Pearl River, N.Y., is offering $20 million of 6 percent first-mortgage bonds due in 2000 at 99.375 to yield 6.11 percent through Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
The noncallable bonds are rated A-2 by Moody's and A+ by S.&amp; P.
Common Stock *
Life Partners GroupInc., Dallas, a life insurance holding company, filed for an initial public offering of 11.4 million common shares through Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities.


Duty Free International reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


More Americans Can Buy the Dream
When Karen and Seth Starr learned that they were going to have twins, their Upper West Side one-bedroom co-op started to look a bit cramped.
Unhappy with the kind of house they could afford last year, they delayed buying.
But when mortgage interest rates fell sharply in the last few weeks, the couple pounced, agreeing on Tuesday to buy a house in Manhasset, L.I.


Review/Dance; A Duet For Man And Nature
"Plains Daybreak," presented by the Erick Hawkins Dance Company on Wednesday night at the Joyce Theater, has a story to tell.
It is a story that is told not literally, but with the economy and shining simplicity of Mr.
Hawkins's masterworks.
The choreographer takes on nothing less than all of nature, including man, whose entry marks him as part of the natural world but whose presence gradually becomes less and less a part of this unspoiled paradise.
There is nothing so unsubtle here as gamboling animals in an idyll interrupted by a threatening stranger.
Each of the eight animals gets its telling moment center stage.
All move together as one with the thudding steps and weight of American Indian dance, stylized with an Asian overlay.
The First Man brings complexity and an upward pull into that dance.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about snowstorms in the New York region misstated the date of a blizzard that dropped 17.7 inches of snow on New York City.
It was in February 1978.


Results Plus
GOLF  Surprise Leaders  Jay Don Blake, who has made a handsome living on the PGA Tour in recent years despite winning just once, birdied the final two holes yesterday to grab a share of the first-round lead in the $1 million Los Angeles Open.
Blake finished with a four-under-par 67, tying him with Jim McGovern and Russ Beiersdorf, each looking for his first tour victory.
Jeff Sluman, who finished second by one shot to Ted Schulz in the 1991 Los Angeles Open, and Ronnie Black each had 68.
The defending champion, Fred Couples, opened with a 71.
Blake, in his seventh year as a pro, earned $299,000 last year despite not winning a tournament.
In the last three years, his earnings have totaled more than $1 million. (AP) NORDIC SKIING  Ogiwara Leads Japanese  Kenji Ogiwara became a double winner at the world Nordic ski championships yesterday in Falun, Sweden, leading Japan to the Nordic combined team title.
Ogiwara, who won the individual gold medal last Friday, anchored the Japanese trio to a 3.46-minute victory over Norway.
Germany was third, 8.30 minutes behind.
Earlier, Russia took the lead for good on the second lap and cruised to a 19.4-second victory over Italy in the women's 20-kilometer cross-country relay.
The gold medal was Russia's third in the championships.
Norway leads with five gold medals. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD  Powell Wins Down Under  The world-record holder, Mike Powell of the United States, won the long jump yesterday in the NEC International meet at Olympic Park in Melbourne, with a mark of 27 feet, the longest ever in Australia.
Powell set the world record of 29-4 1/2 in the 1991 world championships in Tokyo.
Dave Culbert of Australia finished second in 25-7 1/2 and Gordon Laine was third at 25-3 1/4. (AP) TENNIS  7 Double Faults, 1 Victory  Third-seeded MaliVai Washington overcame seven double faults and a strong effort from Marcelo Filippini for a 6-2, 3-6, 6-3 victory yesterday to advance to the quarterfinals of the Purex Tennis Championships in Scottsdale, Ariz.
No. 7 Emilio Sanchez of Spain and an Australian, Mark Woodforde, had straight-set victories in the $275,000 ATP Tour stop.
Sanchez needed tie breakers to eliminate Gabriel Marcos, 7-6 (7-1), 7-6 (14-12).
Woodforde, who won the United States Indoor tournament in Philadelphia last week, continued his streak with a 6-3, 6-3 victory over Luiz Mattar of Brazil. (AP) Ivanisevic Gains: Second-seeded Goran Ivanisevic of Croatia advanced to the quarterfinals of the World Tennis Tournament in Rotterdam, the Netherlands, yesterday with a 6-4, 5-7, 7-6 (7-5) victory over unseeded Amos Mansdorf of Israel.
The hard-serving Ivanisevic is the tournament favorite following the withdrawal of an ailing Boris Becker.
Among other matches, Anders Jarryd of Sweden easily moved into the quarterfinals, beating Paul Haarhuis of the Netherlands, 6-3, 6-4.
Goran Prpic of Croatia, who on Wednesday upset fourth-seeded Richard Krajicek, lost, 6-2, 6-3, to Andrei Olchovsky of Russia. (AP) Wiesner Gains in Austria: Third-seeded Judith Wiesner of Austria advanced to the quarterfinals with a 6-3, 6-3 victory over Laura Golarsa of Italy in the EA Generali tournament yesterday in Linz, Austria. (AP)


Review/Theater; Freewheeling Brothers In Vaudeville
TO that short list of unbeatable combinations that includes bacon and eggs, bourbon and soda, and Laurel and Hardy, you can now add Shiner and Irwin.
"Fool Moon," the show that David Shiner and Bill Irwin have brought to the Richard Rodgers Theater, proves that the whole can be greater than the sum of its parts even when the parts are as great as these two beloved clowns.
Call the phenomenon comic combustion, or maybe fools' fission.
Whatever the magic at play, "Fool Moon" is a meltdown for the audience, whose laughter pauses only long enough to permit the savoring of such emotions as wide-eyed wonder and sheer joy.


F.D.A. APPROVES MILES DRUG TREATMENT FOR HEMOPHILIA
Miles Inc., based in West Haven, Conn., said yesterday that its pharmaceutical division had received approval from the Food and Drug Administration to market a genetically engineered product to treat hemophilia-A, a chronic bleeding disorder.
The Miles product, Kogenate, which was developed in collaboration with Genentech Inc., follows F.D.A. approval in December of a similar protein developed by Baxter Hyland with Genetics Institute Inc.


Disasters With Nuclear Subs In Moscow's Fleet Detailed
Detailing new evidence of cold-war dangers, a report said yesterday that Moscow's nuclear-powered submarines had collided with foreign subs at least eight times over the decades and, separately, suffered at least four partial meltdowns of nuclear reactors.
The report also said that one reactor on a Soviet sub exploded in 1985 while being serviced at a shipyard, killing 10 people and releasing clouds of nuclear fuel that irradiated workers and caused at least one case of severe radiation sickness.


Columbia to Take Legal Texts Into the Future
For some law students and researchers in New York City, finding that obscure passage about mandamus or about freedom of speech will soon no longer require hours of trolling through dusty card catalogues and shelves.
In an effort that experts say provides a glimpse into the future of libraries, Columbia University has begun to test a computerized library that will store digital images of millions of pages of legal texts.
A result will be that researchers will be able to search the pages in seconds for any word or phrase.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League  LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Agreed to terms with Pedro Martinez, pitcher, and Rafael Bournigal, shortstop, on one-year contracts.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Reassigned Dave Collins, first base coach, to advance scout and Jack Hubbard, advance scout, to first base coach.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  ORLANDO MAGIC -- Placed Terry Catledge, forward, on the injured list.
Activated Dennis Scott, guard-forward, from the injured list.
Football  National Football League  HOUSTON OILERS -- Signed Cody Carlson, quarterback, to a three-year contract.
NEW YORK JETS -- Signed Jeff Lageman, defensive end, ti a series of one-year contracts.
Arena Football League  CLEVELAND THUNDERBOLTS -- Signed Eric Wilkerson, wide receiver-kick returner.
Hockey  National Hockey League  CHICAGO BLACKHAWKS -- Acquired Joe Murphy, forward, from the Edmonton Oilers for Igor Kravchuk, defenseman, and Dean McAmmond, forward.
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Recalled Dave Marcinyshyn, defenseman, from Binghamton of the American Hockey League.
International Hockey League  CINCINNATI CYCLONES -- Traded Jeff Madill, right wing, to the Milwaukee Admirals for Ian Kidd and Shaun Kane, defensemen.
Soccer  National Professional Soccer League  CLEVELAND CRUNCH -- Released Viktor Jakovljevic, midfielder.
MILWAUKEE WAVE -- Traded Joey Kirk, forward, and their 1993 first-round draft pick to the Detroit Rockers for Eloy Salgado, forward, and signed Salgado to a contract through the 1996 season.
College
GEORGIA SOUTHERN -- Named Peter Thurmond assistant to the athletics director; Vance Pike co-offensive line coach and administrative assistant to the head coach; Darryl Hopkins running backs coach; Darrell Gast quarterbacks coach.
Reassigned Harold Nichols, defensive ends coach, to split ends coach.
Announced Peter Thurmond will not serve as assistant football coach.


Sports of The Times; Presidents Should Run In Circles
EVER wonder how we wound up with a humongous national debt, paying off the interest like compulsive gamblers to a bunch of loan sharks?
Because our values are skewed.
We put up with Congressional pork barrels and Pentagon overruns, the proverbial $900 monkey wrench, but we go nuts over a modest but potentially life-saving item.


Women Don't Yet Form Law School Majority; Forgotten Fiascos
To the Editor:
Does President Clinton really "desperately need a victory, as quickly as possible" -- following his selections for Attorney General, as you would have us believe in "Case of Double Jeopardy," your Feb. 6 front-page news analysis?


Revenge Is Motive in 7 Bronx Slayings, Police Say
The shootings of six people in a Mott Haven apartment and a young woman at the entrance to the Bronx County Building were twin acts of revenge rooted in a simmering rivalry between two young women over a man, the police said yesterday.
At the center of the case, the police said, were one of the young women, Lourdes Casellas, and her husband, Anthony.
It was his rage at a teen-ager who had hit his wife that led him to plot retaliation, the police said.
That plot came to fruition on St.
Valentine's Day, they said, when three adults and three teen-agers were lined up on the living-room floor of a Bronx apartment and each shot in the head.


Clinton and Yeltsin to Hold Summit Meeting April 4
President Clinton and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia will hold their first summit meeting on April 4, in a third country still undisclosed, the United States and Russia announced today.
The summit meeting, which is expected to be Mr.
Clinton's first overseas trip as President, reflects what Administration officials said was his desire to bolster the standing of Mr.
Yeltsin amid increasing challenges to his authority by Russians who oppose dramatic and sudden political changes.


Lumex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Central Co-Operative Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Grey to Handle Kraft's Spot Buying
Kraft General Foods said yesterday that it would assign the buying of local television time to one agency, Grey Advertising Inc. in New York, effective with buying for the third quarter of the year.
The assignment involves buying commercial time on local stations, or spot buying, estimated at more than $100 million a year.
It had been shared on a regional basis by Grey, Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York and Young &amp; Rubicam New York.
In addition to those agencies, two others had vied for the assignment: D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in New York and Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Chicago.


Albany Hurts Health Insurance Consumers
To the Editor:
You report that health insurers, despite dire predictions, have adjusted to New York State's new rate plan (news article, Feb. 6).
However, you soft-pedal the detrimental economic effects of increased regulation.


Seibels Bruce Group (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


American Air Agrees to Limit Fare Data
American Airlines said yesterday that it would "reluctantly" comply with a Justice Department consent decree that prohibits carriers from giving advance notice to travel agencies of fare changes through their computerized reservation systems.
But American vowed to continue to fight the decree, which, if approved by the court, would be in effect 10 years.
"We are gritting our teeth and doing something we don't think we should have to do," said Jack L. Williams, American's vice president for passenger sales.
He added that American had no choice but to comply with the decree because to resist would expose the airline to treble-damage lawsuits by the Government.


Serbs Free Another Convoy to Besieged Muslims
After holding it at a roadblock for more than two days, Serbian nationalist forces today allowed a convoy of 12 United Nations relief trucks to reach the Muslim town of Gorazde in eastern Bosnia.
The Serbs let the convoy through to one of the enclaves where an estimated 200,000 Muslims live under siege after the trucks, each with about 10 tons of food and medicines for the 70,000 residents of Gorazde, had been inspected by Serbian officers, who opened every carton on every truck to verify that the vehicles were not ferrying arms.


Amato's 'Don Giovanni'
The Amato Opera, under the direction of Anthony Amato, is to begin a 10-performance run of Mozart's "Don Giovanni" tomorrow at 7:30 P.M. and Sunday at 2:30 P.M.
Each of the performances, which are to take place on weekends through March 28, will feature a different cast.
At the Amato Opera Theater, 319 Bowery at Second Street, East Village.
Tickets are $16; $13 for seniors.
Information: (212) 228-8200.


Oilers Trade Murphy
JOE MURPHY, Edmonton's free-agent holdout, was traded to the Chicago Blackhawks yesterday.
In return, the Oilers received defenseman IGOR KRAVCHUK and the junior forward DEAN McAMMOND, Chicago's top draft choice in 1991, currently playing with the Swift Current Broncos of the Western Hockey League.
Murphy is a 25-year-old right-wing who blossomed last season with 35 goals and 47 assists for 82 points.
He was seeking $900,000 a year, but the Oilers said he wasn't worth that much based on one season's performance and pledged in September to trade him.
Murphy has been sitting out ever since. (AP)


SmithKline Beecham reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Palestinians Are Expressing Hope On Both the Deportees and Talks
Although withholding an official response to an American and Russian call for a new round of Israeli-Arab peace talks in April, Palestinian negotiators said tonight that they hoped for a quick resolution of the deportees crisis so they would be able to attend.
Other parties to the peace negotiations -- Israel, Syria, Jordan and Lebanon -- also did not respond immediately to the Americans and Russians, who are technically co-sponsors of the talks even though Moscow is clearly the junior partner.


HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS: At Elizabeth High School; Manchild in a Land Of Gift and Promise
The score had just reached $790,000, a record for college football scholarships at Elizabeth High, and the coaches stomped and honked and began hammering on the future, a 15-year-old freshman, Al Hawkins, who was shambling over the basketball court, his white shirt drooping over his red satin shorts.
"Stick your shirt in, you look like a bum," yelled Jerry Moore, the football coach, who started Al at quarterback last fall.


In Test of Serbia Embargo, U.S. Presses to Seize a Ship
In a test of the West's ability to enforce the embargo on trade with Serbia, the Clinton Administration has urged its allies to seize a Greek-owned ship that recently delivered goods to Yugoslavia.
American officials have alerted the NATO allies, North African countries and other nations in the Mediterranean to seize the Dimitrakis, a Greek-owned ship that is sailing under the Maltese flag, when it comes into port.


In Japan, Dinkins's Lessons in Contrasts
In his travels through Japan, Mayor David N. Dinkins's deepest contact with the realities of urban life here -- and the contrasts with his own city -- probably came in Kazuko Mishimura's sixth-grade mathematics class at the Chuo Elementary School.
When Mr.
Dinkins stepped into the public school in the heart of the city's most densely packed neighborhood, the students had just taken a break from some fairly complicated geometry lessons that were still perfectly sketched across the blackboard.
Each of them was dressed in the school uniform: blue blazers for everyone, red bows and skirts for the girls, red bow ties and shorts for the boys.
Their identical leather book bags were stored in neat rows against the back wall.
This was no show for the Mayor: Walk into any Japanese school and the scene is the same.
Comparing Urban Living
"I can see this is not a school with a discipline problem," Mr.
Dinkins said later as he made his way down the corridors, which are lined with the shoes the students take off before they step into the classrooms.


Police Chief in Los Angeles Sees No Evidence of Spying
After a seven-month inquiry, the Los Angeles Police Chief says he has found no evidence that his intelligence unit spied on politicians, including Mayor Tom Bradley, or on celebrities like Barbra Streisand, Muhammad Ali, Robert Redford and Frank Sinatra.
Even so, the Chief, Willie L. Williams, said he had ordered reforms to guard against any future abuses.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon: Closing This Weekend
"ANNA CHRISTIE," Roundabout Theater, 1530 Broadway, at 45th Street.
Eugene O'Neill's drama, featuring Natasha Richardson, Liam Neeson, Rip Torn and Anne Meara; directed by David Leveaux.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow, 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday, 2 P.M.
All performances are sold out, but returned tickets may be available two hours before the show.
Tickets: $45 and $50.
Information: (212) 869-8400.
"THE SISTERS ROSENSWEIG," Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater, Lincoln Center.
A comedy by Wendy Wasserstein about three sisters, featuring Jane Alexander, Christine Estabrook and Madeline Kahn.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow, 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
All shows are sold out, but returned tickets may be available an hour before the show.
Tickets: $37.50.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
Reopens on March 3 at the Barrymore Theater, 243 West 47th Street.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"FROM HARLEM TO HOLLYWOOD: AMERICAN RACE MOVEMENT 1912-1948," American Museum of the Moving Image, 35th Avenue at 36th Street, Astoria, Queens.
An exhibition of posters, photographs and oral histories.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Today, noon to 4 P.M.; tomorrow and Sunday, noon to 6 P.M.
Admission: $5; $4 for the elderly; $2.50 for students.
Information: (718) 784-4520.
PRESIDENTS' MANUSCRIPTS, Pierpont Morgan Library, 29 East 36th Street, Murray Hill.
An exhibition of famous papers written or autographed by Abraham Lincoln and George Washington, including papers referring to Lincoln's 1858 "House Divided" speech about slavery and letters by Washington reflecting his thoughts during the Revolution.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Today and tomorrow, 10:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Admission: $5; $3 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 685-0008.
Closing Next Weekend
"THE LAST YANKEE," Manhattan Theater Club at City Center Stage II, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan.
A comedy-drama by Arthur Miller about two couples who meet at a state mental hospital where the wives are patients; directed by John Tillinger.
Extended through March 7.
Performances: Tuesday through Friday at 7:30 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday at 3 and 7:30 P.M.
All shows this weekend are sold out, but returned tickets may be available on the day of the performance.
Tickets: $25.
Information: (212) 581-1212.
BAVARIAN NATIONAL BALLET OF THE MUNICH OPERA, New York State Theater, Lincoln Center.
Through March 7.
Performances: Tuesday through Friday, 8 P.M.; Saturdays at 2 and 8 P.M.; this Sunday, 2 and 7:30 P.M.; March 7, 7:30 P.M. only.
Tickets: $10 to $48.
Information: (212) 870-5570.
"THE ROYAL CITY OF SUSA: ANCIENT NEAR EASTERN TREASURES IN THE LOUVRE," Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street.
Through March 7.
Hours: Sunday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.; Friday and Saturday, 9:30 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.
Admission: $6; $3 for children and the elderly.
Information: (212) 535-7710.
JULIAN SCHNABEL: WORKS ON PAPER, 1976-1992, Matthew Marks Gallery, 1018 Madison Avenue, at 78th Street.
Through March 6.
Hours: Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 861-9455.


U.S. Study of Drug Makers Criticizes 'Excess Profits'
A Congressional study of the costs of pharmaceutical development in the United States said today that even using the industry's own numbers and allowing for a substantial profit, drug companies still make "excess profits" totaling more than $2 billion a year.
The profits were excessive, the study said, in the sense that compared with other high-technology, high-risk industries that are also dependent on scientific research, like electronics, the returns in the drug business are higher by two to three percentage points a year.
The study's data indicate that drug companies' average profits are in the range of 13 to 14 percent.


New Chief Is Picked at Grubb &amp; Ellis
Wilbert F. Schwartz has been appointed president and chief executive of the Grubb &amp; Ellis Company, the large real estate concern based in San Francisco.
He replaces Alvin L. Swanson Jr., who had been serving as the company's president on a temporary basis.
Previously, Mr.
Schwartz, 51, was managing director of the Prudential Investment Corporation in Newark.


Loyalty Drew Victim Into Vortex of Revenge
As a schoolgirl at St.
Anselm's in the South Bronx, Lourdes Serrano Casellas drew both admiration and jealousy from her classmates.
Beautiful and quiet, she was known for her high marks and her long dark hair, which hung below her waist.
As if determined to rise above the culture of drugs and crime that hung over the projects where she lived, the young girl kept close to her family's apartment, lugging her overstuffed book bag back and forth through the towering brick buildings, keeping to herself.


Diner's Journal
A Mediterranean Corner
For three years Caffe Bondi has been a sunny little corner of the Mediterranean amid the monochromatic commercial district of Chelsea.
On periodic visits over the years, it has always scored higher on cuteness than on consistency.
Yet there are always enough enticing offerings to keep one coming back.


Somali Warlord's Supporters On Rampage for Second Day
In a growing challenge by supporters of a Somali warlord to the foreign military presence here, bands of Somalis fired shots in the heart of southern Mogadishu for six hours today in defiance of American demands that they lay down their arms.
The shooting, in which Nigerian troops returned fire with rocket-propelled grenades and machine guns, brought Mogadishu to a level of violence unseen since the arrival of United States forces nearly three months ago.


Reviews/Film; Two Men Wear Black; Only One Plays Guitar
El Mariachi (Carlos Gallardo), the lone, black-clad musician who arrives in a Mexican border town with little more than his guitar case, travels light.
So does Robert Rodriguez, the new, 24-year-old director who made "El Mariachi" without benefit of any of the usual Hollywood accouterments, from makeup to money.
Working on a bare-bones budget of $7,000, Mr.
Rodriguez has succeeded quite spectacularly in thinking big.
His Spanish-language film has all the basic elements of a tough, savvy Hollywood action saga, except possibly for Arnold Schwarzenegger or Steven Seagal in the leading role.


Operas by Rameau
Les Arts Florissants, an early-music ensemble directed by William Christie, is to present concert performances of two operas by Rameau this weekend at the Brooklyn Academy of Music Opera House, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, in Fort Greene.
"Castor et Pollux" is based on the classical myth of Leda's two sons, who achieve immortality by demonstrating that their fraternal love is stronger than their competitive quest for the love of Telaire.
"Les Indes Galantes" concerns a battle between Pleasure and War, in which Love becomes the arbitrator and victor.
The tenor Howard Crook is featured in both works.
The performances, part of the academy's three-year French Baroque Project, will have English surtitles.
"Castor et Pollux" is to be performed tonight at 7 and on Sunday at 3 P.M.; "Les Indes Galantes," tomorrow at 7 P.M.
Tickets are $15 to $50.
Information: (212) 307-4100.


Parents Wary of Change As Integration Looms
TO visit Duffy School and talk with its parents is to be reminded how good public education can be, and how thoughtful and generous parents can be.
It is also to step right up to the chasm that separates suburbs and cities, a chasm of race and class, hope and fear, that few parents will lightly ask their children to cross.
Duffy is a powerhouse school with powerhouse parents who have a lot of concerns about the possibility that Connecticut's courts will order West Hartford and other suburbs to integrate their schools with Hartford's.
Mainly they are concerned that a judge will come up with a bad plan, because they want integration to work here.


At the Bar; A judge's comments to co-workers conjure up memories of a disagreeable past.
Judge B. Joseph Fitzsimmons Jr. gave plenty of ammunition to his critics, including the Massachusetts Commission on Judicial Conduct.
He sloughed off work and abused lawyers and litigants.
He arrived in court late and left early, often for a nearby country club.
Yet he chastised the unemployed, particularly women, when they came before him.
But Judge Fitzsimmons's real undoing were some wisecracks he made to some courthouse associates that brought down the wrath of Jewish groups, the legal establishment, the press and Gov.
William F. Weld, among others.
His remarks have left him unemployed, impoverished and under police protection.
They have also conjured up memories, dimmed by time and the Second Vatican Council, of the tortured ties between Boston's Irish and Jews.


Sylvan Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3


Questions Follow a Slaying in a School
John Rodriguez and Angel Jimenez were headed to their fifth-period pro-skills class, the session devoted to lectures on dealing with frustration without punching people and on containing anger without blowing a fuse.
Instead, the police charge, John stabbed Angel to death on their way to the class.
The killing on Wednesday at Junior High School 25 on the Lower East Side of Manhattan left social workers and other professionals who worked with the two troubled 15-year-old ninth graders groping to understand how the special education system, set up to identify potentially violent students and help them cope, could have failed so badly in this case.


New Appointments At DDB Needham
Alan Pando, president at DDB Needham West in Los Angeles, has been named to the additional new position of president of DDB Needham's Latin American operations.
Mr.
Pando, 60, will continue to be based in Los Angeles.
In related appointments, Dave Park, 50, president at DDB Needham Los Angeles, was promoted to chairman of the Los Angeles and Honolulu offices.
And Ken Kaess, 38, executive vice president and account group director at the Los Angeles office, was named to succeed Mr.
Park as president.


Irate Soldiers Seize Zaire Parliament
Hundreds of heavily armed soldiers have seized control of the Parliament building here and are holding hostage several hundred members of Zaire's Parliament, demanding that the lawmakers approve new bank notes as legal currency.
Officials inside the building, contacted by telephone, said the soldiers have told them that they would not be allowed to leave until the Parliament issues orders requiring local merchants to accept the new high-denomination bank notes.
The bills, with which the soldiers are being paid their monthly salary, were issued by Zaire's central bank, which is under the direct control of President Mobutu Sese Seko.


Laser Precision (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Budapest Quartet Knew Glory After Schneider
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 4 obituary of Alexander Schneider states that the 84-year-old violin virtuoso was a "member of the Budapest Quartet during its greatest years."


Women Don't Yet Form Law School Majority
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 7 article on the scarcity of Democratic women with the right experience to be Attorney General, following the withdrawal of Judge Kimba M. Wood's nomination, contains a glaring inaccuracy.
You state, "law schools have opened admissions policies to the point that there are as many, if not more, women as men studying to become lawyers."


Shoreham A-Plant Has Found a Taker For Its Spent Fuel
The $5.5 billion Shoreham nuclear power plant lurched a step closer to oblivion yesterday as the Long Island Power Authority announced that it had found a home for the plant's partly spent nuclear fuel.
Instead of shipping the 100 tons of fuel to France at a cost of $80 million, as originally proposed, the authority will pay the Philadelphia Electric Company $45 million to take it.
The fuel will be used over a 15-year period at two reactors near Pottstown, Pa., the company said.


Bracing for Shock of Energy Tax
The energy tax that President Clinton proposed last week would ripple through various industries in different ways.
And from Maine to Washington State, executives are beginning to contemplate how to shift their strategies, pricing policies and operating plans to adjust to a tax on most energy consumption.
For some industries, energy represents a small fraction of costs.
But for others, like aluminum manufacturing and airlines, it eats up a sizable share of revenues.
Such a tax would also affect the cost of moving goods, and in some cases consumers' choices.
Auto makers, for example, say a rise in gasoline prices of 8 cents a gallon or more by 1996 would spur sales of smaller cars.


Lawson Mardon reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Horse Racing: Notebook; In Florida, the Fountain Overflows
The road to the Kentucky Derby got so crowded with contenders today that officials at Gulfstream Park split this Saturday's Fountain of Youth Stakes into two sections of nine colts apiece.
"It proves nobody's scared of anybody else," said Scotty Schulhofer, the trainer.
"Everybody wants to run this year."


New Issues Of Bonds Set Record
The corporate bond market was flooded with a record amount of new issues yesterday as borrowers continued to scramble to take advantage of low interest rates.
About $5.8 billion of new corporate issues was priced during a day that was made hectic by a roller-coaster ride in the Treasury market, where prices rose in the morning and fell in the afternoon.
At the end of the day the 30-year bond yield was unchanged at 6.88 percent, still well below the 7 percent level it dropped through earlier this week.


Parish Admits Validity Of Marijuana Charge
The judge who heard ROBERT PARISH admit to marijuana possession said he was treating him the same as any other offender, but he added that the Boston Celtics center has a special responsibility.
"You have an extra burden of great fame and notoriety," Waltham (Mass.) District Court Judge PAUL CAVANAUGH said yesterday as Parish admitted that there were sufficient facts to warrant the charge.
"The people of this area place a vast reservoir of good will in you. I hope you can put this behind you and repay that trust."


Review/Film; Urban Horrors, All Too Familiar
In the eerie opening sequence of "Falling Down," a man identified by his license plate as D-Fens (Michael Douglas) sits in his car, brought to a halt in a gigantic Los Angeles freeway tie-up.
The stalled lanes of glass, chrome and paint jobs sparkle in the midmorning sun, which is very hot.
Nothing moves except the tiny beads of sweat on the man's face.
They slip down his brow from his military-style brush haircut to his jaw, which is clenched against life.
The man grips the steering wheel and stares straight ahead through gold-rimmed glasses.
All is silent at first, as if the man had willed that his mind be blank.
Yet little by little, the sounds of the outside world drain into his (and the movie's) consciousness: vulgar (to him) rock music, laughter, arguments, children.
Someone is yelling into a cellular phone.
Without visible emotion, the man takes his briefcase and gets out of his car.
The fellow in the car behind angrily asks what he thinks he's doing.
D-Fens ignores the other's fury.
He walks across the road, up an embankment and away from the miles of stalled automobiles, away from urban order and sanity.


Review/Dance; 'Onegin,' Reproduced By the Bavarian Ballet
The Bavarian National Ballet, an excellently schooled classical company that opened its two-week debut engagement in the United States on Wednesday night, can trace its roots, as do many other German troupes, to organized ballet activities in the 18th century.
Yet it is a much more recent model that the company from Munich seemed to have in mind by starting out at the New York State Theater with "Onegin," John Cranko's familiar three-act dramatic ballet.
For it was with this sumptuously designed opera-house treatment of "Eugene Onegin," the great Russian narrative poem by Alexander Pushkin, that the Stuttgart Ballet and Cranko, its director, took New York by storm in 1969.


TVWeekend; Now Look, We're Talking Serious Comedy Here
On television's interview circuit this weekend are two superstars who rarely are found sitting around and talking about themselves.
Tonight on PBS, Clint Eastwood appears on "Talking With David Frost." Sunday on Comedy Central, "Alan King: Inside the Comedy Mind" begins a new season with a special hourlong session featuring Robin Williams.
Mr.
Eastwood's movie "Unforgiven" has been nominated for nine Academy Awards, three of them personally, as producer, director and star.
Sitting in a West Hollywood hotel, the low-key, determinedly nonflashy star almost challenges Mr.
Frost -- recently elevated to Sir David Frost -- to try to crack his steely facade.
In 1974, begins Mr.
Frost, you said you would rather have an Oscar for directing than for acting.
"Did I say that in 1974?," Mr.
Eastwood responds with a gentle amusement that screams "So what?"


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about City Councilwoman Una T. Clarke's appeal to New York State to overhaul its inspection and monitoring of day-care centers referred incorrectly to a State Senator.
He is Franz S. Leichter.


On Stage, and Off
A New Start and Finish by Hwang
The critical splat in Boston of David Henry Hwang's Broadway-bound "Face Value" has the producers of the $2 million farce publicly shrugging ("It's just business as usual in the theater," said Scott Rudin), and the press agent pointing out that not
every
notice was
totally
negative.
But the creative team is now engaged in revamping a show that was essentially judged confusing and unfunny.
Both a new beginning and a new ending went in this week, and apparently a lot of stuff in between, too.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an obituary yesterday about Arnold E. Beermann, a retired advertising executive for The New York Times, omitted his nickname.
He was known as Barney, as was his son Arnold E. Jr.


S.E.C. Cites Japanese
The Securities and Exchange Commission said American branches of some of Japan's biggest brokerage firms had violated securities laws by reimbursing losses of favored customers, hiding millions of dollars in foreign-exchange losses and fraudulently buying Treasury securities.
Business Day, page D1.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.91
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.93
2.94
3.91
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.03
3.04
3.96
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.65
5.64
6.99
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.88
6.88
7.84
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.79
7.79
8.84
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.90
5.92
6.78
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


State Budgets Mending After Years of Surgery
Finally emerging from the recession, nearly all the states are planning their first budgets in years without big tax increases or deep cuts in programs.
But they are not celebrating their recovery by reducing taxes, as they usually do after a recession, according to a report being published today.
Very few states are starting new programs, and most are still reducing spending to cope with the continuing sharp increases in health-care costs and prison populations.
Nor are they certain that the gain in tax collections that most of them saw late last year will last.


Badger Paper Mills reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


For Children
Family Matinee Erick Hawkins Dance Company Joyce Theater 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street Chelsea (212) 242-0800 Recommended ages: 6 and up Tomorrow
The Joyce Theater offers a Saturday children's matinee for many dance companies that perform there, and the one tomorrow is by the Erick Hawkins Dance Company.
This highly energetic company's work has enough suspense and mystery to sustain the interest of a young audience.


AIG Earnings Up 7%; Equitable Cuts Loss
The American International Group, the nation's largest commercial and international insurer, reported 7 percent growth in 1992 earnings yesterday, which was surprisingly strong considering that it was a particularly bad year for industry-wide property casualty losses.
A second insurer, the Equitable Companies, which transformed itself from a mutual insurance company to a publicly traded stock company in July, reported an after-tax loss from continuing operations of $32.2 million for 1992.
This was in comparison with an after-tax operating loss of $307.8 million the previous year.


Grumbling But Loyal To Clinton
The disenchanted Democrats here who abandoned their party in Presidential politics for more than a decade but returned last November to vote for Bill Clinton are still behind the new President, although cautiously.
A sounding of public opinion in shopping malls, coffee shops and on snow-swept sidewalks suggests that most voters are wavering between a wait-and-see attitude and strong support for Mr.
Clinton and his economic program of tax increases, spending cuts and "shared sacrifice."


The Art of Interrogation
On Nov. 20, 1990, in Rostov on Don, Chief Inspector Issa Kostoev of the Russian Attorney General's office arrested Andrei Romanovich Chikatilo.
Inspector Kostoev was convinced that Mr.
Chikatilo, a 54-year-old industrial engineer, grandfather and zealous Communist, was the serial killer who had murdered and cannibalized women and children for 12 years throughout the Soviet Union.
The following adaptation describes the crucial eighth day of interrogation.
On Oct. 15, 1992, Mr.
Chikatilo was sentenced to death for committing 52 murders.
He is appealing the verdict on grounds of insanity.


Benjamin B. Rosenberg; Accountant, 79
Benjamin B. Rosenberg, an accountant who worked for District Attorney Frank S. Hogan of Manhattan and later for the New York State Harness Racing Commission, died on Friday at his home in Deerfield Beach, Fla.
He was 79.
Mr.
Rosenberg had suffered from a heart condition and diabetes, said his son, Alan, of Mount Vernon, N.Y.


Genesco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Awards Presented In Direct Marketing
For the second consecutive year, Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct took top honors from judges of the John Caples International Awards for excellence in direct marketing.
The 15th annual awards were presented yesterday in New York.


Creative Director At BBDO New York
Jonathan Mandell, who had been the creative director at the New York office of Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos since May, has left to join BBDO New York as a creative director.
Mr.
Mandell, 38, who has been at BBDO twice before, will work on accounts like Frito-Lay and Pepsi-Cola with Ted Shaine, the former creative director at Hill, Holliday's Boston office who joined BBDO in December as a senior creative director.


Computer Uncovered 2 Suspects In Killings
At first, investigators met only silence.
Looking for any thread that could lead them to the killers of six people, slain execution style in a Bronx apartment on Valentine's Day, they fanned out over the streets of Mott Haven only to find people were too terrified to speak.
But after two or three days, when the horror of the deaths of the three adults and three teen-agers had settled into the beleaguered community, pieces of information began to trickle in, much of it over a special 24-hour telephone hot line.
In the stream of information, two nicknames began to surface: Tato and Ding Ding.


Market Place; Another biotech selloff and again the question: Is this the bottom?
SPURRED by disappointments from three major biotech companies and uncertainty about the Clinton Administration's health-care proposals, investors continued a selloff of biotech stocks yesterday.
Many analysts downgraded the entire biotech group, while others scrambled to determine if the stocks had hit bottom, which would represent a buying opportunity.
As a group, biotech stocks are down about 20 percent from the first of the year, after losing 40 percent of their value in 1992.


Giddings &amp; Lewis (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Troops Suppress Hindus' Protests In India Capital
Firing tear gas and wielding bamboo staves, the riot police prevented a rally here today by Hindu nationalists demanding the resignation of the Government of Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao.
At least 1,000 Hindu militants and 110 members of Parliament from the Hindu revivalist Bharatiya Janata Party were detained and at least 54 were hospitalized as the police swarmed through crowds of demonstrators at half a dozen sites in the city.


Review/Art; A Softer Side To a Knight Of Wicked Wit
IF you think you know Honore Daumier because you know the famous and beloved lithographic illustrations he did for the Paris journal Le Charivari in the mid-19th century, think again.
A wonderful exhibition of Daumier's drawings, along with some related paintings and sculptures, which opens today at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, will be a revelation.
For all the fluency and wicked humor of so many of his lithographs, Daumier reveals himself in these mostly private works to be an artist of wider technical range and vastly subtler emotions.
Some of the drawings are heartbreaking in a quiet, almost surreptitious way that has nothing to do with the theatrics that Daumier was obliged to perform in his caricatures and that at one point landed him in jail.


Executive Changes
ANN TAYLOR INC., New York, the apparel chain, named Robert Weinstein senior vice president for marketing.
AQUANAUTICS CORP., Alameda, Calif., a specialty materials company, appointed Sharon C. Castle president and chief operating officer.


Ferrer Is Joining Comptroller Race
The Bronx Borough President, Fernando Ferrer, has formally told Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin that he wants to be considered to replace Edward V. Regan as state comptroller.
Hispanic legislators had been lobbying Mr.
Ferrer to join the race in the hope he might become the first Hispanic politician to hold a statewide elected office.
Also running is H. Carl McCall, president of the New York City Board of Education, who seeks to be the first black politician in a statewide elected office.


Talk Is Cheap, and for Some Nets, Not Necessarily Productive
As the Nets enter one of the toughest parts of their schedule, there is a concern among some players that, despite their unity earlier this season, they are in danger of becoming the tumultuous Nets of old and that steps need to be taken or the team could be in serious trouble.
This feeling became clear one day after a rocky team meeting that happened hours before the 103-88 loss to the Boston Celtics on Wednesday night.
The meeting was called by Derrick Coleman, Sam Bowie and Rick Mahorn to give players the opportunity to air their concerns.
Immediately afterward, players would talk only in general terms about what was said in the meeting.


DeKalb Energy (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


African Burial Ground Made Historic Site
Once at the edge of town, long at the edge of civic consciousness, New York's Colonial-era African Burial Ground won official historic status yesterday that puts it in the company of the city's wealthiest neighborhoods, loveliest temples and mightiest skyscrapers.
At an emotionally charged special session, the Landmarks Preservation Commission voted 8 to 0 to create the African Burial Ground and the Commons Historic District, from the southern tip of City Hall Park to the north side of Duane Street, including part of Foley Square.


Not Everybody's Running to the Garden's Big Party
It is the height of the indoor track and field season, but not everybody is attending the house party.
Eamonn Coghlan and Noureddine Morceli will be at Madison Square Garden tonight for the USA/Mobil track and field championships.
Carl Lewis, Mike Powell and Leroy Burrell will pass.
Gail Devers and Evelyn Ashford will sprint here.
Jackie Joyner-Kersee, healthy but not fully prepared to compete, will sit this one out.


New York Classrooms Looking Bad but Better
New York City school officials said yesterday that physical conditions in the city's public school classrooms were improving overall but that deterioration in many classrooms "remains a serious problem."
In their latest review of classrooms' walls, ceilings, fixtures and furniture, the officials said inspections of more than 45,000 classrooms in the city's 1,053 public school buildings showed that "paint and cleanliness conditions have improved" for the most part.
So have functioning lights and doors and working window shades, the report said.


Jets Retain Rights to Moore, Hasty
As much as possible in the new world of the N.F.L., the Jets yesterday guaranteed a Jets future for two of their top players.
Like many of the clubs in the National Football League, the Jets had no one they deemed worthy of being named a franchise player.
But they did name wide receiver Rob Moore and cornerback James Hasty as their transition players.
Each is now entitled to a salary that puts him at least in the average of the top 10 at his position, with the Jets getting the right to match any offer another club might make.


Arizona Braces to Meet Once-in-200-Years Flood
Audrey Sanchez and Patricia Fajardo stood in the yard with their five young children today and listened to the deputy sheriff urging them to leave the area as soon as possible.
"How can we get help to move out our stuff?" Mrs.
Fajardo said.
"All we have are small cars."


Canucks End Up Celebrating The Day Kovalev Turned 20
The Rangers' Aleksei Kovalev sat on the locker room bench on Wednesday night with his head down and his hands on his suit-clad knees, his shoulders hunched over into an almost protective position.
This had happened on Kovalev's 20th birthday, and there was no avoiding talk of his age.
From all corners of the locker room, the same words were spoken: "He is only a kid. He is only 19 or 20 years old. Young players make mistakes."


June Bout for Foreman
The former heavyweight champion GEORGE FOREMAN will meet TOMMY MORRISON on June 5 in Las Vegas, Nev., promoters said yesterday.
The fight, which was to have taken place April 16, will be televised on pay-per-view.
Foreman, 44, is the No. 1-ranked heavyweight by the International Boxing Federation and is 72-3 over all with 67 knockouts.
Foreman is 27-1 since beginning his comeback in 1987 after a decade out of the ring.
Morrison, from Kansas City, is 35-1 with 31 knockouts.
He is ranked fifth by the I.B.F. (AP)


Arthur Markewich, 86, a Justice On Panel That Disbarred Nixon
Arthur Markewich, a retired Justice of the Appellate Division of the New York State Supreme Court, died on Wednesday at the Jewish Home and Hospital for the Aged on West 106th Street.
He was 86 and a longtime resident of the Upper West Side.
His son Daniel said that the cause of death was pneumonia and that he had been in the nursing home since suffering a stroke a year ago.


Circo Craft reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Data I/O Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Royal Dutch/Shell Group of Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Today's TV Listings
Television and radio news, listings and advertising appear today on pages B14-15.


EXPLOSION AT THE TWIN TOWERS: Television; News Coverage Plays Central Role in Story
WNBC's Chuck Scarborough instructed people trapped in the World Trade Center to remove the ceiling tiles from their offices.
WWOR-TV urged those stuck in the building to call the station and report their locations.
And WCBS's Jim Jensen tried, in a conversation on the air, to reassure a worker trapped on the 107th floor.
With a tremor in his voice, the worker, Scott Salem, said that the smoke in his office was getting worse and that the people trapped with him, especially one woman who was pregnant and having trouble breathing, were growing increasingly anxious.
"We did break the window, because a lot of people were panicking," he said.


Katie Beers's Godmother Denied Visitation Rights
A judge denied visitation rights today to Katie Beers's godmother, Linda Inghilleri, who says she raised the 10-year-old girl virtually from birth.
Judge James F. X. Doyle of Suffolk County Family Court also said only a showing of "extraordinary circumstances" would allow Mrs.
Inghilleri to gain custody of the child, as she has requested.


Dow Up 5.67, to 3,370.81; Gain for Week Is 48.63
Stocks completed a week of recovery yesterday with modest gains but some continuing queasiness.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 5.67 points, to 3,370.81, ending the week with a gain of 48.63 points, or almost 1.5 percent.
This left the Dow only about 20 points below where it stood two weeks ago, just before the market's worst one-day plunge in 15 months as details of the Clinton budget proposals emerged.
Helped by Bond Rally
The week's rally in the bond market helped stocks, as did a calmer look at the Clinton plan.
"People are beginning to analyze the total package in a somewhat less emotional manner," said Stefan D. Abrams, a portfolio manager at the Trust Company of the West.
"They realize that this nation is not going to commit economic suicide."


Hard-Pressed Orioles Owner Sells His Home at a Loss
The 11-room Baltimore-area home of Eli S. Jacobs, the financially troubled businessman and owner of the Baltimore Orioles baseball team, was sold at a court-ordered auction yesterday.
The 4,000-square-foot home, on six acres in Owings Mills, Md., fetched $1.44 million from an unidentified buyer as the press covered the sale.


Voices Rise Against Fees for a High-Tech Library of Congress
Envision the Library of Congress as a high-technology operation where a touch of a computer button gives users, no matter where they are, access to its 100-million-item collection.
It's a brave new vision for the world's largest library, a vision based not on a universal library card, but on a user fee.
James H. Billington, the Librarian of Congress, has been pressing Congress for several years to establish such a fee.
He contends it is necessary so the library can expand services and prepare for the 21st century.


Grand Jury Studies Case Against Undercover Unit
A Federal grand jury is investigating whether a group of police officers from the 34th Precinct in Washington Heights used excessive force, conducted illegal searches and made falsifying arrest reports during two drug arrests last summer, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
The case focuses narrowly on a group of undercover officers from the precinct, but is seen as part of a wider effort by the United States Attorney's office in Manhattan to investigate allegations of misconduct and corruption in the precinct.


Clinton Plans an Overhaul Of Student Loan Program
President Clinton has decided to restructure the Federal student loan program to give tens of thousands of college students a way to pay off their loans through national service, Administration officials said today.
The officials said they hoped that by the end of this year a program would be in place that would create about 20,000 jobs in public works and social services in its first year of existence.
They estimated that the program would eventually provide more than 100,000 jobs after three years or so for people before or after they attend college.


Battle Ill and Won't Perform
The soprano Kathleen Battle is ill and has withdrawn from the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra concert scheduled for tomorrow at 3 P.M. in Carnegie Hall.
Ms.
Battle will be replaced by Waltraud Meier, mezzo-soprano, who will perform Alban Berg's Seven Early Songs.
The orchestra, conducted by James Levine, will also play Schubert's "Unfinished" Symphony and Stravinsky's "Sacre du Printemps." Information: (212) 247-7800.


CHRONICLE
No routine wedding for STEFANIE POWERS: she says next month she is off to Africa for her April 1 wedding "in Kenya, in the bush" to PATRICK DE LA CHESNAIS, a Frenchman.
But first, on Monday Ms.
Powers, president of the William Holden Wildlife Foundation -- named for her longtime companion who died in 1981 -- will be the star of a decidedly tamer event.


Review/Music; Carly Simon's New Opera for Children
Only a great anxiety over the future of the operatic tradition could account for such a peculiar, well-meaning and misguided failure like Carly Simon's new opera, "Romulus Hunt," which had its public premiere at the John Jay Theater on Thursday night.
This work, just over an hour in length, is meant to be a "family opera," able to attract children and new audiences to the art form that, along with the rest of the art-music tradition, has no role in contemporary public education.
So the Metropolitan Opera Guild decided to commission and produce the work with the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts (which will present it in April), and is scheduling performances for school classes as well as for the general public.
Its New York run will continue through March 7 at the theater (899 10th Avenue, between 58th and 59th Streets).


Pippen Is Suspended
SCOTTIE PIPPEN of the Chicago Bulls was fined $5,000 yesterday and suspended for one game without pay for slugging JEFF TURNER of Orlando in a game one night earlier.
Pippen hit Turner late in the fourth quarter of Chicago's 108-106 victory at Orlando.
Both players were ejected.
Pippen must sit out tonight's game against Atlanta.
The league said Turner was also fined $2,500. (AP)


No Headline
"It was horrible. There was this awful feeling that we might not be able to get out. We were in the mighty, tall tower but we weren't getting out." -- DENISE BOSCO, who was on the 82d floor.  [ 1:4. ]


EXPLOSION AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Overview; BLAST HITS TRADE CENTER, BOMB SUSPECTED; 5 KILLED, THOUSANDS FLEE SMOKE IN TOWERS
An explosion apparently caused by a car bomb in an underground garage shook the World Trade Center in lower Manhattan with the force of a small earthquake shortly after noon yesterday, collapsing walls and floors, igniting fires and plunging the city's largest building complex into a maelstrom of smoke, darkness and fearful chaos.
The police said the blast killed at least five people and left more than 650 others injured, mostly with smoke inhalation or minor burns, but dozens with cuts, bruises, broken bones or serious burns.
The police said 476 were treated at hospitals and the rest by rescue and medical crews at the scene.


Islamic Art Collection Suffers Unfair Attack
To the Editor:
"Nasser D. Khalili wants to donate his vast collection of Islamic art, which he values at nearly $1.5 billion, to Britain. But there are strings attached, and his gesture has provoked suspicion, much of it vituperative and furtively expressed" (Arts pages, Feb. 15).
You state that much of the suspicion provoked by my offer -- having to do with its valuation and the stipulations that it be a loan for the first 15 years and housed in a separate museum -- is vituperative and furtively expressed.
Yet the body of the article consists of quotations from unnamed sources, with only Anna Somers Cocks mentioned by name.
Might it have been possible to talk with one of the 28 scholars involved in cataloguing the collection, who are the only people familiar enough with its contents to pass judgment?


New Inquiry Puts Pressure On Kevorkian
The new homicide investigation of Dr.
Jack Kevorkian began in a suburban basement this week, when Lynn Mills pulled on a pair of rubber gloves, rolled up her sleeves and began sifting through a pilfered bag of trash.
What Mrs.
Mills, the local leader of an anti-abortion group, found was a garbage-stained, one-page document describing the death of Hugh Gale, the 13th of 15 people the doctor had helped commit suicide since 1990.


The Court Slows Property Seizures
Heady with the profits of a multibillion-dollar collection business, Federal law enforcers are seizing ever more valuable property when they pursue drug smugglers and racketeers.
The Supreme Court has routinely cheered the trend -- even when an accused mobster was stripped of funds needed to pay for his lawyer.
Last week the cheering stopped, if only for one day.
A case quaintly titled U.S. v.
A Parcel of Land showed an enforcement zeal that even the law-and-order high court couldn't stomach.


INSIDE
Economy Ended 1992 With Robust Growth
The gross domestic product grew at the robust rate of 4.8 percent in the final three months of 1992, the best quarterly performance in five years and a full percentage point higher than initial estimates.
Page 35.
Judge Rebuffs Gay Group On St.
Patrick's Parade
A Federal judge ruled that New York City cannot order the Ancient Order of Hibernians to include a gay contingent in the annual St.
Patrick's Day Parade up Fifth Avenue.
The city will not appeal.
Page 21.
Bosnia Sees a Turning Point
After hearing of American plans to airdrop relief supplies, many Bosnians said they sensed a major change in their plight.
Page 5.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY Canadiens Edge Sabres  Linemates Mike Kean, John LeClair and Kirk Muller each scored as the Montreal Canadiens surrendered two goals, then scored the next five in beating the host Buffalo Sabres, 6-4, last night.
Kean, LeClair and Muller combined for seven points as Montreal, which leads the National Hockey League with 84 points, won its fourth game in a row.
Buffalo got two goals from Alexander Mogilny, his 61st and 62d of the season, and one each from Pat LaFontaine and Dale Hawerchuk. (AP) COLLEGE BASKETBALL Columbia Triumphs  Buck Jenkins scored 25 of his 32 points in the second half last night to lead Columbia to a 65-57 home victory over Princeton.
The Lions (15-8, 9-2) remain one and a half games behind first-place Penn in the Ivy League standing.
Columbia held a 27-25 halftime lead, largely on the strength of Tom Casey's 15 points.
The Tigers (14-8, 6-4) pulled to 61-57 in the final minute, but Jenkins converted a free throw and then made a 3-point play to seal the victory. (AP) Penn 75, Cornell 59: Matt Maloney and Jerome Allen each scored 19 points as Penn won in Ithaca, N.Y., to remain unbeaten in the Ivy League.
Cornell (13-10, 6-5) led by 40-36 with 16 minutes 36 seconds left in the game, but the Quakers (18-4, 10-0) used a 23-4 run to take control. (AP) Harvard 77, Brown 74: Tyler Rullman, with 34 points, moved into third place in Harvard career scoring and the Crimson rallied for its first road victory since January 1992.
Harvard (5-18, 2-9) came back as Brown (7-16, 2-9) shot 5 for 15 from the line in the second half.
Rullman, who has 1,481 points, moved ahead of Ralph James in Harvard's record book. (AP) TENNIS Ondruska Beats Gilbert  Marcos Ondruska, a 21-year-old South African, completed a sweep of the United States Davis Cup singles players by upsetting fifth-seeded Brad Gilbert last night in the Purex Championships in Scottsdale, Ariz.
Ondruska, ranked 67th, defeated Gilbert by 7-5, 6-2 in the quarterfinals after eliminating David Wheaton on Thursday.
Mark Woodforde defeated third-seeded MaliVai Washington, 4-6, 7-6 (7-5), 6-3.
In today's semifinals, Woodforde will meet the winner of the late match between Andre Agassi and Emilio Sanchez.
Ondruska will face Andrei Chesnokov. (AP) Fernandez Advances: Top-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez survived a scare from 16-year-old Lindsay Davenport to post a 7-5, 6-2 quarterfinal victory at the Matrix Essentials/ Evert Cup in Indian Wells, Calif.
Davenport, making her pro debut, led by 4-0 in the first set before Fernandez rallied.
Today, Fernandez faces fifth-seeded Helena Sukova, and fourth-seeded Amanda Coetzer goes against Stephanie Rottier. (AP) Ivanisevic Loses: Anders Jarryd upset second-seeded Goran Ivanisevic, 6-3, 6-4, in the quarterfinals of the ABN-Amro tournament in Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
Jarryd, a former top 10 player now ranked 156th, next plays fifth-seeded Aleksandr Volkov.
The other semifinal is Karel Novacek versus Diego Nargiso. (AP) ALPINE SKIING German Wins Downhill  Katja Seizinger of Germany yesterday won the downhill in Veysonnaz, Switzerland.
In her third World Cup victory of the season, Seizinger finished in 1 minute 34.41 seconds to edge Kerrin Lee-Gartner of Canada by .09 seconds. (AP)


Russian Right to 14 Matisses Is Challenged
In a case that could discourage future loans by Russian museums, a lawyer for the heiress of a famous Russian art collector today asked a French court to recognize her ownership of 14 Matisse paintings confiscated after the 1917 revolution and now on temporary display in Paris.
As a first step, the lawyer requested that some 40,000 catalogues of a new Matisse exhibition at the Georges Pompidou Center be impounded for illegal reproduction of the works, although he withdrew an earlier demand that the paintings also be removed from the show, which opened here this week.


EXPLOSION AT THE TWIN TOWERS: Fire Safety; Tougher Code May Not Have Helped
Fire experts said the force of the explosion yesterday at the World Trade Center, which ripped doors off elevators, knocked out power and sent thick smoke up stairwells, would have disabled even the most sophisticated fire system.
And while the building is exempt from New York City's stringent fire codes, these experts said even the most exacting high-rise safety rules would have made little difference in the death toll, injuries or damage.


Jackson Again Warns of a Boycott
Opening a two-day conference on discrimination in professional sports, the Rev.
Jesse L. Jackson today renewed his threat to organize a boycott of baseball teams if the major leagues fail to take steps to increase the number of minorities and women in the nonplayer ranks.
He said a meeting earlier in the day with representatives of the major league owners had made no progress on his proposal that baseball adopt an affirmative-action plan.
Jackson met in Washington with Jerry Reinsdorf of the Chicago White Sox and Bill Bartholomay of the Atlanta Braves, the two men appointed by baseball to serve as a liaison with Jackson's new group, the Rainbow Commission for Fairness in Athletics.


A Boost for RU486
It took only a few strokes of a pen last month for President Clinton to discard five Federal policies that infringed upon the freedom of American women to decide for themselves whether to continue a pregnancy.
But it is taking a lot more than a Presidential signature to get RU486, the French abortion-inducing pill, into this country.
A promising start was made this week when an executive of Roussel-Uclaf, the drug's manufacturer, met with Dr.
David Kessler, who heads the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration.
The French company, Dr.
Kessler said later, is finally willing to talk about making the drug available here -- presumably under an agreement with another company or research institution.
But whether Roussel -- or more important, its German parent company, Hoechst AG -- will carry through remains unclear.


EXPLOSION AT THE TWIN TOWERS: Car Bombs; A Tool of Foreign Terror, Little Known in U.S.
The phenomenon is well known in Belfast, Lima, Bogota and Beirut, but if the explosion that rocked the World Trade Center today was indeed caused by a car bombing, as the F.B.I. believes, it would be the largest such attack in American history, experts said.
Not since 1975, when 11 people were killed at La Guardia Airport, has anyone used a bomb, delivered in any fashion, to kill so many civilians in the United States.
It is unknown whether a terrorist group was responsible for the explosion today.


Sports of The Times; The Crown Jewel of Mozambique
OVER breakfast one morning, Maria de Lurdes Mutola thumbed through a book of poems and essays by women writers of African descent.
She stopped at a poem written by Noemia De Sousa.
"I've heard of her," she said.


Bar Groups Are Happy To Find You a Lawyer
YOUR local bar association naturally wants to help you find a lawyer.
Perhaps you want one.
Increasingly, the bar groups are expanding their services to expedite matches, and increasingly, the public is ringing them up.
"Calls have steadily increased since the service started in 1981," said Audrey Ryan, coordinator of the Lawyer Referral and Information Service of the New York State Bar Association.
"I really don't know why." The service, which makes referrals to lawyers in 39 upstate counties and directs callers in the other 21 to local bar services, has seen calls nearly double in five years, reaching 26,000 last year.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Benjamin B. Rosenberg, an accountant, misstated the day of his death.
It was Thursday.


Rangers' Comeback Is Left Incomplete
It was spoiled the first time when Gary Suter sliced a puck into the net with five seconds remaining in regulation to send tonight's Rangers-Flames game into overtime.
And it was spoiled the second time when Joel Otto crunched Sergei Zubov from behind with a vicious elbow in the first minute of overtime.


Teachers Union In Los Angeles Accepts Pay Cut
The Los Angeles teachers union voted decisively today to accept a 10 percent pay cut as part of a compromise agreement that averts a strike on Monday over a salary dispute.
A preliminary count of the votes by the 27,000-member union showed 68 percent approving the agreement, union officials said.


Overdose Killed Actor
The death of Michael Morrison, a star of the soap opera "As the World Turns," was caused by an accidental overdose of alcohol and illegal drugs, the New York City Medical Examiner's office said yesterday.
Mr.
Morrison, 33, who had played Caleb Snyder on the CBS series since June 1988, died in his sleep Feb. 18 at a friend's Manhattan apartment.
The police did not identify the woman.
A toxicology report lists the cause of death as "acute intoxication caused by the combination of ethanol, cocaine and opiates," said Ellen Borakove, a spokeswoman for the Medical Examiner.
Mr.
Morrison, of Peekskill, is survived by his wife, Amy McDonald, and their 2-year-old son.


New Talks on Bosnia Set to Begin Monday at U.N.
After several false starts, a new round of negotiations to reach a settlement on the fighting in the former Yugoslavia is scheduled to begin Monday at the United Nations, United States and United Nations officials said tonight.
The officials said representatives of the three major factions would be arriving in New York throughout the weekend.
Among them is Radovan Karadzic, leader of the Serbs in Bosnia and Herzegovina, where the fighting has been most fierce in recent weeks.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The economy expanded at the robust pace of 4.8 percent in the final three months of 1992, the best quarterly performance in five years.
Economists saw the strong fourth-quarter showing for gross domestic product as evidence of an economic surge.
But the Administration still appears to be planning a stimulus.  [ Page 35. ]


Vroom! That Was Devers Whipping By
The USA/Mobil indoor track and field championships last night offered some near milestones, an assortment of disoriented Kenyans and one magnificent dash by Gail Devers.
Long before 40-year-old Eamonn Coghlan came within 1.39 seconds of his precious four-minute Masters mile, or Noureddine Morceli of Algeria outkicked stubborn Marcus O'Sullivan over the final lap of their mile duel, Devers required less than seven seconds to sprint 60 meters, a blur across the length of the Madison Square Garden floor.


Sugar Industry Must Clean Up Its Mess Now; Right Plan Exists
To the Editor:
Robert Hahn's industry-backed plan for tradeable pollution rights in the Everglades (Op-Ed, Feb. 6) has a deceptively nice ring to it: just work in the proper market mechanisms, and the Florida sugar industry will efficiently clean up the nutrient-polluted discharges that are choking the Everglades.
However, a sound program to clean up the Everglades without further delay is already in place.
It incorporates market incentives, but unlike Mr.
Hahn's panacea, it avoids delay and is based on proved technology and the ecological needs of the Everglades.
Florida's plan for the Everglades has two basic components: (1) a best management practice rule, requiring Everglades farmers to reduce nutrient discharges from their farms, and (2) manmade marshes -- called storm-water treatment areas -- to remove nutrients from water that leaves farms before it reaches the nutrient-sensitive Everglades.


Running Into Winter


CHRONICLE
"Oh, how sweet," thought KAREN AKERS, the cabaret singer and Broadway star, when a package marked "candy" for customs purposes arrived for her while she was in London for a nightclub date this month.
Then she opened it to find a record made of chocolate with the words "Karen, just for the record, I love you, Kevin" around the edge, with "Please marry me" in the center.


EXPLOSION AT THE TWIN TOWERS: Disruptions; Manhattan Is Held in the Grip Of Traffic Snarls and Anxiety
Traffic snarled to a standstill in lower Manhattan.
Major arteries downtown closed, and a half-dozen subway lines were rerouted.
Nervous relatives jammed the 911 emergency lines.
And an anxiety that began in lower Manhattan at lunchtime yesterday grew infectious as the day grew long, generating a restless buzz throughout New York City.
As news spread that the explosion at the World Trade Center -- which the F.B.I. said may have been caused by a car bomb -- had been followed by a bomb scare at and evacuation of the Empire State Building, nerves began to fray.
Drivers sitting bumper to bumper on Canal Street leaned on their horns, waiting over an hour to enter the Holland Tunnel.
Subway riders jostled their way onto overcrowded trains, pondering their commuters' headaches as well as what seemed to be a different kind of urban terrorism.
An Eerie Quiet on Closed Streets
"It's frightening," said Charles Sampey, 34 years old, a building superintendent riding the IRT No. 3 downtown at 6 P.M.
"You'd expect more to get robbed in New York than to get hit by a terrorist bomb."


Constance Ford, 69, TV and Stage Actress
Constance Ford, an actress who appeared for 25 years in the role of Ada Hobson, an indestructably upbeat mother in the NBC daytime serial "Another World," died yesterday at New York Hospital.
She was 69.
The cause was cancer, said Murray Schapiro, her business manager.


Richmond Out for Year
MITCH RICHMOND, an All-Star guard, will undergo surgery on his fractured right thumb and miss the rest of the season, the Sacramento Kings said.
Richmond was injured Feb. 11 while trying to steal the ball from Atlanta's MOOKIE BLAYLOCK. (AP)


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-6  MORE IS URGED FOR EX-SOVIETS
President Clinton declared that the U.S. must be willing to spend much more than planned to support democracy in the former Soviet republics.
Documents indicate that he will ask for $700 million in aid next year for the republics, nearly doubling the $417 million allotted for this year.  1  NO LOGISTICAL AID ON AIRDROPS
Secretary of State Christopher met with NATO foreign ministers to win support for the U.S. military operation to parachute food and medicine into remote areas of Bosnia and Herzegovina, but he failed to get new commitments of logistical help in carrying out the operation.  5
Bosnians are hoping that the airdrops will be turning point.  5
A new round of talks on Bosnia is to begin at the U.N. on Monday.  5  AN ANXIOUS CALM IN MOGADISHU
Nigerian troops and U.S. marines in Somalia's capital occupied buildings from which sniper attacks had been launched, arrested suspected gunmen and seized weapons from buildings as an anxious calm returned to southern Mogadishu after two days of intense gunfire.  4  PANEL SUGGESTS REMEDIES FOR U.N.
With new crises looming in many parts of the world, the U.N. must prepare for a substantial expansion of peacekeeping operations and put its financing on a sounder footing, an international panel of financial experts has recommended.  4  A DEPARTURE FOR KOREA'S CABINET
The new President of South Korea, Kim Young Sam, surprised Koreans by announcing the appointment of relatively young Cabinet members who were drawn largely from universities, business and politics rather than from the military.  2  INDIA: WEAKNESSES ARE EXPOSED
News analysis: By thwarting plans for an anti-Government rally by Hindu nationalists, the Prime Minister survived an important challenge.
But he was also seen as having exposed weaknesses in his party and in his vision for a divided country.  3  IRAQIS BEAR WEIGHT OF SANCTIONS
Two years after Iraqi forces were crushed by the U.S. and its allies, Iraqis are trying to overcome the effects of economic sanctions, which have created widespread shortages and sharp increase in prices.  4  National 7-9  CLINTON PLANS FOR LOANS
Administration officials said President Clinton had decided to restructure the Federal student loan program in a way that offers people a chance to repay their debts through national service.  8  LIBRARY VISION DRAWS FIRE
A plan by the Library of Congress to charge fees for computerized access to its 100-million-item collection has drawn protests from people concerned about restrictions on information, copyright infringement and unfair competition.  8  G.O.P.
LAWMAKERS MEET
Conservative themes were dominant as Republican members of Congress met for an annual meeting that seems to mix tent revival and chalkboard lectures.  8  HEAD OF HEALTH AGENCY QUITS
Bernadine Healy announced her resignation after two stormy years as director of the National Institutes of Health.  8  RACE BARRIER FALLS IN TEXAS
A 58-year-old man who is moving into a housing project in Vidor, Tex., is the first black resident since the 1920's in the town, which has a reputation of being a hotbed of Ku Klux Klan activity.  7  TRASH LED TO INQUIRY OF DOCTOR
The new investigation of Dr.
Jack Kevorkian got its start with a search of the garbage of one of his assistants by the leader of a militant anti-abortion group.  9  Testimony began in the Rodney King beating case.  7  A Navy gay-bashing case took a new twist.  9  Los Angeles teachers agreed to a pay cut, averting a strike.  7  The Navy began a series of "Star Wars" missile tests.  7  Religion Notes: the 10,000th circumcision.  9  Metro Digest 21  WORLD TRADE CENTER EXPLOSION
An explosion apparently caused by a car bomb in an underground garage shook the World Trade Center in lower Manhattan with the force of a small earthquake, collapsing walls and floors, igniting fires and plunging the city's largest building complex into a maelstrom of smoke, darkness and fearful chaos.
The police said the blast killed at least five people and injured more than 650 others.  1  TRAPPED INSIDE THE TOWER
Minutes after the explosion, thousands of people in the World Trade Center knew they were in the grip of one of the most dreaded urban nightmares: they were in the city's tallest building and something was very wrong.  1  TRAFFIC SNARLS AND SMOKE
The anxiety that began in lower Manhattan with the explosion grew infectious as the day grew long, generating a restless buzz throughout New York City.
Traffic snarled to a standstill in lower Manhattan.
Major arteries downtown closed and a half-dozen subway lines were rerouted.
Beaumont Newhall, a historian of photography.
Eren Ozker, an actress.
George N. Marshall, a leading minister in the Unitarian Church.
Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19  Editorials  Mr.
Wilder's bulletproof vest.
A boost for RU486.
Iran's Nuremberg laws.
The Court slows property seizures.
Letters  Vibhuti Patel: India's days of rage.
Walter Reich: Shame on the Dutch.
Richard Blow: The trouble with tankers.
Julian Bond: Putting the spin on the N.A.A.C.P.


Blue's Bounce
I.B.M. crept up during the week to its highest close since the Dec. 15 announcement of huge cutbacks and a likely dividend reduction.
The week's news included progress in the search for a strong chief executive from outside, and I.B.M.'s first acknowledged layoffs.
As Peter Lieu of Furman Selz put it, "Clearly, I.B.M.'s being shaken up."


Classical Music in Review
Leipzig Chamber Orchestra  Joseph Kalichstein, pianist Carnegie Hall


Next Vote on Guns Ban Is Up to G.O.P. Leaders
Gov.
Jim Florio has again declared political war in his effort to save the nation's toughest ban on assault-type firearms, but it is Republican leaders who will decide when the final battle will take place.
The State Assembly voted Thursday to repeal the two-year-old ban over the Governor's veto.
The matter now goes to the Senate, where the Senate President, Donald T. DiFrancesco, has more than 10 months to call the matter to a vote.


Witnesses to Beating Testify That King Did Not Disobey Officers
Rodney G. King was repeatedly struck in the head but did not appear to resist officers after a police-cruiser chase, witnesses told jurors today in the Federal civil rights trial of four officers charged in his beating.
After the beating, officers appeared to laugh and chat casually while Mr.
King lay hog-tied and bleeding on the ground awaiting an ambulance, a woman who lives across the street from the beating scene testified.


G.E.'s Aircraft-Engine Unit To Cut 3,900 Jobs This Year
In response to order cutbacks from the financially ailing airline industry, the General Electric Company's aircraft-engine business announced yesterday that it would reduce its 33,000-member work force by 3,900 jobs, or 11 percent, this year.
About 2,500 jobs will be eliminated at G.E.
Aircraft Engine's headquarters in Evendale, Ohio, an industrial area outside Cincinnati.
About 700 jobs will be cut at the company's plant in Lynn, Mass., and 700 at smaller operations elsewhere.
About 2,300 salaried workers and 1,600 hourly workers will be cut.


Corrections
An article and a chart on Thursday about the pace of Clinton Administration appointments misstated the number of nominations formally submitted to the Senate for confirmation.
By Thursday, the President had made 29 such nominations, not 30.
One nomination, not two, was for a Justice Department post.


Blast Halts Some Trading
The explosion at the World Trade Center complex in lower Manhattan yesterday disrupted trading on the five commodities exchanges in New York.
The explosion also interfered with trading in the bond market and the Nasdaq National Market system.


Here's Where Woodstock Meets Silicon Valley
Though the personal computer industry has grown to be a $70 billion-a-year business, it is still remarkably tribal, dominated by a few hundred people who grew up together.
They all know each other, friends and rivals, their affections and resentments deeply held.
Their roots are in Silicon Valley in California, culturally if not always geographically.
Most of them are in their 30's and 40's now.
They are top executives in companies that range from high-tech brand names like Microsoft and Apple to promising start-ups like General Magic and EO.


Wilmer Ames Jr., 43, Magazine Editor, Dies
Wilmer C. Ames Jr., a writer and the founder and editor of a national magazine, died on Feb. 16 at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 43 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause of death was a heart attack, his family said.


U.S. and Nigerian Troops Halt Somali Shootings
Nigerian forces and United States marines today occupied buildings in southern Mogadishu from which recent sniper attacks had been staged.
Suspected gunmen were arrested and quantities of weapons were seized.
American military and diplomatic officials said the disturbances of the last two days, which had paralyzed relief operations in Mogadishu, would not affect United States plans for a speedy transfer of command of the foreign military effort in Somalia to the United Nations.


Blazers Keep Nets in Tailspin
If anyone happens to see the New Jersey Nets, call the police.
They've been missing for some time now.
Against Portland tonight the Nets continued to sleepwalk through the second half of the season.
The way they're sinking, by mid-March they should arrive at the center of the Earth.
By April, they'll know the price of tea in China.
This is getting ugly.


Christopher Fails to Secure European Help for Airdrops
Secretary of State Warren Christopher met with NATO foreign ministers today to win support for an American military operation to parachute food and medicine into remote areas of Bosnia, but failed to get new commitments of logistical help in carrying out the operation.
The Europeans, who have been urging the United States to get more directly involved in the relief effort, praised the American plan, but they did not offer to take part.
President Clinton said on Wednesday that he expected other countries to take part, but for now at least, it appears that the United States will have to make the airdrops alone.


Anti-Gay Motive Questioned In Beating Death of a Sailor
A new affidavit suggests that the Navy sailor accused of killing a shipmate in Japan in what has been portrayed as a gay-bashing murder might be homosexual himself, Defense Department officials said today.
But Navy investigators are skeptical of the new affidavit, which was given by a sailor who said he had had homosexual relations twice with the accused man, Airman Apprentice Terry M. Helvey.
A Defense Department official said the other sailor, who was not identified, had failed a lie-detector test.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.18
3.00
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.93
2.93
3.92
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.04
3.03
3.97
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.64
5.65
6.91
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.90
6.88
7.79
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.79
7.79
8.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.90
5.92
6.76
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


'Star Wars' Test in Hawaii Brings Demonstration
The Navy began a series of missile launchings today to test the "Star Wars" defense system, firing a modified Polaris missile from the Barking Sands range on the western island of Kauai.
The missile traveled 2,200 miles west to a splashdown near the Kwajalein atoll in the Pacific Ocean.


It's 3-D: Dumars, Dumars, Dumars
Joe Dumars brought the Knicks to their knees with threes tonight.
Making 7 of his 11 3-point attempts, Dumars finished with a season-high 43 points in leading the Detroit Pistons to a 108-80 wipeout of the Knicks at the Palace of Auburn Hills.
New York suffered its largest margin of defeat this season.


Behind the Plate? Bad. At the Plate? Worse.
As the indignity expanded on the night of Aug. 18, 1992, Todd Hundley's world shrank.
The Dodgers stole one base after another on their way to the night's total of a half-dozen.
Hundley, the rookie catcher for the Mets, could sense his father's long-distance disappointment.
He could hear the heckler in the box seats.
He could feel Tommy Lasorda's greed.
Hundley answered it all without conviction.


Q. &amp; A.
No Loads vs. Loads
What would the net asset value be at the end of five years for both a no-load and load mutual fund, assuming they had the same investment results?
JEFF STERNSTEIN, HOBOKEN, N.J.
No-load mutual funds do not charge their shareholders a sales fee, while load funds impose a charge when the shares are purchased or redeemed.
There is also a category called 12B-1 funds, which assess an annual fee, normally 1 percent of assets, for sales promotion costs.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League


Iran's Nuremberg Laws
Iran's clerical rulers have approved a secret blueprint for the persecution of the Bahai faith that is appalling evidence of growing intolerance.
The sweeping code is reminiscent of the sinister Nuremberg Laws imposed by the Nazis in 1935, which shredded citizenship rights of German Jews.
Some 200 Bahais have been executed and thousands imprisoned since the reign of the ayatollahs began in 1979.
But the assault on 300,000 Bahais seemed to abate after an outcry abroad.


Last Quarter's Growth Revised to Robust 4.8%
The economy expanded at a robust pace of 4.8 percent in the final three months of 1992, the best quarterly performance in five years, the Commerce Department reported today.
The revised estimate of gross domestic product -- the total output of goods and services within American borders -- was a full percentage point higher than the initial estimate published a month ago.


Fed Chief Sways to Clinton's New Economic Tune
After two staid decades among the gray suits of Washington and Wall Street, Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, is suddenly popping up in the oddest places.
First, there he was grinning next to Bill Clinton at an Oval Office "photo op" shortly after the new President took office.
Then there was the night recently when he found himself wedged uneasily between Hillary Rodham Clinton and Tipper Gore as President Clinton introduced his economic package before a joint session of Congress.


EXPLOSION AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Scene; First, Darkness, Then Came the Smoke
It depended on where you were in the towers when it came.
For some the warning was a trembling underfoot or just a blank computer screen and flickering lights.
For others, it was a shocking noise.
One woman was blown out of her high heels.
Another, desk chair and all, sank into the floor.
And then, instantly it seemed, came the billowing smoke and the chilling realization that you had to get out of there.
The Face of Death
There were those who panicked, those who coolly absorbed it, those who got sick to their stomach and those who saw the face of death.
No one was sure what had happened; did a plane hit the building, was it an earthquake, had lightning struck?
Many wondered why there seemed to be no evacuation plan and no guidance -- not realizing that the blast had knocked out the center's operations center.


Sugar Industry Must Clean Up Its Mess Now
To the Editor:
In "Real Help for the Everglades" (Op-Ed, Feb. 6), Robert W. Hahn, an economist speaking for the sugar industry, claims that "real help" for cleaning up the Everglades system can come only if we offer the sugar industry just one more break in fixing their problems.
On the contrary, if we are serious about cleaning up the Everglades, we must give the sugar industry a clear signal that it has to clean up its own mess, and now.
No one disagrees that the sugar industry in South Florida has polluted the water system.
Yet in the last few years the industry has failed to clean up its pollution.
According to the Fish and Wildlife Service, in the last 10 years pollution from the Everglades agricultural area -- a 750,000-acre area south of Lake Okeechobee -- has gotten worse.


Packers Give Up On Mandarich
TONY MANDARICH's once-promising career with the Green Bay Packers ended yesterday when the team said it would not offer the former first-round pick a contract for next season.
"It is our feeling that it is in Tony's best interest to attempt a fresh start in professional football somewhere else," General Manager RON WOLF said of the former Michigan State player, who was chosen second over all in the 1989 draft.


Bosnians Hope U.S. Airdrops Will Be a Turning Point
"The Americans are in," Dino Dizdar said today, stamping his feet in the morning cold at the central market in Sarajevo.
"Yes, finally," said Kemal Muratovic, a friend of Mr.
Dizdar.
"Now, let's see what they can do. I always thought that America was the one that could make the difference."


Judge Allows Group to Bar Gay Marchers
The Dinkins administration cannot force the Ancient Order of Hibernians to include a gay group in the St.
Patrick's Day Parade, and must permit the Hibernians to sponsor this year's march up Fifth Avenue, a Federal judge ruled yesterday.
The ruling makes it all but certain that there will be a parade this year and that, as in years past, the parade will be run by the Hibernians on their chosen terms.


METRO DIGEST
EXPLOSION AT THE WORLD TRADE CENTER: DEATH AND FEAR ROCK A LANDMARK
An explosion apparently caused by a car bomb in an underground garage shook the World Trade Center in Lower Manhattan with the force of a small earthquake shortly after noon, collapsing walls and floors, igniting fires and plunging the city's largest building complex into a maelstrom of smoke, darkness and fearful chaos.
The police said the blast killed at least five people and left 650 others injured.
Page 1.


Religion Notes
Rite for Jewish Males
A bris, a symbol of the covenant between Jews and God, is traditionally performed on the eighth day of a boy's life.
But for many Jewish males who were reared in the formerly communist Eastern bloc, a bris, or ritual circumcision, was either illegal or unavailable.
So for these males a Brooklyn organization has spent 20 years helping immigrants from Eastern Europe experience Judaism in a new land.


Falling Rates Help Long-Bond Categories
Falling interest rates so far this year have brought cheer to some bond fund owners.
Rates on five-year Treasury securities tumbled from 6.03 percent as the year began to 5.66 percent by the end of January.
Bond prices move in the opposite direction of interest rates and the longer the term of the bond, the more volatile the price shift.
Also, lower-coupon bonds are more volatile than their higher-coupon cousins.
So it's not surprising that target maturity funds, which are packages of long-term zero-coupon bonds, are the best-performing taxable bond funds in 1993 so far.


Ben Elliott, 104, Dies; Automobile Engineer
Ben G. Elliott, a professor of engineering at the University of Wisconsin who conducted groundbreaking research on the automobile engine in the early years of this century, died Wednesday at St.
Marys Hospital in Madison, Wis.
He was 104 and lived in Madison.
He had pneumonia, said Jeff Iseminger, a spokesman for the University of Wisconsin in Madison.


What Clinton's Energy Tax Would Cost
Thomas C. Sahagian is thinking about buying a more energy-efficient refrigerator to replace what he calls "our massive side-by-side job," the culprit in the family's electric bills.
The Clinton Administration's proposed new energy tax could be an incentive to do that, he says -- but he was considering such a move before the announcement of the tax.
Further, the incentive to save is not large: he estimates that the tax, if put into effect, will raise the electricity bills in the family's three-bedroom co-op by a mere $19.92 a year at the end of the three-year phase-in.


Taking a Hard Look At Those Clinton Plays
WALL Street hopped right to it in response to President Clinton's proposals for the budget, the economy and the taxpayer.
Within hours of the President's speech to Congress, investment experts had a Clinton play to soothe every tax-paranoid investor in the nation.
While the notion of fine-tuning a portfolio in light of potential changes is certainly well advised, investors should keep this in mind: The strategy-switching game will cost you, so you'd better feel secure that the tax savings you obtain will more than offset the cost of your transactions.


Beaumont Newhall, a Historian Of Photography, Is Dead at 84
Beaumont Newhall, a pioneering historian of photography and an ardent and articulate advocate of the medium, died yesterday at his home in Santa Fe, N.M.
He was 84.
Mr.
Newhall's companion, Christi Newhall, his former wife, said the cause was complications from a stroke.


Putting the Spin on the N.A.A.C.P.
To: Journalists and Pundits From: Media Central Re: N.A.A.C.P.
This memo is prompted by the news that more than 75 people have applied to replace Benjamin Hooks as executive director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and the speculation that Jesse Jackson is a leading candidate for the job.


Before Schott's Winter, a Bittersweet Visit to Spring
Marge Schott appeared today as she said she might at the Cincinnati Reds' training site here, three days before she is to begin her one-year suspension from baseball.
She hugged the team manager and she hugged veteran Barry Larkin, keeping a cheery demeanor as she walked to the batting cage through the late morning drizzle.
But she did little to hide the bitterness and anger over her ouster.
"It was a witch hunt," she said.
"And I think my players are intelligent enough to know it."


PRESIDENT URGES MORE RUSSIAN AID
President Clinton declared today that having spent trillions of dollars to win the cold war, the United States must summon the will to spend much more than planned in Russia and the other former Soviet republics "to support democracy's success where Communism failed."
Documents sent to Capitol Hill with the President's economic message last week, but little noticed at the time, indicated the President will ask for $700 million in aid next year for the former Soviet republics, nearly doubling the $417 million allotted for this year.
Mr.
Clinton, who plans to meet with President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia on April 4, said "the world will suffer" if Russia's tottering economic reforms collapse.  [ Excerpts, page 6. ] Wants America to Compete
In a speech at American University consciously evocative of one delivered there 30 years ago by John F. Kennedy, the President endorsed the broad thrust of former President George Bush's trade policies.
But at the same time, he sent two signals of change with his call for greater support for Russia and a suggestion that he would demand progress on human rights as the price for continued growth in trade with China.


Review/Ballet; A Bavarian Display of Dance Power
Skip, don't walk, over to the Bavarian National Ballet, which on Thursday night presented the electrifying showcase that should have opened its local debut season in the first place.
Any suspicion that the company is filled with superbly trained dancers was happily confirmed in its second program at the New York State Theater.
Sheer dance power, not dance-acting as in the previous night's "Onegin," is what this German troupe, typically international in its personnel, can show to exciting advantage.


Seoul Chief Names Cabinet, Mostly Young and Civilian
The new President, Kim Young Sam, surprised Koreans today by appointing a Cabinet drawn largely from university faculties, business and politics rather than the military, with several key positions filled with knowledgeable but young and inexperienced officials.
Mr.
Kim, the first nonmilitary South Korean President in more than three decades, delivered a tough inauguration speech on Thursday promising major reforms and his Cabinet lineup today suggested that he meant it.


Why Students Don't Like Community College Route to a B.A.
To the Editor:
"How They Do It: The Community College Route to a Lower-Cost Bachelor's Degree" (Your Money page, Feb. 6) tells how Adrian Tubero, a junior at New York University, is obtaining a bachelor's degree at half the price of what it could have cost her.
The article would have been more useful to me, as a high school senior, if it told about a person who has an idea of what her major is going to be and knows what school she wants to attend.
The article made me feel that the only way to cut costs is to attend a two-year community college and transfer, but if this were the only way, community colleges would be flooded, and a young person's education would be severely limited.


Plato on Homosexuality
To the Editor:
In "What Plato Says" (letter, Feb. 13), Catherine Glass suggests that Phaedrus in the "Symposium" says what Plato thought.
This gets Phaedrus and Plato wrong, for Phaedrus is praising pederasty, not homosexual intercourse in general, and Plato condemns homosexual intercourse in both the "Laws" and the "Republic." The "Laws" (Book VIII) rejects homosexual intercourse because it can render men unfit for marriage and because it is contrary to nature and a shameless indulgence.
The "Laws" recommends that homosexuality, like adultery, fornication and the use of prostitutes, not be engaged in; that if it is engaged in, it be kept private or closeted, and that if it is discovered, it be punished by deprivation of civil rights, a severe penalty.
In effect, the "Laws" recommends criminalization.


Review/Dance; The Many Faces, All Sad, Of Not Being Together
Chill choreographic winds seemed to blow through the program that the Extended Dance Company presented Sunday afternoon at the Marymount Manhattan Theater.
The presentations dealt with loneliness, longing and alienation and combined various jazz and modern-dance techniques.
The skill of the choreographers and the performers made the eclecticism persuasive.
Val Suarez, who founded the company in 1988, contributed two strong pieces.
"Wave" began with Rosemary Flynn, David Liddell, Oliver Kirch, Katherine Steers, Carla Rudiger, Teri Lee Steele and Jacqueline Tuorto kneeling on the floor and swaying rhythmically.
After first struggling to rise, they began to leap.


Classical Music in Review
Richard Locker and Frederick Zlotkin  Cellists Ethical Culture Society


When the Arts Were in Nazi Hands
One historic photograph in a provocative new exhibition at the New York Public Library says it all.
It shows four smug-looking Nazi storm troopers in gleaming jackboots, their arms loaded with books they are carrying away to be torched.
The place is Hamburg, the time May 15, 1933.
Libraries and bookstores are being purged of so-called racially impure books written by Jewish, pacifist, socialist and foreign authors.
In the Nazis' Campaign Against the Un-German Spirit, tens of thousands of books were burned in cities and university towns all over the Third Reich.
The photograph is one of the items in "Assault on the Arts: Culture and Politics in Nazi Germany," which opens today in the Gottseman Exhibition Hall in the library, at Fifth Avenue and 42d Street, and runs until May 28.


No Shoulder Problem
JAMES (BUDDY) McGIRT, the World Boxing Council welterweight champion, insisted yesterday that there was nothing wrong with his left shoulder.
That opinion was confirmed by Dr.
BARRY JACOBS of the New York State Athletic Commission, who examined McGirt on Thursday and pronounced him fit to meet PERNELL WHITAKER for the title next Saturday night at Madison Square Garden.


Board Reconsiders Discipline Of Principal in Bronx Rape
Reversing course under pressure from Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez, a Bronx school board promised yesterday to begin disciplinary proceedings against a principal accused of humiliating an 8-year-old girl who said a custodian had raped her.
In a letter yesterday to Mr.
Fernandez, Pablo Ortiz, the president of Community School Board 12, said that he had scheduled a meeting for Tuesday to deal with the matter and that five of the board's nine members had agreed to vote to begin the disciplinary proceedings.


At Retreat, G.O.P. Tries to Keep Faith
William J. Bennett, the pugnacious philosopher-politician, is preaching his gospel of social conservatism to a rapt group of Republican members of Congress almost as if he were still Education Secretary and George Bush were still President.
He rails against liberal civil-rights dogma, which he says is "patronizing" black and Hispanic youths instead of helping them.
He bemoans the "racism" of handing out inflated grades and scholarships to unqualified minority students solely in the name of affirmative action.


Split Goal on Trade; President's Speech Tries to Reconcile Open Markets With Help for Industry
President Clinton's strong endorsement of free trade today is an attempt to reconcile the need for open international markets with his Administration's commitment to a more active Government role in helping industries at home.
While the Bush Administration pursued free trade as part of its general faith in markets, Clinton Administration officials have much more confidence in the ability of Government to intervene productively.
In his speech today, President Clinton tried to blend his enthusiasm for free trade abroad with industrial policies at home, Administration officials said.


British Editors Add a Very Cutting Edge
IT was just about as inspiring a thing as a body could ever hope to see.
Right here in New York, up at Columbia University, four people who had come all the way from London, England, to do their bit for American publishers were discussing journalism here and back home.
They all had a lot of aplomb and even panache, which is what you would expect from people who come from London, England.
But as they warmed up, they also reflected the kind of caution a Japanese auto executive might project if he found himself drinking boilermakers with the guys and gals from River Rouge.
The chap who heads Random House, the man from The National Review, the editor of TV Guide and the writer from The Nation all made it clear some of their best friends were Americans and how much they liked it here.


One Man's Arrival in Town Exposes a Racial Fault Line
As he dropped off a box full of his belongings at 530 National Drive here a few days ago, John DecQuir Sr. told one of his future neighbors, who looked on curiously: "I don't understand why this is such a big deal. I'm just renting an apartment."
But his move into the federally financed housing project in Vidor has become a very big deal in this small city in the piney woods of East Texas, one that has forced the police to set up a 24-hour-a-day patrol outside his home.
Mr.
DecQuir, local officials say, is the first black adult to live in Vidor since the 1920's.


University of Bridgeport Accredited for 30-Month Term
The University of Bridgeport, which was rescued from financial collapse last year by an arm of the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon's Unification Church, won renewed state accreditation today after a contentious public meeting.
By a vote of 7 to 3, the Board of Governors of the State Department of Higher Education re-accredited the university through June 30, 1995.
Terms of accreditation are commonly longer, to a maximum of five years.
A Department of Higher Education official said the abbreviated term reflected concern that the school had been taken over by a group that might interfere in academic affairs.
Trustees of the private, 1,400-student university and school officials spoke of the need to maintain the school as a resource in a struggling city.
They argued that the group that has taken over the university, the Professors World Peace Academy, is separate from the Unification Church, although it is almost totally financed by the church.
Pep Rally Atmosphere
Much of today's meeting at the Greater Hartford Community College had the air of a pep rally as about 250 students, bused in from the university, erupted periodically in applause and whoops of appreciation for advocates of continued accreditation.
"I'm delighted by this confirmation and the ability to go forward and keep doing what we've been doing for 65 years, to provide education to a broad spectrum of people," said Walter Wager, a university spokesman.
University officials said the school has complied with the board's requirements, which call for an independent, self-governing panel to oversee the school's operation.
However, the three board members who voted against accreditation said they were concerned that the agreement between the Professors World Peace Academy and the university did not meet state standards.
The board's vice chairman, Marie C. O'Brien, of Bristol, said she had "serious concerns" about the future of academic freedom at the university.
And Helen B. Wasserman, of Fairfield, another board member, said the agreement between the academy and the university "is not in keeping with either the spirit or the specific guidelines" of state law.
The university's previous two-year term of accreditation expired Jan. 31.
But its status was extended when the board of governors postponed its decision for a month to study issues related to the running of the university and the role of the Professors World Peace Academy.
If the university had failed to win accreditation, it would have been unable to grant degrees or participate in Federal financial aid programs, and probably would have closed.
Re-evaluation Next Year
In re-accrediting the university, the board followed a recommendation by Andrew G. DeRocco, the higher education commissioner.
He called for the 29-month period "to allow time for the university to come into full compliance" with board standards.
Mark E. Ojakian, an aide to Mr.
DeRocco, said the term of the accreditation was "a little less than normal, but there have been instances when two years has been used." Under the commissioner's recommendation, the school's status will be re-evaluated by the board in 1994.
Last year, the Department of Higher Education found that the university did not comply with several of its standards.
However, "Since then, the university has shown affirmative action in addressing the outstanding issues, to include revision of its bylaws to comply" with board standards of administration, Mr.
DeRocco said in his recommendation.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a report in the Company News column of Business Day yesterday about Imperial Chemical Industries P.L.C. misstated the charge against earnings that the company took last year.
The charge was $:949 million, the equivalent of about $1.4 billion.
The company had a net loss of $:384 million, or about $550 million, for the year.


EXPLOSION AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Children; For 17 Kindergartners, 5 Hours in an Elevator
The school bus full of kindergartners pulled up outside Public School 95 in the Gravesend section of Brooklyn just before 8 P.M.
Teachers and school officials formed a double line at its door.
And then one by one, 5-years-olds in colorful parkas were handed off the bus, some in tears, some unfazed and some bewildered after a day of being trapped in the World Trade Center.
The day's vigil had come to an end.
"Thank God. I never thought I'd be so happy to see my school," said Annamarie Tesoriero, who had led her 17 youngsters in songs and prayers to keep their spirits up through five hours stuck in a dark elevator, with no hint of when they would be rescued.
"We expected the children to behave. We're old-fashioned that way."


Behind the New Apology From NBC
For the second time this month, NBC News has acknowledged on the air that pictures it used to illustrate a news story were inaccurate.
But unlike the abject admission by NBC that it participated in the faking of evidence used in a report on General Motors trucks, NBC executives now say that a report on the clear-cutting of forests in Idaho, broadcast last month on the "NBC Nightly News," was a minor mistake.
Betty Hudson, senior vice president of corporate communication for NBC, said the latest instance was "analagous to a newspaper miscaptioning a picture."


Robert Triffin, 81, an Economist Who Backed Monetary Stability
Robert Triffin, the Belgian-born Yale economist who championed European unity for much of his life and correctly foresaw the demise of the Bretton Woods international monetary system, died on Tuesday in Ostend, Belgium.
He was 81.
He suffered from emphysema, his son Nicholas said.


Challenge to India's Leaders: Survived but Weakly
By transforming New Delhi into a fortress of barbed wire and heavily armed policemen on Thursday, Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao summoned the forces of state power to confront the growing challenge of Hindu nationalism and survived an important challenge to his authority.
But in successfully thwarting plans for an anti-Government rally by Hindu nationalists, he was also widely seen today to have exposed gaping weaknesses in his governing Congress Party and in his vision for a deeply troubled and divided country.


Shame On the Dutch
The Parliament of the Netherlands, one of the most humane nations on earth, has given Dutch physicians, members of one of the most humane professions on earth, permission to kill their patients.
Physicians still have to follow rules.
The patient must ask for death, must not be depressed when asking for it, must be well informed about his illness and options and must feel his suffering is unacceptable.
The physician must consult a colleague before doing the deed and, having done it, must inform the authorities why he was justified in doing it.


Showalter Picks Perez To Be the Leadoff Pitcher
Melido Perez was designated today as the Yankees' opening-day starter, which came as no surprise.
What was surprising was that the normally cautious Buck Showalter made the announcement barely a week into spring training.
Hoping to assure Perez that his superb efforts last season had not been overlooked and knowing that his plans for the team's top rotation spots were hardly a secret, Manager Showalter huddled with Perez this morning and delivered the news that had been anticipated for weeks.
Perez will oppose the Indians in Cleveland on April 5, and then be followed in the rotation by the newly acquired Jim Abbott and Jimmy Key.
The balance of the rotation remains uncertain.


Mr. Wilder's Bulletproof Vest
Gov.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia and his supporters in the Legislature made clear this week that they, and not the gun lobby, are in charge of their state.
In doing so they challenge other states with weak gun laws and underscore the shameful lack of courage in Washington D.C.
Virginia is infamous for gun dealers eager to sell weapons without concern for their intended use, and for its lack of laws to prevent them.
The state has become the central warehouse for smugglers who supply guns for criminals and thugs up and down the East Coast.


Marshall Picks a Fight With Costly Kick to It
In a twist, the Redskins' Wilber Marshall, who had been the first player in recent history to take advantage of National Football League free agency, was described yesterday by his lawyer as a victim of the new order that he helped bring about.
On Thursday, Marshall, a pass-rushing linebacker, was designated as Washington's franchise player, which essentially removed him from the pool of about 340 players who will be free to negotiate with other clubs starting Monday, under the N.F.L.'s new free-agency system.
Marshall's designation ties him to the Redskins for at least a year.


G. N. Marshall, 77, A Leading Minister In Unitarian Church
Dr.
George N. Marshall, a retired leader in the Unitarian Universalist Association, died on Feb. 15 after collapsing while walking his dog near his home in Chapel Hill, N.C.
He was 77.
He died as a result of heart failure, the church headquarters said.


Bridge
The instinct of every defender is to ruff something when offered the opportunity, and similarly to give partner a ruff if possible.
But that is often wrong.
The most common situation occurs when the ruff removes an opponent's loser, not a winner, and improves the declarer's control of the trump suit.
But there can be other reasons, and one of them is illustrated in the diagramed deal reported by an English writer.
North and South arrived in four hearts after locating, and abandoning, a spade fit.
When the spade four was led to the ace, South dropped the king.
That could not mislead East, although it might have done so if the bidding had concealed the spade fit.
American players who respond one no-trump, forcing, with the North hand and follow with three hearts or four hearts would be slightly better off in this respect.


Leslie Fay Audit Finds $13.7 Million Loss in '92
The Leslie Fay Companies yesterday announced preliminary financial results of its audit committee's investigation into accounting irregularities, which the apparel maker disclosed at the beginning of the month.
The committee's report said Leslie Fay had a loss of $13.7 million on sales of $777.4 million in 1992.
Before it announced the accounting scandal, analysts had expected it to earn $24 million to $25 million.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Arthur Markewich, a retired Justice of the Appellate Division of the New York State Supreme Court, who died Wednesday, omitted the name of a brother.
He is Robert Markewich of Manhattan.


A Singular Story: Self-Publishing a Book About Starting a New Career
Profile: Under stress from her job as a saleswoman for Reed &amp; Barton, a flatware company, Maryann Capo of Ronkonkoma, L.I., investigated various relaxation techniques.
This led her, at age 59, to embark on a second and third career at a time when most people are thinking about retiring.
After investigating a number of relaxation techniques, Ms.
Capo enrolled in a massage thereapist course.
She left her job in June 1985, was certified in August and then spent more than a year of trial and error before building up enough clientele to warrant her investment.
She later decided to write a book about the problems she had encountered in setting up her business.


Panel Sees Growing U.N. Intervention
With new crises looming in many parts of the world, the United Nations must prepare for a substantial expansion of peacekeeping operations and put its financing on a sounder footing, an international panel of financial experts has recommended.
Peacekeeping costs have already risen tenfold in six years.
Among the panel's most important recommendations are that governments charge their peacekeeping dues to their national military budgets and that the United Nations set up a unified peacekeeping budget financed by a single annual assessment on member governments, backed by a $400 million revolving fund to pay start-up costs.


COMPANY BRIEFS
DRESSER INDUSTRIES, Dallas, completed the acquisition of Bredero Price Holding B.V., which provides pipe coatings, for about $160 million.
KEYCORP, Albany, a financial services company, completed the acquisition of National Savings Bank of Albany, for undisclosed terms.


EXPLOSION AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Response; Size of Blast 'Destroyed' Rescue Plan
Evacuation plans for the World Trade Center were rendered useless yesterday because the explosion devastated its police command and operations centers, Port Authority officials said.
As a result, tens of thousands of office workers were left to fend for themselves in terrifying confusion as they groped their way with no organized leadership down as many as 100 flights of stairs in darkness and choking smoke.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the fatal shooting of a woman on Wednesday at the Bronx County Building, apparently in revenge for the slayings of six people in a Mott Haven apartment on Feb. 14, referred incorrectly to the victims in the earlier shooting.
Three were men and three were women.


EXPLOSION AT THE TWIN TOWERS: Vignettes; Ordinary Lives Hurtled Into the Extraordinary
David Peter was just beginning his brown-bag lunch in a basement locker room with about 20 other maintenance workers when the lights flickered and the wall exploded in front of him.
Mr.
Peter, a 25-year-old mechanic from Huntington, L.I., said the explosion wrecked a cinderblock wall and the metal lockers, hurling debris over him and his fellow workers, gashing faces and limbs.


4 Carjackings Scare Drivers Along I-95 In Fairfield
It was anything but business as usual today at the two McDonald's restaurants on Interstate 95 here, the day after a Long Island woman became the fourth victim of carjacking at the rest stops over the last five months.
"It's getting scary," said Patricia Hanbury of Newington, who had stopped for lunch on her way to New Jersey.
"I'm really thinking about packing a lunch and filling up the cooler instead of making these stops along the highway. I would never stop here at night anymore, and that's really sad because if you can't feel safe at McDonald's, is there any place you can feel safe?"


Huge Emergency Response to World Trade Center Blast


5 Men Charged With Murder in 6 Bronx Slayings
Five men arrested in the Feb. 14 slayings of six people in a Mott Haven apartment have been charged with murder and ordered held without bail, the Bronx District Attorney's office said yesterday.
Four of the men, including Anthony Casellas, 21, whom the police have accused of arranging the killings, were arraigned on Thursday night in the Bronx before Judge Douglas Wong of Criminal Court, said Gloria Cullen, a spokeswoman for District Attorney Robert T. Johnson.


Clinton Retains Bush Appointee As F.D.A. Chief
Dr.
David A. Kessler will be reappointed Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, while Dr.
Bernadine P. Healy has been asked to resign as director of the National Institutes of Health, officials of the Health and Human Services Department said today.
Dr.
Kessler is one of the few appointees of President George Bush who has been retained, chiefly because of his technical expertise and what department officials said is his nonpolitical approach to the job.


With Clinton Visit Due, Program at Rutgers Is Spotlighted
When Luis Guardardo heard President Clinton's idea to make money available for students who serve their communities after graduation, he was immediately sold.
The 20-year-old sociology major at Rutgers University already makes community service part of his life.
He tutors elementary-school students in an after-school program, takes courses in civic education and lives in the Community Service House, a residence for 40 students committed to doing volunteer work.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 19 about a benefit for the Actors Studio listed its founders incorrectly.
They were Elia Kazan, Cheryl Crawford and Robert Lewis.
Lee Strasberg served as artistic director, and a correction in this space on Thursday misstated the dates of his tenure.
He held the post from the 1951-52 season until his death in 1982.


Eren Ozker, Actress And Puppeteer, 44; A Voice of Muppets
Eren Ozker, an actress and a puppeteer with the Muppets, died on Thursday at her home in New York City.
She was 44 and also kept a home in Los Angeles.
The cause was cancer, said her husband, William Bogert.


Red Sox Waive Clark
JACK CLARK was waived yesterday by the Boston Red Sox a day after arriving at spring training in Fort Myers, Fla.
He said he was grateful that the team cut him early enough to improve his chances to play elsewhere.


Classical Music in Review
Marie-Pierre Langlamet  Harpist Merkin Concert Hall


Classical Music in Review
Marilyn Horne  Metropolitan Museum of Art


Steel Industry Doesn't Oppose Trade
To the Editor:
"Mickey Kantor's Historic Task" (editorial, Feb. 2), on the new United States Trade Representative, makes false and misleading statements about the American steel industry.
Assertions that we seek to pressure the Administration to erect trade walls or to block the pending Uruguay Round and North American Free Trade Agreement are simply not true.
The steel industry supports the trade agreement, as well as a rapid conclusion to the Uruguay Round, provided the long-standing United States countervailing duty and antidumping laws are not gutted in any new multilateral agreement.


Why Students Don't Like Community College Route to a B.A.; Strains of Adjustment
To the Editor:
You note that Adrian Tubero saved $29,000 by attending a two-year community college before transferring to New York University (Your Money page, Feb. 6).
While Ms.
Tubero's tale seems a success, many of the students who undertake a similar path often have grave difficulties when transferring to four-year institutions.
The lower standards of many two-year institutions often leave students unable to cope with the courses in their new school: grades often tumble, courses must be retaken, and the drop-out rate may be high.


Devoted Brass Pulls Surprise
Devoted Brass, who began his career at tiny Stampede Park near Calgary, Alberta, upset several of California's leading 3-year-olds in today's $150,000 San Rafael Stakes at Santa Anita.
Devoted Brass trailed early but benefited by a fast pace and was able to rally for the victory.
He wore down Union City to win by a half-length.
It was another 12 lengths back to the 3-5 favorite, Stuka, who has lost two straight after beginning his career with two dazzling victories.


Elizabeth Jakes, David Wykoff
Dr. and Mrs.
William C. Jakes of Andover, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Knight Jakes, to David Hayes Wykoff, a son of Faith A. Wykoff of Manchester, Mass., and James H. Wykoff of Prides Crossing, Mass.
An April wedding is planned.


At Work; Straddling the Law on Layoffs
WHEN Congress passed legislation in 1988 requiring companies to give 60 days' notice to workers who were about to lose their jobs, it was trying to put a tourniquet on the wounds of America's industrial heartland.
Business howled, as it tends to do over measures it views as fettering its options.
President Ronald Reagan, who vetoed the measure once and only reluctantly let it slip through on a second pass, used to refer to the law -- known formally as the Worker Adjustment and Retraining Act, or WARN -- as "a ticking time bomb in the back seat of any medium-sized or larger company."
Last week, the General Accounting Office, the agency directed by Congress to keep tabs on the alleged time bomb, weighed in with its report.
That instigated a confluence of not-very coincidental events, a Congressional hearing and the release by a grass-roots labor organization of what it called a "dirty dozen" of plant closings and layoffs.


Pedophiles and the Law
To the Editor:
According to Walter Kendrick's review of James R. Kincaid's "Child-Loving" (Jan. 24), Mr.
Kincaid "points out that the pathological condition called pedophilia . . . leads to very few crimes" and that "pedophiles, such as may exist, are gentle and unaggressive." These assertions are stunningly inaccurate.


Colleges Luring Black Students With Incentives
George Watson is a high school senior in great demand.
More than 100 colleges have sent him unsolicited application material, filling two crates in his house in South Orange, N.J.
Some have offered to waive their normal $35 application fee.
One invited him for an all-expenses-paid visit.
Another promised him a $20,000 scholarship, although his parents own a successful business.
Last week Harvard University wrote to say that it had waived its Jan. 1 application deadline for Mr.
Watson so he could still apply.
When he called to check, a woman in the Harvard admissions office said she knew nothing about the change, until he identified himself as a black student.
Aggressive Recruiting
Mr.
Watson, who has a 'B' average and scored 690 out of 800 in math on the Scholastic Aptitude Test, is among the beneficiaries of a rapidly escalating bidding war by many of the nation's top colleges for academically talented black students.


Helping the Neediest
The 81st annual appeal of The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund ends today and deep gratitude is owed to some 14,000 donors who gave so generously in these tough economic times.
So far the appeal has received nearly $4.5 million in contributions, significantly below last year's record but nevertheless the second-highest figure in the history of the fund.
These donations will be distributed to seven private social-service agencies to benefit New York City's most needy residents.
This snowy winter, a fragile economic recovery brought fragile hope of better times ahead for many in the region.
But it should not be forgotten that for far too many, desperate need remains.


On Turning 13: Reports from the Front Lines
Yesterday, Chelsea Clinton became a teen-ager.
The Week in Review asked an eighth-grade social studies class at the New York City Lab School for Gifted Education, a public junior high that selects students with diverse backgrounds from all over the city: "What did it feel like when you turned 13?" Here are excerpts from their written responses.
It was at the end of August, last sumer.
I had too many other things to worry about.
I had broken my toe, summer homework and I had to worry about the upcoming school year and my gymnastics career.
Only now, after half the school year has gone by, can I reflect.


Finally, Someplace Fed Up Enough To Stop Fighting
IT is not easy imposing peace on people when they are bent on killing each other.
That much is clear from the Balkans, Angola, Cambodia and other fresh holes in the graveyard of good intentions.
Mozambique would seem to pose a much easier challenge to the peacemakers who began this decade with such lofty hopes: What can you do for a country that genuinely wants to kick the war habit?
The answer, though, is not altogether encouraging.
For the United Nations, desperately seeking to prove its fitness to police the new world order, Mozambique has the potential to be an easy win, but many fear this victory could slip through its fingers if bureaucratic inertia or the world's inattention let the momentum for peace fade.


The Annual Look Back: Making It Work for You
THE Internal Revenue Service reckons it might take a full weekend to run the tax-filing marathon this spring: 20 hours or more to gather records, read the rules and fill out a typical pile of forms.
But the motto of the fitness enthusiast -- no pain, no gain -- may be equally appropriate in the realm of personal finance.


Around New England, Main Street Faces Peril
There has been a lot of snow here this winter, but people in this declining, 240-year-old factory town are not much concerned with the weather or the Celtics or President Clinton's new tax plan.
They are obsessed by something else: Wal-Mart is coming.
And Wal-Mart is not just another discount store.
The retail chain, with its rock-bottom prices and highly developed consumer research, has already swept the South and Midwest, swallowing small businesses, overtaking giants like Sears and multiplying at the rate of one Wal-Mart every other day.
In some rural towns, Wal-Mart, which sells everything from toothpaste to children's clothes, is the new Main Street.


2 Dead and 1 Hurt in Brooklyn Apartment
Three people were shot, two of them fatally, in an apartment in Brooklyn yesterday, the police said.
The three were found by police officers in a second-floor apartment at 1137 Dean Street, in Prospect Heights.
One man, Derrick Vincent, 32, was still alive, said Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman, but another man and a woman were dead.


Making a Difference; Helping Families Talk When Someone Is Ill
THE Camelot Consulting Group is a small company with a big idea.
The management and communications consulting firm, based in Fairfield, N.J., is starting a nonprofit foundation to help the families of seriously ill patients pay their telephone bills.
Susan Marc Lawley, 41, the firm's president, says the foundation, called Lasting Connections, is the only charitable organization she knows of dedicated solely to helping defray long-distance telephone costs during a crisis.


To Make His Own Marc
Marc Jacobs is a very talented fashion designer, but he's a pretty strange salesman.
"To be fashionable, you need just money and that's very uninteresting," the 29-year-old designer said last week.
"I know that's not the way you're supposed to be. You're really supposed to sell everybody as much as you possibly can that's yours, and I just find that really boring."


On Turning 13: Reports from the Front Lines
Yesterday, Chelsea Clinton became a teen-ager.
The Week in Review asked an eighth-grade social studies class at the New York City Lab School for Gifted Education, a public junior high that selects students with diverse backgrounds from all over the city: "What did it feel like when you turned 13?" Here are excerpts from their written responses.
When I turned 13 it was like starting a new life.
It was the year I was finally going to be allowed to do more things.
For one thing I was able to hang out later.
I wasn't a child anymore.
I knew it and my parents knew it, too.


On Turning 13: Reports from the Front Lines
Yesterday, Chelsea Clinton became a teen-ager.
The Week in Review asked an eighth-grade social studies class at the New York City Lab School for Gifted Education, a public junior high that selects students with diverse backgrounds from all over the city: "What did it feel like when you turned 13?" Here are excerpts from their written responses.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
FATHER AND SON.
By Denize Lauture.
Illustrated by Jonathan Green.
Philomel. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9) The illustrations accompanying a poet's meditation on the pleasurable relationship of father and son set the scene, according to the artist, in "the low country of South Carolina, the home of the Gullah people."


2 Ways to Install Sinks: Freestanding or Vanity
THERE are two types of bathroom sinks.
One is freestanding, which is mounted directly on a wall and sometimes supported by legs or a pedestal, and the other is the vanity sink, which is attached to or part of a vanity top.
Installing a vanity sink is fairly easy, but installing a freestanding one can be more challenging.
To remove a sink before installing a new one, first shut off the water supplying the faucets or the main valve near the water meter.
Next, open the faucets to drain remaining water.
Then use a basin wrench to loosen the nuts beneath the sink that fasten the supply tubes to the faucet's base.
To use a basin wrench, fit it around the nut so that turning the handle counterclockwise tightens the jaw.
Otherwise, the tool will slip.


Corrections
A picture caption on page 13 of the Real Estate section today about small, ready-to-occupy office spaces misidentifies the vice president for commercial real estate at the Rockrose Development Corporation.
He is Mitchell Arkin.


ECONOMIC PULSE: Florida; Florida Is Acting Like a Sunbelt Economy Again
Airplanes landing here and in Orlando, the theme park capital of the world, are full once again.
So are the help-wanted pages.
And at seaports here and in Tampa, Jacksonville and Pensacola, cargo ships bound for Latin America are departing with record loads.
Even Hurricane Andrew did its part.
Florida's economy -- lifted by everything from storm rebuilding to the explosive growth in the international trade that has made Miami the commercial capital of Latin America and the Caribbean -- is poised for a burst of expansion after three years of struggle.


No Headline
It is impossible to speculate at this point why any person should have committed such a horrible crime.
Nevertheless, the fear it may engender among New Yorkers, and others in our nation for that matter, is very real.
We must remember that fear is a type of weapon as well, one to which we must not submit.
And we should remember that we are protected by the best law-enforcement personnel -- at the local, state and Federal levels -- in the world.
RAYMOND W. KELLY, the Police Commissioner.  [ 34:2. ]


Estate of the Art
All it the paradox of contemporary house design: Everybody wants a new house that looks old but acts new.
Window seats and gables, moldings and fireplaces -- these are the elements that make a home livable,
not
a machine for living.
And yet, along with modernism and its stripped-down esthetic came bigger rooms, more light and circulation patterns that flow the way people actually live.
So what's an architect to do?
If you're Bernard Wharton, of Shope Reno Wharton Associates, you've made a specialty out of just such a conundrum.
"Our work is rooted in the past, but not literally," explains the Greenwich, Conn., architect.
"Back then, houses really did have to provide shelter from the weather. They had tiny windows for a reason; but they also had a wonderful coziness and warmth. Today, technology makes it possible for houses to open up and take advantage of the views."


Straight to the Source for Help
THE Internal Revenue Service not only collects taxes, but it also provides free information that helps taxpayers arrive at the right amount to pay.
At this time of year, when millions of people are struggling with their tax forms, the number of requests for this information reaches a peak.
There are many ways to get the data you need from the Internal Revenue Service.
The agency has made recordings of tax information on about 140 topics, compiled on an automated system called Tele-Tax.
You can access any of these subjects by calling either a toll-free number, (800) TAX-4477, or a local number listed in your tax instruction booklet or I.R.S.
Publication 910, "Guide To Free Tax Services."


Wilderness Tale


Business Diary/February 21-26
THE ECONOMY The Numbers Are Up, but Belts Are Tight and Consumers Edgy


Alternative Magazine Changes With the Times
WHAT goes around, comes around.
It happens in fashion and politics, and it has happened to The Aquarian Weekly.
Last fall, what started over two decades ago as The Aquarian Weekly, and eventually became The East Coast Rocker, came full circle with a new look and a new name: The Aquarian Weekly.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: George E. Chartier; When Audience and Actors Are Neighbors
GEORGE E. CHARTIER of Vernon has been involved with community theater for more than a dozen years, mainly behind the scenes, and has now put his experience into a book, "Full House: The Definitive Guide for Successfully Promoting School and Community Theater."
The book, which was published in December by Dramatic Concepts Publishing, Mansfield Center, Conn., is already in use by an arts professor at the University of Connecticut in a theater management course.


EXPLOSION AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Dead; Casual Choices of Workday Prove Fatal to 5 at Disaster
Had it happened on almost any other day, it might not have mattered to them, for their habit was to be elsewhere at lunch time.
But when four co-workers picked a snowy Friday to eat together in their subterranean offices, they were doomed.
So was a dental equipment salesman trapped in the parking garage at the absolute wrong moment.


EXPLOSION AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Precautions; With Talk of a Bomb, Security Tightens
Police and public safety experts throughout the New York region yesterday drew a tight security net around the city's airports, hotels, major tourist spots and other vulnerable public spaces, moving the city to an alert level not seen since the Persian Gulf war.
The precautions came as preliminary investigations pointed to the possible involvement of a terrorist group in the explosion in the basement of the World Trade Center on Friday.


Keep It Confidential
To the Sports Editor:
Harvey Araton's column ("Counseling Is Needed on a Daily Basis," The Times, Feb. 17) was both timely and extremely well informed.
As a psychiatrist who has treated many professional athletes, I am continually amazed at the paradox of these exceptional athletes who understandably need support and therapy for their minds as much as their bodies, yet only seek it after the crisis.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 14 about "Significant Others," an exhibition at the Kraushaar Galleries, omitted the name of the curator.
She is Amy J. Wolf.
The article also misstated the number of artists in the show who are living.
There are eight.


Figuring Taxes on Investments Is Not an Easy Exercise
MILLIONS of Americans who own mutual funds will soon discover that buying shares is simpler than selling them.
With all the money pouring into funds lately, it's no surprise that sales of fund shares took a big leap last year.
But figuring the taxes owed on fund sales more complex than figuring taxes due on sales of stock or bonds.
Given the complexity, some fund groups calculate investors' profits for them, but people who do it themselves often save.


In the Region: Connecticut; A New Train Station for South Norwalk
LIGHT is finally appearing at the end of the South Norwalk railroad station tunnel.
Nearly five years after the idea of upgrading the station was put forth, and after a major setback, planning is now under way.
They are considered a key to the city's continued revitalization.
A contract between the city and the Starrett Housing Corporation of Manhattan for a mixed-use project on the 8-acre site was canceled last November after the developer was unable to raise the $100 million needed.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
In POINT OF IMPACT, by Stephen Hunter (Bantam, $21.95), the protagonist is a former Marine sniper who served in Vietnam and had more than 80 verified kills -- the best of his kind, a world-class shot.
Now living in seclusion in Arkansas, Bob Lee Swagger spends his time hunting and taking care of his firearms collection.
Hired by a mysterious organization as a consultant, he discovers too late that he has been set up.
He becomes the most hated man in America.
He is on the run, wanted by every police department in the country, targeted by the F.B.I. and also on the hit list of the powerful, shadowy group that originally approached him.
Yes, Bob Lee Swagger is in a lot of trouble.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Fernandez in Final Top-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez had three service breaks in the first set en route to a 6-3, 6-1 semifinal victory over No. 5 Helena Sukova of Czechoslovakia in the Evert Cup in Indian Wells, Calif.
No. 4 Amanda Coetzer of South Africa defeated Stephanie Rottier of the Netherlands, 6-4, 6-3, in the other semifinal.
Fernandez, a 21-year-old from Miami ranked seventh in the world, faces Coetzer in today's final for the $75,000 prize. (AP) Novacek Defeats Nargiso: Czech Karel Novacek beat Diego Nargiso of Italy, 6-3, 6-4, yesterday to reach the final of the ABN-Amro indoor touranment in Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
Novacek, ranked 16th in the world, will be aiming for his fourth singles title in today's final against Anders Jarryd of Sweden.
Jarryd, a wild-card entry ranked 156th, beat fifth-seeded Aleksandr Volkov, 6-3, 6-7 (6-8), 6-3, in the other semifinal. (AP) Ondruska Wins Again: An unseeded South African, Marcos Ondruska, continued his streak of upsets yesterday, beating eighth-seeded Andrei Chesnokov, 6-4, 7-5, to advance to the finals of the Purex Championships in Scottsdale, Ariz.
Nunes, the 1991 world champion, completed the 62.14-mile course in 6 hours 45 minutes 38 seconds, more than 6 minutes ahead of Stefan Fekner, 40, of Canada (6:51:52).
Bryan Hacker, 29, of Bloomington, Ind., was third (7:11:49) and as the first American finisher became the national champion.
Vass won the women's division in 8:13:54, and Kris Clark-Setnes, a 33-year-old psychoanalyst from Germantown, Wis., earned her second consecutive national championship by finishing second (8:21:19).
Her husband, Kevin Setnes, 39, was fourth among the men (7:15:56).
Ellen McCurtin, a 26-year-old veterinary student who has been running the distance for only two years, finished third among the women (8:29:28).
BOXING Moorer Beats Smith Second-ranked World Boxing Association heavyweight Michael Moorer remained in the title picture by wearing down James (Bonecrusher) Smith to capture a 10-round unanimous decision yesterday in Atlantic City.
Moorer, 31-0 with 28 knockouts, capitalized on the tiring Smith (33-11-1, 26 knockouts) to land several flush left crosses during the final three rounds. (AP) HIGH SCHOOL TRACK Tottenville Triumphs Tottenville of Staten Island, led by Tone Bratteng, upset two-time defending champion Jamaica of Queens yesterday for the team title in the girls' Public School Athletic League indoor track and field championships at Pratt University Brooklyn.
Tottenville had 65 points to Jamaica's 60.
Bratteng won the 1,500-meter run in 4 minutes 44.86 seconds for Tottenville's only individual first place.
She was second to Violet Blake of Jamaica in the 1,000.
Yvonne Harrison of Lehman was voted the best performer with victories in the 55-meter hurdles (8.17 seconds) and the long jump (17 feet 2 inches).


In Tireless Pursuit of Key West
The budgets for the $500 weekends covered accommodations, sightseeing and food and drink, but not the cost of transportation to and from the cities.
YOU have to work hard to spend $500 on a Key West weekend, even in the winter-spring high season.
In fact, in our two nights and two full days at the Florida island resort, my husband, Tom, and I approached the limit only by dint of tireless and surprisingly expensive sightseeing.


On Turning 13: Reports from the Front Lines
Yesterday, Chelsea Clinton became a teen-ager.
The Week in Review asked an eighth-grade social studies class at the New York City Lab School for Gifted Education, a public junior high that selects students with diverse backgrounds from all over the city: "What did it feel like when you turned 13?" Here are excerpts from their written responses.
I was going through a depressing phase when I turned 13.
I felt like I was being greedy by asking for anything expensive, so I only asked for one expensive gift.
On my birthday, I received that gift, and discovered that I didn't want it anymore.
My mother yelled at first.
Then tried to return it.
It was nonrefundable.
I started having mood swings over every little thing.
I screamed at my parents constantly and got into big fights with my twin sister, who was perfectly satisfied with her birthday.


Redmen Focusing On Last 2
St.
John's, inching closer to capping a surprisingly successful Big East campaign, squeaked past last-place Villanova, 65-62, last night at Madison Square Garden after holding a 14-point second-half edge.
With two games remaining in the regular season, St.
John's (16-8, 11-5), picked to finish in the Big East's second division in a preseason poll of coaches, assured itself of no worse than a second-place finish.


Cable Rates Rising; Choices to Multiply
BEGINNING tomorrow Cablevision is raising many rates for its 580,000 subscribers on Long Island.
And in another series of changes it will increase programming choices and packages starting next month.
The changes are the forerunners of a wide range of features that will become available over the next few years as cable companies adopt technological advances.
Eventually, viewers will have significantly more choices of programs, but at a higher cost.


Support Runs Second as Meet at Garden Winds Up
There is a memory from the USA/ Mobil track and field championships, that speaks of the track athlete's desire and dilemma.
It happened Friday night, when Mark Everett defended his crown at 500 meters, a low-status distance that had attracted an unspectacular field.
Everett captured the race easily, leading wire to wire in 1:01.19.


Martha Fein, Todd Miller
Dr.
Richard Fein and Dr.
Helen Fein of Cambridge, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Martha Susan Fein to Todd David Miller, a son of Harley Miller of Canton, Ohio, and the late Elaine Miller.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Fein, 31, is a researcher in Washington for the Office of Social Responsibility, a public-policy research laboratory of the Union Institute.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
She and her fiance received master's degrees in public administration from New York University.
Her father is a professor emeritus of English at the State University College at New Paltz, N.Y.
Her mother is the executive director of the Institute for the Study of Genocide, in New York and Cambridge.


A Remembrance of Whitney Biennials Past
It may be the exhibition that New York loves to hate, but the world would be a duller place without the Whitney Biennial to kick around every two years.
This informative, if hardly infallible, barometer of contemporary art has been part of the scene since 1932; its latest incarnation, which will include 80 artists, will arrive on Thursday.
Over the years, the biennial has undergone major and minor adjustments.
For the first decade, the artists invited selected their own works for the show, until it was noticed that instead of choosing their best efforts they sometimes sent pieces that were for sale.
Beginning in 1937, the museum held two annuals a year -- painting in the fall, and sculpture and other media in the spring.
Not surprisingly, the exhibition became a regular event for many American artists: Georgia O'Keeffe was in 22, Charles Sheeler in 29 and Raphael Soyer, maybe the record-holder, was in 38.


Apology Not Accepted
After Oriole scout FRED UHLMAN opined that Mexicans lack speed because of genetics, but were good infielders and dancers because they have good rhythm, he apologized and was reprimanded by club president LARRY LUCCHINO .
That's not good enough for the national council of La Raza, a national Hispanic organization.
The Washington-based lobbying group told Lucchino on Friday that it wants both Uhlman's resignation and an investigation. (AP)


Deep Freeze


Pedophiles and the Law
To the Editor:
According to Walter Kendrick's review of James R. Kincaid's "Child-Loving" (Jan. 24), Mr.
Kincaid "points out that the pathological condition called pedophilia . . . leads to very few crimes" and that "pedophiles, such as may exist, are gentle and unaggressive." These assertions are stunningly inaccurate.


BABY SITTERS' BOSS TELLS ALL
This ragged tale of desperate searches for marginally qualified care-givers says far more about a sorry state of family life than it does about the vagaries of the I.R.S.
Ms.
X has missed the real problem: the effects of this lackluster group on her children.


Corrections
A listing on Feb. 14 with an article about the Costa del Sol misstated the fax number for Joan Parker, who rents villas there.
It is 58-61-05-28.
The listing also referred incorrectly to the usual starting time for serving tapas.
It is 7 P.M., not 9.


February Can Be the Coolest Month
The Knicks had been playing inconsistently for more than a week, but had gotten away with it.
Friday night, they paid for it.
How New York will react to Friday's 108-80 spanking by the Detroit Pistons remains to be seen.
Perhaps the Knicks' rivalry with the Nets, which resumes this afternoon at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, will provide New York with the spark necessary to shake its midseason blues.
Any Knick-Net confrontation usually brings out the competitive juices in both teams.
And the Nets (30-24), who have lost three consecutive games, need a victory more desperately than the Knicks (36-17) do.


Jill Purdy, Paul Sarkozi
Jill Elizabeth Purdy and Paul David Sarkozi, lawyers in New York, were married last Sunday.
Rabbi Daniel Wolk officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Sarkozi, who received undergraduate and law degrees from Tulane University, is an associate at Milbank, Tweed, Hadley &amp; McCloy.
She is a daughter of Dr.
J.
Gerry Purdy of Cupertino, Calif., and Judith E. Pridgen of Charlotte, N.C.
Her father is the vice president of the mobile computing group at Dataquest Inc., a market research company in San Jose, Calif.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Melanie Purdy of Cupertino and Samuel Pridgen of Charlotte.


Lucile B. Olson, Richard Huber Jr.
Lucile Bello Olson, the public relations officer for the division of arts at the Organization of American States, was married yesterday to Richard Miller Huber Jr., an environmental specialist at the World Bank.
Both work in Washington, where the wedding took place at Holy Trinity Roman Catholic Church.
The Rev.
James T. Maier performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Huber, 28, graduated from Marymount College of Virginia.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Olson of Washington.
Her father is the deputy chief of the political military division of the United States Army staff at the Pentagon in Arlington, Va.
Her mother, Elena Aida Olson, is a language tutor in Washington.


Mexico City
For decades now, Mexico City has been afflicted by unsubtle, centrifugal forces: Traffic and noxious smog, noise and sundry chaos forced people from its center.
One ventured downtown because one had to, went the thinking of those citizens who didn't, and one did so at the risk of nausea, neurosis or worse.
Beneath the brownish haze of pollution, however, Mexicans have begun to rediscover the center of a city that has an extraordinary history.
Young artists and bohemians have moved into some of the decrepit colonial buildings, and a few wealthier residents have taken to restoring others.
Politicians and power-bureaucrats have made the center's old restaurants fashionable again, and its museums and theaters are busier and busier.


In a Wheelchair
To the Editor: Betsy Wade's column provided excellent tips for travelers with mobility impairments.
As Ms.
Wade mentioned, the Air Carrier Access Act of 1986 has improved passenger services for people who use wheelchairs, as well as overall airport and aircraft accessibility.
There is one aspect I would like to clarify.
While Ms.
Wade wrote that passengers' personal wheelchairs are "destined for the cargo compartment sooner or later," in actuality people who use manual wheelchairs are most often able to stow them in the aircraft cabin.
The Access Act requires airlines to permit the stowing of one folding wheelchair in the cabin closet or other approved storage area.
Passengers who board their flight ahead of time may place their wheelchair in the cabin closet with priority over carry-on items from the same airport, and airlines cannot count wheelchairs and other assistive devices toward a passenger's carry-on limit.
When a personal wheelchair is stowed in the baggage compartment, air carriers must insure that it receives priority.


Cockle, Doodle New Year!
Wake up to the Year of the Rooster with this red and gold paper lantern.
A leftover from the Chinese New Year celebrations last month, the lantern nonetheless can strut its stuff all year long with a votive candle inside or roosting on a light bulb.


THE ART WORLD BUST
The biggest news in the New York art world right now has nothing to do with a new style or movement, with neo-this or post-that.
Rather, it has to do with money and the phenomenon of being nouveau poor.
It's impossible to have a bacchanal like the 80's without paying for it later, and artists still are.
As the art stars of the past decade fret about having to lower the prices of their work, innumerable young and not-so-young artists are leaving their studios to teach or illustrate or drive cabs while scrambling for diminishing exhibition space.
Hard times can alter the look of art.
Witness the trend that might be called "Honey I Shrunk the Art," as artists reduce the size of their creations and their prices in an attempt to accommodate wary collectors.
Frank Stella, who in a recent show at Knoedler &amp; Company exhibited a group of small coffee-table sculptures instead of his usual elephan tine wall pieces, might seem to be an obvious example of instant weight loss.
At the other extreme, the depressed market has encouraged art to take a sharp turn toward the left.
As if atoning for the smug commercialism of so much 80's art, the prevailing fashion among younger artists is "martyr art" -- art that shrieks about every last inequity.


A Dancer Dances, Against All Odds
DAWN STORRS could hardly have been happier.
Classes at Torrington High School had just been dismissed for the Christmas break, and she and five friends -- two other cheerleaders and three male athletes -- got in a car and headed for Waterbury to do some last-minute shopping.
It was early afternoon on Dec. 23, 1988, and a mixture of snow and sleet was falling as their car traveled along Route 8.
Suddenly, in Thomaston, the laughter inside the car turned to screams and panic as the car skidded on the icy highway, careened wildly and slammed into a guardrail.
As it did, Dawn, and her best friend, Shawn Collins, and Chris Samele, a burgeoning basketball star, were catapulted through the rear window that had blown out on impact.


CRYING WOLF OVER ELEPHANTS
Ray Bonner correctly characterized World Wildlife Fund's 1989 decision to support a worldwide ban on ivory trade as difficult.
But the debate was among conservationists, not between conservationists and fund-raisers.
W.W.F.'s field scientists and policy experts
were
divided over how best to halt the poaching of dwindling elephant populations in Africa and control the rampant illegal trade in ivory.
None of the choices were risk free, field data were ambiguous and time was short.
But W.W.F. has always given the benefit of any doubt to wildlife.
That principle led us to push for the ban.


Making Soups and Stews With Seafood
ALTHOUGH I spent a great deal of my childhood in Dorset in the southwest of England not far from the sea, I don't remember eating shellfish until I moved to New York.
On my first day in the city, my mother took me to the Oyster Bar at Grand Central Terminal, where I tasted bluepoints for the first time and had my first bowl of clam chowder.
I was 17, and for me the experience was an initiation into an exciting new world.
Since then, I have discovered the seafood soups and stews of the Mediterranean, Italian zuppa di pesce, mussels mariniere loaded with garlic, bourride with aioli and countless other ways of cooking different kinds of shellfish and seafood in a pot.
The recipes sometimes look rather daunting at first, because there are so many ingredients, but the stews or soups take only a short time to cook, which makes them particularly good for informal entertaining or for a dinner prepared after work.


Programs That Teach Students the Basics
WANT to start young people off with a solid grasp of photography?
Take a look at two programs, one sponsored by Fuji and the other by Eastman Kodak.
Fuji Photo Film U.S.A., in conjunction with Scholastic Inc., has created Photo Pals, a pen-pals program in which third- through fifth-grade students exchange pictures and letters.
The program already includes 1,300 elementary school classes nationwide, and 40,000 students.


New Rochelle
To the Editor:
Since I lived for 43 years in the Beechmont section of New Rochelle, I read with great interest your article on Jan. 17 about living in New Rochelle.
But the article omitted mention of the main library, really a wonderful community center.


Data Bank/February 28, 1993


What Do You Expect Living Along the L.I.E.?
It's most timely to read "Expressway Noise Walls Disputed"  [ Feb. 14 ] .
The whole project should enrage overburdened taxpayers.
Why is the public so acquiescent and silent about this blatant waste of taxpayers' dollars?


Profile/Michael Viner and Deborah Raffin; Selling Books to a Generation That Won't Sit Still
ONE evening six years ago, Michael Viner, a producer, sat down to play backgammon with a longtime friend, the novelist Sidney Sheldon.
The stakes were high.
Mr.
Sheldon promptly lost $8,000 to Mr.
Viner.
Even by this town's excessive standards, the amount seemed a bit outrageous.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Edison  $140,000
156 Fourth Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old ranch; fireplace in living room and recreation room, 1-car garage; taxes $3,032.
Hillsdale  $300,000
99 Oak Trail Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 41-year-old ranch, 2-car garage, den, fireplace, family room; taxes $5,788.
Iselin  $120,000
280 Benjamin Avenue  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; handyman special, full basement, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,692.
Metuchen  $195,000
9 Poet's Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 22-year-old colonial; new c/a, fenced yard, country kitchen; taxes $3,875.
Moorestown  $445,000
713 Lippincott Road  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 6-year-old colonial; move-in condition, new addition, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $9,822.
Woodbridge  $128,000
99 High View Drive  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 14-year-old condominium; deck, h/w floors, fireplace, monthly maintenance $116; taxes $2,667.
OTHER AREAS Glen Head, L.I.  $351,200
40 Roosevelt Street  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old split level; family room, office, 2 fireplaces, oak floors, cul-de-sac; taxes $5,500.
Bedford, N.Y.  $243,000
75 Lakeside Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 49-year-old cape; den, fireplace, office, 1-car garage; taxes $5,175.
Orange, Conn.  $1179,000
773 Dennis Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old ranch; formal dining room, new furnace, in-ground pool, 1 acre; taxes $3,703.


Mediums With Messages
Nino Fidencio was a Mexican folk healer who lived in the northeastern state of Nuevo Leon in the early part of the 20th century.
When he died at the age of 40 in 1938 (at the hands of jealous doctors, his followers believed), he was the country's most prominent healer -- it was even said that he had cured the Mexican President of a serious illness.
Since his death his cult has spread, particularly among Mexican-Americans in south Texas; tens of thousands make a pilgrimage to his tomb every year.
NINO FIDENCIO: A Heart Thrown Open (Museum of New Mexico Press, $34.95) presents a reverential look at the experiences of his contemporary followers through Dore Gardner's documentary photographs of the pilgrims, and through testimonials from the women who are his mediums.
Frequently these women go to Nino Fidencio's shrine (often over the objections of their husbands) seeking to cure themselves or their children of debilitating illnesses after traditional medicine has failed.
If they or their children are healed, the women often pay their debt by allowing Nino Fidencio's spirit to take over their bodies so that they may cure others, and by making the arduous pilgrimage to the remote village where he lived.
Few who knew Nino Fidencio are still alive, and details about his life are vague and subject to constant revision by his devotees.
An essay by the folklorist Kay F. Turner offers some historical and psychological insight into the cult, but more information would have been welcome, not only about Nino Fidencio but about his followers as well.
For example, biographical sketches of the people giving testimonials might have made clear that many references to Nino Fidencio are actually about a medium who has taken on his spirit in a trance.
However, this book offers a fascinating glimpse into a little-known phenomenon as well as a testament to the power of belief.


Judith Seibert, Gary R. Schall
Judith Anne Seibert, a daughter of Marjorie Seibert of Somerville, N.J., and the late James H. Seibert Jr., was married yesterday to Gary Richard Schall, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin G. A. Schall of Todt Hill, S.I.
The Rev.
Dr.
Gerald S. Mills performed the ceremony at Providence Presbyterian Church on Hilton Head Island, S.C.
Mrs.
Schall, 28, is a senior consultant at Price Waterhouse in New York, where her husband was until recently a tax associate.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father owned Seibert Inc., a builder of tennis courts, in Somerville.


An Offbeat Play Is Nicely Repulsed
THE piggyback tournament has been getting some tryouts in the last five years.
The format consists of two overlapping competitions, one a string of elimination minimatches, the other a Swiss-system tournament comprising the players who were knocked out of the first.
Each has its own prizes.
This year's 55th playing of the Hoogoven International Tournament, from Jan. 14 to 31 in Wijk aan Zee, the Netherlands, was a prestigious version of the piggyback format.
The former world champion Anatoly Karpov of Russia won the knockout series, and the grandmaster Valery Salov, formerly of Russia and now of Spain, won the Swiss competition.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Monday
Feb. purchasing managers' survey, percent
58.0
58.1
Jan. personal income, percent change
1.0
0.2
Jan. construction spending, percent change
0.0
0.3
Jan. existing-home sales, millions
4.02
3.92
Tuesday
Jan. leading indicators, percent change
1.9
-0.2
Jan. new-home sales, thousands
656
650
Wednesday
Late Feb. auto sales, millions, annual rate
6.5
6.5
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
325
315
Friday
Feb. nonfarm payroll, change in thousands
106
107
Feb. unemployment rate, percent
7.1
7.1
Tuesday: Johnson-Redbook survey released  Wednesday: Conference Board 1993 business conference outlook


Have Suburban Prices Hit the Bottom?
THE market for one-family homes in the suburban New York metropolitan region, much of which has been in decline for the last five years, appears to have bottomed out in most areas, and, in some places, such as Northern New Jersey, a modest recovery seems to be under way.
Real estate brokers attribute the trend to low mortgage interest rates, realistic prices set by sellers, the dearth of new construction and a small surge of first-time buyers who were priced out of the market in the mid-80's and frightened out in the late 80's and early 90's.


TV Signals Fully Restored
New York City television stations returned to service late Friday night, according to station officials.
Local stations except WCBS-TV were unable to transmit to non-cable customers after Friday afternoon's explosion, when power was cut off to One World Trade Center, temporarily knocking out the transmitter that feeds the stations.


Does She Or Doesn't He?
IN rock, hair style proves tribal allegiance, but it's also a crucial form of personal expression, especially for men.
Over the last decade, ambiguity has dominated the hair scene, as a wide array of male rockers explored their masculine/feminine selves with mousse in hand.
The following brief history of rock hair over the decade tries to reveal those developments.
Jon Bon Jovi serves as a guide, because he is not a tortured artist, but a rock-and-roll Everyman.
As goes Mr.
Bon Jovi's hairdo, so goes the rock nation.
THE AQUA NET YEARS (1984 to 1986) Not yet ready to confront the woman within, rock's manly crews simply imitate those they've met at the mall.


Caught Between Homes
WITH tax time at hand, people who have had their home on the market for a long time are pondering the tax consequences of whether and when to sell.
If they have already vacated their home and bought another, the decision may be filled with stress as they approach a key time threshold -- two years years after they have purchased a new home without having sold the old one.
"It's a problem for many people," said Neil Peters, a partner in the accounting firm of Rothenberg &amp; Company, Great Neck, L.I.
"They may really have to unload in two years or report a gain and pay a tax."


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
APOCALYPSE THEN
About 150 years ago, the Second Coming of Christ and the end of the world were believed to be imminent and simultaneous realities by hundreds of thousands of Americans.
The prediction was made by William Miller, a New Englander with his own interpretation of the Bible, who was convinced that the events would occur between March 1843 and March 1844.
His crusade across the country began in 1831, thus allowing sufficient time for people to prepare themselves.


Where's The Beef?
To the Editor:
Jennifer Dunning's article on efforts to improve the lot of ballet dancers, "Ballet's Young Rebels With a Cause"  [ Jan. 31 ] , contained one set of figures that seem to imply the opposite conclusion -- namely that salaries have been getting worse.
In 1979, the basic salary for dancers ($300) was a little better than 75 percent of the basic salary for musicians ($392), but today dancers' basic pay is only around 66 percent ($650) of the musicians' ($982).
This is progress?
SAM ABRAMS Rochester


National Service -- Now
Apathy is dead.
Of everything I've learned in my first few weeks in the White House, that's the thing that's made me the happiest.
Whether or not the people I've met outside the capital support the changes I have proposed, they're all saying they're ready to rebuild our country.


Where Nearly 10,000 Exotica Contend
IN this city of a thousand cities, the area around Broadway and Canal Street is looking a lot like Hong Kong.
Teeming with shoppers, its stalls brimming with cheap watches and sidewalk fashions, Chinatown has edged its way into SoHo.
Chinatown reaches "almost to Holland Tunnel," Ming-Yi Chen said of the neighborhood's expansion.
Mr.
Chen is an owner of Pearl River Mart, a Chinese department store that sells anything from orchid plants ($30) and brass gongs ($145) to preserved duck eggs (six for $2.55) and talking Chinese-English electronic dictionaries ($279).


Tantalizing Appetizers, Served Up by City Ballet
As things turned out, there was more new choreography than originally scheduled for the New York City Ballet's recent season.
Peter Martins, the troupe's artistic director, offered three premieres, and William Forsythe appended a completely new duet to a slightly revised version of "Herman Schmerman," a piece he had created last year for the company's choreographic showcase, the Diamond Project.
As a whole, however, the City Ballet seemed to be serving up appetizers before next spring's feast, the mammoth Balanchine Celebration, which will feature 73 ballets by George Balanchine.
It is true that the company offered a main course among the premieres: "Jazz (Six Syncopated Movements)" proved to be only a partially successful ballet, but it was a major collaboration between Mr.
Martins and Wynton Marsalis, who wrote the commissioned score.


Bullying Can Backfire
To the Editor:
As the casting director who canceled the audition that sent Carol Ann Francis to the Screen Actors Guild, I feel I must respond to Aljean Harmetz's article "Casting a Shadow in The Land of Illusion"  [ Feb. 7 ] .


Budget London
To the Editor: Readers of the "Pound-Wise Guide to Off-Season London" (Jan. 10) might be interested in knowing about a couple of our new British Tourist Authority brochures that are available free of charge.
They are "London Accommodation for Budget Travelers" and the newly revised "London Guide." Both can be requested from B.T.A. offices in New York, Chicago, Los Angeles and Atlanta.
BEDFORD PACE Director, public relations, U.S.A.
New York


U.S. URGES NATIONS TO SPEED GROWTH
Its standing boosted by tentative signs of economic recovery at home and enthusiasm abroad for its new deficit-reduction plan, the United States encouraged the other major industrial nations today to do more to stimulate world growth.
At a meeting of finance ministers and central bank directors from the Group of Seven, Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen made clear that the United States would like to see Germany and Japan, in particular, take steps to bolster their economies.


Young Acting Program Comes of Age
THEIR names pop up regularly now in theater reviews, news of the film world and celebrity profiles.
Graduates of the State University of New York's division of theater arts and film here have reached a kind of critical mass and their success is drawing attention to the program that helped start their careers.
In addition to a full-fledged movie star -- Wesley Snipes, known for his roles in such films as "Jungle Fever" and "White Men Can't Jump" -- the 20-year-old school has produced graduates like the writer and director Hal Hartley, whose most recent film, "Simple Men," has won critical praise; Nick Gomez, who wrote and directed the film "Laws of Gravity," and the actors William Sage and Robert Burke, who starred in "Simple Men."


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
KEEPERS OF THE FLAME The Role of Fire in American Culture, 1775-1925.
By Margaret Hindle Hazen  and Robert M. Hazen.
Princeton University, $29.95.


Opposites Attract When One Actor Shows Two Sides
I HAVE AN ACTING THEORY TO propose this morning.
For want of a better term, call it the theory of contradictory impulses.
It works like this.
An actor on the verge of tears is somehow more interesting if he seems -- in the brief moment before the actual tears start to flow -- as if he might be going to laugh instead.
Or take anger.
Usually, it's born out of agitation and distress.
But how vivid it can be if it suddenly seizes a performer who has given every appearance up to then of being calm and in control.


POSTINGS: Lecture at the Y; Assessing Big Projects
What is the real impact of such megaprojects as Riverside South on their immediate neighborhood and on the city at large?
At 8 P.M. on Wednesday, David Childs, an architect whose firm, Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill, designed the master plan for Riverside South and Columbus Center; Richard Kahan, former president of Battery Park City and now head of the Riverside South Planning Corporation, and Carl Weisbrod, president of the New York City Economic Development Corporation, will address that topic as part of the 92d Street Y's "Shape of the City" lecture series.


How Clinton's Stimulus Plan Cuts Into Deficit
To the Editor:
"Bill Clinton's Moment" (editorial, Feb. 18), on the President's economic policy address, states that "Mr. Clinton proposes a $30 billion stimulus package that temporarily increases the deficit." Will the deficit be increased by $30 billion?


Beleaguered Bosnian President Meets With Gore
The President of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Alija Izetbegovic, conferred with Vice President Al Gore today on the Bosnian conflict, and after a 90-minute meeting Mr.
Gore issued a statement saying he had "expressed the profound hope that an equitable and durable solution would be found to the problems of former Yugoslavia."
Mr.
Izetbegovic was invited to Washington as part of an effort by the Clinton Administration to persuade him to rejoin peace talks in New York under the supervision of the United Nations and the European Community.


Hunger Strike Declared in 'Ivan the Terrible' Case
Few fingers are needed to count the number of Israelis likely to muster sympathy for him.
Nevertheless, John Demjanjuk, found guilty of being the sadistic Nazi death camp guard known as "Ivan the Terrible," has declared a hunger strike to protest the long wait for a decision on the appeal of his 1988 conviction.


Weeds: Nutrient, Vegetable or Nuisance?
THE next time anyone considers weeds as mere nuisances, they just may want to think again.
No one knows what value some of these ordinary plants may have, and there could be a beneficial function to society in their future.
As a case in point, look at what is happening to purslane, a rather common garden weed.
It sprawls, has fat rounded leaves and is a nuisance, even though a somewhat attractive one.


Rethinking The Statistics Of 'Epidemic' Breast Cancer
THROUGHOUT the 1980's the incidence of breast cancer appeared to rise dramatically, increasing by nearly a third from 1980 until 1987.
Doctors, advocates for women with breast cancer and frightened women talked about an epidemic.
But recently the American Cancer Society and the National Cancer Institute have cast a cold eye on those upward curves and have come to what should be a reassuring conclusion.
Both assert there is not now nor was there ever an epidemic of breast cancer in this country.
The increase was more of a statistical illusion, they say, resulting from an increased use of X-ray screening that caught cancers early.
There is also no rise in breast cancer rates among young women in their 20's and 30's, according to the cancer society.
More young women are getting breast cancer, but there are more of them in the population.


Illness That Killed 63 in France Is Traced to Pork
At least 63 people died in France last year from a bacterial infection that has been traced in many cases to frozen pork products, according to a new report from the French Health Ministry.
The report said no new cases had been identified since Jan. 1, leading specialists to believe the outbreak of an infection known as listeriosis was over.
But the authors of the report also warned that the infection could recur and urged consumers to take special precautions.


No Substitutions for Her
NAME: Martha Wash.
IDENTITY: Singer, formerly with the duos the Weather Girls and Two Tons of Fun.
FAMOUS WEATHER GIRLS SONG: "It's Raining Men."


FEB. 21-27: Out in Ottawa; Mulroney's Tough Love Goes Unrequited in Canada
Prime Minister Brian Mulroney took unpopular steps in trying to insure Canada's future.
He introduced a hated goods-and-services tax intended to reduce the deficit.
He privatized bloated state enterprises.
And he cut free-trade deals with the United States and Mexico that left unions howling over job losses in Canadian manufacturing.
Tough prescriptions, and Mr.
Mulroney never could persuade Canadians that the pain was worth the gain.
Last week, after acknowledging a loss of "enthusiasm" for governing, he said he was quitting after more than eight years in office.


Clinton Delays Naming 'AIDS Czar'
President Clinton has yet to fulfill his campaign pledge to appoint an "AIDS czar" because of differences among his advisers over how the post should be structured and who should get the job.
White House officials say Mr.
Clinton still intends to appoint a coordinator of Federal efforts to combat AIDS, a post he has described as an "AIDS czar." But the time it is taking to fill the position has led advocacy groups to conclude that he has not made fighting the disease a priority.


A SENSE OF PLACE
LONG before I met the woman who owned it, I knew the power of the black dress.
Beth had borrowed it for a grand dinner in the grand ballroom of the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, an evening of caviar and Champagne, silk lapels and Explorers Club medals.
The black dress was almost new then, and the woman who owned it was happy.
At the Waldorf, as now, the dress was dazzling -- low-cut and strapless, a bonne bouche of black chiffon -- and soon the swains were around my wife, whispering in Beth's ear: Come roam the wilds of Mongolia, they said; come dive off Tierra del Fuego and swim with dolphins and whales.


How Clinton's Stimulus Plan Cuts Into Deficit; Cut Spending
To the Editor:
Re "Mr. Clinton's Captious Critics" (editorial, Feb. 23):


American Indians March in Remembrance of Wounded Knee Siege


EXPLOSION AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Heroes; Many Dramas, One Story: Only the Details Differ
There's a thrill only heroes feel, and James W. Sherwood felt it Friday when he heard voices echoing faintly through a wall at the World Trade Center, sledgehammered a hole through mortar and wood and discovered an elevator crammed with dozens of panicked school children.
"I was ecstatic," Lieutenant Sherwood of the New York City Fire Department recalled.
"They reached up to me with their hands, like I was God or something. It was a rush, really a rush."


LONE STAR
What, exactly, does Alison Cook mean when she writes about Gov.
Ann Richards of Texas being "too popular for her own good"("Lone Star," Feb. 7)?
So the Republicans don't like her.
Why should they?
Richards is a Democrat.
Did anyone say that Ronald Reagan was too popular for his own good?
If so, I didn't read it anywhere.


FEB. 21-27: Penny-Wise at the Pentagon; Defense Chief a Casualty In Retreat From Profligacy
It makes sense to a lot of Americans that the Pentagon is slashing billions from its budget in recognition of post-cold war realities.
But it didn't make sense last week when penny-pinching claimed Defense Secretary Les Aspin as victim.
Mr.
Aspin was laid up in the hospital for four days after Air Force doctors gave him a typhoid shot known to cause nausea and fever, aggravating the Secretary's congenital heart condition.


FEB. 21-27: Anti-American Riots; From Hunger Pangs To Withdrawal Pains In Still-Violent Somalia
In Somalia, the American military is learning a new lesson in the difficulty of graceful exits.
Last week supporters of Somalia's most aggressive warlord, Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, rioted in Mogadishu, the capital, to protest a victory by a rival warlord in the south, who they claimed was helped by the American-led military coalition.
About a half-dozen Somalis were killed and a handful of American marines and Nigerian troops wounded before calm was restored and aid deliveries resumed.


Churchgoing Affects Office Ethics (but Few Are Truly Saints)
A survey of over 2,000 workers has shown that the more often people go to church, the less likely they are to steal the company postage stamps or call in sick on the first sunny day in March.
What will science find out next?


Poetic Soprano


Pitchers Hope for Breaks and Slides Under the Sun
The inspiration for pitching experimentation is varied: insecurity, injury, boredom, arrogance.
The constant is that pitchers do it all the time.
Here's a look through the window at the lab work being done by the Mets.
BRET SABERHAGEN'S SLIDER -- The right-hander has been addicted to the pitch since his first professional season, 1983.
Club officials, though, have repeatedly advised him to drop the habit, mortified by the pitch's propensity for producing injury.


On Sunday; 'Cost-Effective' Can't Measure Babies' Lives
STORY No. 1: Aug. 29, 1992, Catherine Grotto was born at 3 A.M. in Point Pleasant, N.J.
She was full term, weighed 8 pounds, but as soon as her umbilical court was cut, she turned blue.
Doctors diagnosed hypoplastic left-heart syndrome, one of the most common and serious heart defects in infants.
Catherine's aorta was one-tenth the normal size, meaning oxygenated blood could not get to her body.
Her heart had no left ventricle.
Until a decade ago, these otherwise robust-looking infants died within days.
But now a few hospitals will operate.
The procedure is complex, expensive, high-risk.
About 25 percent of the babies survive.
For this reason many hospitals avoid the operation -- it pushes up their mortality rates.
The procedure involves rerouting the heart's flow of blood, sewing the pulmonary artery to the aorta and getting the right ventricle to do the left's work.
It's like rerouting the traffic pattern of a complicated highway cloverleaf -- say where the Grand Central Parkway meets the Interboro -- except you're working on a heart the size of a plum.


Q and A
Inner Hebrides
Q.
Are there any group tours that include Iona? -- R. W. Ogden, Frostburg, Md.


On Turning 13: Reports from the Front Lines
Yesterday, Chelsea Clinton became a teen-ager.
The Week in Review asked an eighth-grade social studies class at the New York City Lab School for Gifted Education, a public junior high that selects students with diverse backgrounds from all over the city: "What did it feel like when you turned 13?" Here are excerpts from their written responses.
In the year I was 13, I took a high school entrance test which was the most important test I have ever taken in my life.


The Nation's Library, for a Fee and a Modem
FOR several years, the Library of Congress has been asking Congress to help it expand access to its 100-million item collection through a combination of high technology and customized services that users would pay for.
Now Congress is coming around, but many of the library's constituents are complaining.
The idea of a high-tech library seems to fit neatly into President Clinton's plan for a national data "superhighway," a high-speed computer network that would transmit information -- words, music, movies, medical images, manufacturing blueprints and more -- in a move as dramatic as the advent of television.


Dominick Albano, Finance Executive, 62
Dominick Albano, a senior vice president of the United States Trust Company of New York, died on Wednesday at Winthrop-University Hospital in Mineola, L.I.
He was 62.
Mr.
Albano was a senior portfolio manager in the personal investment division.
He joined the firm in 1948 as a messenger and rose through the ranks to become an assistant secretary in 1964, an assistant vice president in 1968, a vice president in 1978 and a senior vice president in 1989.


Weather Disruption to Last a While, Data Show
Precise measurements of ocean currents made by a new satellite show that El Nino, the warm current that flows along the Pacific coast of South America and, among other things, has given California its rainy and snowy winter, will persist into the spring and maybe the summer, scientists said Friday.
The measurements, made by sensitive altimeters aboard the Topex/Poseidon satellite, which was launched by the United States and France last August, show that a "pulse" of unusually warm water is spreading from the western Pacific to the eastern Pacific and will reach the coast of South America in the next few weeks, an American and French team of scientists said at a news conference at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif.


The Rise and Fall of the Killer B's
IN "MATINEE," THE Director Joe Dante's new homage to 1950's B movies, an audience stampedes when an atomic bomb appears to blast through the screen where a horror movie is showing.
The impresario Lawrence Woolsey (played by John Goodman) confides the secrets of his "Atomo-Vision" and "Rumble-Rama": "Some of it's stage lighting, some of it's magic-show stuff, but the big studios have nothing like it." Later he says: "I've got a new process. Don't want the boys from the studios coming around and stealing it."
But the big studios
have
stolen something from those low-budget exploitation films known as B movies -- their ideas (and their directors).
B movies -- action-adventure, martial-arts, science-fiction, horror and even soft-core pornography -- no longer fill a void.
Instead, with budgets of under $10 million (and frequently less than $1 million), they take a back seat to their more expensive brethren.


SURFACING
HOLLYWOOD --
Instant remakes:
If you thought you'd seen it before, you may have.
At least three new movies ("Sommersby," "Point of No Return" and "The Vanishing") are American versions of recent foreign films ("The Return of Martin Guerre," "La Femme Nikita" and "The Vanishing").
POLITICS --
President Clinton on CD-ROM:
A high-tech President if there ever was one.
A new CD-ROM release, "Portrait of Victory," traces his last months on the campaign trail.
APOLOGIES --
Who's sorry now?:
February must have been National Apology Month.
Mea culpas were issued by Ann Landers (for misrepresenting a letter writer), Marky Mark (for misunderstandings with Asians and gay people) and NBC (for rigging a test of G.M. trucks).


ENDPAPER: Public Stages; The Chelsea Show
Chelsea Clinton turned 13 yesterday.
Can her embittered tell-all White House memoir, "Dirty Socks," be far behind?
That depends on how serious her parents are about keeping her adolescence private.
An unwilling player in a drama of others' making, Chelsea is stuck in a real-life Actors' Nightmare.
She will be trapped on stage for at least four years without a script, rehearsal or, judging from her early appearances, much guidance in wardrobe and makeup.
And everyone in the audience is a critic.


Sports of the Times; Mets' Young Shrugs At Streak
YOU could say Anthony Young was the epitome of the entire last season.
The Mets lost 90 games and he lost his last 14 decisions, straight out of the old Mets tradition of Roger Craig and Bob Miller and Craig Anderson with their double-digit losing streaks.
But if all the Mets returning to the scene of the disaster had an attitude like Young's, they would stand a chance for respectability.
In the midst of all the losing, the 27-year-old right-hander impressed management with his poise and his stuff and his courage as a makeshift relief pitcher.


CRYING WOLF OVER ELEPHANTS
Even though a few South African countries had stable or increasing elephant populations in 1989, the ban on the ivory trade had to be
worldwide.
If ivory was permitted to be sold from South Africa, illegal ivory from Tanzania, Uganda or Kenya easily could be sold to ivory buyers, with phony documents of the country of origin -- just as is done today in the exotic bird trade.
EDWARD S. LOOSLI
New York, N.Y.


Yeats to the Rescue
To the Editor:
"You are the only person I know who could help." So wrote Maud Gonne from a country house in County Wicklow to William Butler Yeats in Oxford, begging him to return to Ireland and straighten out the mess of her daughter's recent marriage.
Yeats responded immediately, leaving his own young family to go to the aid of a friend in need.
It was always so with him, as the recently published "Gonne-Yeats Letters 1893-1938" makes amply evident.
Yet Seamus Deane, in his review (Jan. 10), is so eager to defend Maud Gonne from the charge of nationalist fanaticism that he portrays Yeats as a self-serving, arrogant prig.


BABY SITTERS' BOSS TELLS ALL
Baby sitters' boss is going to have a hard time keeping all those people on her domestic payroll once she starts reporting their earnings (Hers: "Baby Sitters' Boss Tells All," Feb. 7).


World Markets; Loading Up on Latin American Debt
AS investors in fixed-income securities see interest rates drop on United States Treasury and corporate issues, some are looking to the booming debt market in Latin America, where dollar returns average two to six percentage points higher.
Led by Mexico and a host of high-quality Mexican corporations, Latin America stormed the international capital markets last year, issuing $10.2 billion in new debt.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Feb. 21 about concerns over preserving the environment of exotic places misidentified the party that controls the government of British Columbia.
It is the New Democratic Party.


Miss Harcsar, Stephen Purdum
Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene A. Harcsar of Rumson, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Katherine Curry Harcsar to Stephen Edward Purdum, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Purdum of Mendham, N.J.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Harcsar is an assistant portfolio manager at Campbell, Cowperthwait &amp; Company, an investment counseling concern in New York.
She graduated from George Washington University.
Her father is a vice president of Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Inc. in New York.


Miss Muldowney, Nils Dahl 3d
Christine Muldowney, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Muldowney of Alpharetta, Ga., was married yesterday to Nils S. Dahl 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nils J. Dahl of Barrington, R.I.
The Rev.
Timothy Brown performed the ceremony at St.
Lucy's Roman Catholic Church in Middletown, R.I.
Mrs.
Dahl is a senior marketing manager in travel-related services at American Express in New York.
She graduated from Lake Forest College.


Paper Chase May Find Hidden Deductions
"DEDUCTION is a very popular word between January and April," said Avery E. Neumark, a partner in Weber, Lipshie &amp; Company, New York-based certified public acountants, commenting on Americans' search for ways to lighten their tax burdens.
About the only deduction that can be put in place retroactively for 1992, he said, is an I.R.A. of up to $2,000 by April 15.
But it is available only to people whose incomes are low enough or who are not covered by a qualified retirement plan and whose spouses also are not covered.
The income ceiling is $50,000 for married taxpayers filing jointly with phaseouts above $40,000 and $35,000 for single taxpayers with phaseouts above $25,000.


Q and A
Improving a Rented Unit Question: I live in a rent-stabilized apartment building that became a co-op about six years ago.
My understanding was that the owners weren't really anxious to sell.
So the insider's price wasn't really an insider's deal and most did not buy.
The building is still about 49 percent rental, managed by the same group that has always managed it.
Because the apartment is inexpensive, albeit dark and small, I plan to stay and feel it would actually be cheaper to make some small cosmetic improvements rather than move.


Battered Women: How Pictures Speak
THEY are not pretty pictures: women with bruised and blackened eyes, tear-streaked, swollen faces, a leg torn open by a knife, a tire track across an abdomen.
They could be photographs of prisoners of war.
They are, instead, pictures of the dark side of American home life, a civil war between men and women that transcends all racial and economic barriers.
The straightforward black-and-white images are photographs of a domestic war that rages behind closed doors and strikes a woman in the United States every 15 seconds, according to crime reports compiled by the Federal Bureau of Investigation for 1991.


Yeats to the Rescue
To the Editor:
"You are the only person I know who could help." So wrote Maud Gonne from a country house in County Wicklow to William Butler Yeats in Oxford, begging him to return to Ireland and straighten out the mess of her daughter's recent marriage.
Yeats responded immediately, leaving his own young family to go to the aid of a friend in need.
It was always so with him, as the recently published "Gonne-Yeats Letters 1893-1938" makes amply evident.
Yet Seamus Deane, in his review (Jan. 10), is so eager to defend Maud Gonne from the charge of nationalist fanaticism that he portrays Yeats as a self-serving, arrogant prig.


To This Jazz Vocalist, Resilience Is More Important Than Sorrow
It is no coincidence that at a moment when the first generation of great jazz divas is on the verge of expiring (Billie Holiday and Sarah Vaughan have died, and Ella Fitzgerald and Carmen McRae are ailing), Abbey Lincoln should ascend to the throne that Holiday vacated in 1959.
Among music critics and the public there is a shared understanding that this vocal tradition is such a precious cultural resource that it deserves to be honored as a sort of royal lineage.
Indeed, how better to attract the next generation?
That is why not only Lincoln but also Betty Carter and Shirley Horn are suddenly finding their reputations soaring.


Lilian Manger, Porter Fleming
Dr. and Mrs.
William M. Manger of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lilian Wade Manger, to Porter Farrar Fleming, the son of Mrs.
S.
Robert Weltz Jr. of Santa Barbara, Calif., and the late David W. Fleming.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Manger is a teacher in the lower school at the Buckley School in New York.
She graduated from Hollins College.
Her father is a professor of clinical medicine at the New York University Medical Center and the chairman of the National Hypertension Association.
The bride's grandfather the late Julius Manger founded Manger Hotels, a chain that included the Windsor in New York and the Hay-Adams in Washington.
Her maternal great-grandfather, John Day Jackson, was the owner and publisher of The New Haven Register and The New Haven Journal-Courier.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
118.30
118.30
129.50
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6380
1.6380
1.6390
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2595
1.2595
1.1820
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.4540
1.4540
1.7570
U.S. Dollar
per British Pound
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Alou Does Show Up
MOISES ALOU , upset over his contract negotiations, showed up nonetheless for the Montreal Expos' first full-squad workout of the spring at West Palm Beach, Fla., arriving two hours late yesterday.
Alou, runner-up for National League rookie of the year, is seeking $250,000 for 1993.
BILL STONEMAN, the Expos' president of baseball operations, is offering about $200,000.


Special Duty


Streetscapes: Central Park West Lampposts; A Tree-Lined Street Gets New Old Look
WHAT are really the newest things on Central Park West just look old.
The nine dark green lampposts between 62d and 77th Streets are the forerunners of a total of 67 new lampposts on that stretch, which is being rebuilt by the Department of Transportation.
Their installation raises issues of the place of both uniformity and history on our streets.
By the 1870's Central Park West, although still undeveloped, had regular lines of gas streetlights, relatively plain short cast-iron poles with large glass covers.
Jeremy Woodoff, deputy director for public projects at the Landmarks Preservation Commission, says private utilities controlled much of the city's public lighting, making for a great variety of lighting fixtures in the late 19th century.


Ivanisevic's Chilling Quote
To the Sports Editor:
Toward the end of the article about Goran Ivanisevic ("Ivanisevic's 'Fight' for Croatia," The Times, Feb. 22) and highlighted in bold print by the words "Bang, Bang!", I read a description of Ivanisevic as he learned to shoot a machine gun.
Here it is in his own words:


Corrections
An article on Feb. 14 about feminism and rock music misstated Sue Cummings's position at L.A.
Weekly.
She is a senior editor.


Tech Notes; Video Games in a Big Way
VIDEO game fanatics with more than a few quarters to burn are the target of a new control device for Nintendo and Sega game systems that is as big as some children.
The $2,000 control pad, which is two feet tall, three feet wide and six inches thick, went on sale for the first time last month.
Its maker, Albany-based Triax Controls, was founded in 1991 to manufacture and sell a line of controllers for Sega's Genesis and Nintendo's NES and Super NES game systems, using a touch-sensitive plate instead of a joystick or buttons to let users control movements of characters or objects within a game.


EXPLOSION AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Investigation; Bomb Is Definite Answer, But All Else Is Mystery
Working with puzzle-pieces of seared wreckage, chemical traces and disjointed telephone messages, investigators from New York City to the White House struggled yesterday to decipher the mystery of the blast that ripped through the World Trade Center on Friday, killing at least five people and injuring more than 1,000.
Beyond saying officially what had been widely conceded -- that the explosion almost certainly came from a powerful bomb -- Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly and James Fox, assistant director in charge of the New York office of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, repeatedly fended off questions yesterday about the nature and placement of the device and possible suspects and motives.


Celebrating Sassoon
The father of cutting-edge hair styles. F.I.T., Feb. 22.


New &amp; Noteworthy
A COMPLICATED WAR: The Harrowing of Mozambique, by William Finnegan. (University of California, $13.) This book examines the seeds of the grueling civil war in Mozambique, which began after the country obtained independence from Portugal in 1975.
The author shows how Rhodesian military intelligence gave birth to the rebel Renamo movement, which opposed the new socialist state, and how South Africa supported the insurrection for its own ends.
Last year our reviewer, Thomas Pakenham, praised the book as a "brilliant, devastating eyewitness report."
THE TAX INSPECTOR, by Peter Carey. (Vintage International, $11.) This novel's main characters, the members of the Catchprice family of Australia, were described last year by our reviewer, Francine Prose, as "the Beverly Hillbillies on bad acid." They are, however, far from rich, and their already disturbed lives become even more disturbed when they are targeted for audit by an unmarried, pregnant tax inspector.
Ms.
Prose said the book's "pattern of mini-surprises followed by small, jarring pleasures prepares us, phrase by phrase, for the novel's greater rewards -- for its wit and density, its sympathy and wacky inventiveness and its exhortation to step farther back and see more." Vintage International has also reissued Mr.
Carey's 1980 collection, THE FAT MAN IN HISTORY: AND OTHER STORIES ($10), which contains stories one critic found "as brilliant as they are bizarre."


Loves of a Young Hustler
MARTIN AND JOHN
By Dale Peck. 228 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $21.


Small Change
To the Editor: Beware of currency exchange in Greece.
The bank authorities welcome exchanges from dollars into Greek currency, but discourage exchanges back into dollars by imposing exorbitant bank charges.
On a recent trip I had to overnight in Athens to get a connecting flight.
At the counter of the National Bank of Greece in the airport, I exchanged $60 into Greek currency at a rate of $1 for 213 drachmas, plus a 2 percent bank commission of 256 drachmas, or $1.20.


How Clinton's Stimulus Plan Cuts Into Deficit; Not Hobson's Choice
To the Editor:
"A Cowardly Retreat" (Op-Ed, Feb. 11) by Jon Cowan and Rob Nelson uses "Hobson's choice" incorrectly: "we will face a Hobson's choice: drastically cut benefits, sharply raise payroll taxes (up to 40 percent) or default on obligations."
Hobson's choice means
no
choice.


Kevorkian's Backers Outnumber His Foes At Michigan Protest
Separated by police officers, the two sides in the growing debate over doctor-assisted suicide demonstrated today in front of Dr.
Jack Kevorkian's apartment here in this Detroit suburb.
The protest was organized by abortion opponents who have made fighting assisted suicide part of their cause.
But they were outnumbered today by the doctor's supporters.


Great Riffs. Big Bucks. New Hopes?
Alternative rock doesn't seem so alternative anymore.
Every major label has a handful of guitar-driven bands in shapeless shirts and threadbare jeans, bands with bad posture and good riffs who cultivate the oblique and the evasive, who conceal catchy tunes with noise and hide craftsmanship behind nonchalance.
Meanwhile, the independent labels that first exposed the style -- some people still call it Amerindie rock, despite the new corporate presence -- have kept up production, as bands proliferate and commercial hopes expand.
In the first two months of this year (the usual time to release albums by lesser-known acts that would be ignored amid the Christmas blockbusters), labels small and large have been pumping out alternative rock efforts by established bands like Dinosaur Jr. (formed in the mid-1980's) and new ones like Pond (founded in late 1990).
And surprise!
With its insularity cracked a little bit, the music is still strong, as on new albums by Belly, Sloan, the Fastbacks, Cell, Superchunk and Swell.


Who's That Masked Man? It's Richter
Mike Richter hasn't had many moments like this one this season.
His Rangers teammates were wandering by to congratulate him.
His coach was singing his praises.
He was smiling, looking confident and -- get this -- enjoying himself.
It wasn't the easiest night for Richter to try and stage a comeback.
Idle for two weeks, with only a few starts in the entire month before that, he was chosen to start in goal against the Edmonton Oilers in the final game of a brutal road trip.
The defensive corps in front of him was decimated by injuries.
His offense was exhausted from an overtime game in Calgary the previous night.
He himself was a bit rusty.


Chili Country
From the air, Oaxaca is a tiny oasis in the bitter, parched plains of the Sierra Madre del Sur, a geological blip fringed with green.
After a two-hour flight over desert mountains, with nothing to look at but cactus and baked orange soil, it's a relief to peer through the trees and catch sight of the pink colonial buildings and Baroque church spire.
You can almost understand, given the exquisite isolation, why the inhabitants of this tiny town are such giddy survivors.
You arrive in Oaxaca (pronounced wah-HAH-kah) and immediately feel hopeful, as if this dusty refuge in southern Mexico is always on the verge of fiesta.


EXPLOSION AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Tenants; Explosion Displaces Hundreds of Business
To avoid a major blow to the region's economy and world financial markets, the Port Authority was scrambling yesterday to find offices for hundreds of tenants dislocated by Friday's huge explosion at the World Trade Center.
Port Authority officials said most of the seven-building complex, which houses the trading floors of exchanges that set prices on commodities ranging from gold to cotton and from heating oil to orange juice, would be closed tomorrow.


Kong and Wray: 60 Years of Love
Gorillas have a life expectancy of 30 years.
King Kong was created out of wire, cloth, metal, rubber and stop-motion photography 60 years ago, and he may well turn out to be immortal.
At 85 and facing her own end within a decade or two, Fay Wray is aware that her immortality is inextricably linked with the huge ape who held her in his eight-foot hand when she was 25 years old.


Pedophiles and the Law
To the Editor:
I would like to respond to your review of my "Sexual Science and the Law" (Jan. 31).
I did not conclude in the book that "we have no reliable psychiatric evidence that  [ child-adult sexual ]  relations harm children." I reported the findings of a 1986 review of the scientific literature that maintained that "from one-fifth to two-fifths of abused children seen by clinicians manifest pathological disturbance." I reported the findings of a 1991 review that maintained "there is still a lack of consensus regarding
the proportion
of children who have been psychologically harmed" (emphasis added). Regarding incest experiences, I concluded, "
Not all
reports . . . document harm" (emphasis added). For homosexual child-adult experiences, I concluded, "
Not all
. . . are necessarily viewed by the younger person as traumatic" (emphasis added). And I noted that two factors seem to be associated with more harm to the child -- when the sexual contact is forced and when the adult is the father. The reviewer makes it appear that I support the extremist views held by pedophile groups like the North American Man-Boy Love Association.


IS IT BRITAIN'S DAY OF RISING ANGUISH?
A chill fog seems to have settled over Britain's soul these days, a mixture of doubt and depression that has sent public confidence plummeting in opinion polls and provoked everyone from clergymen to politicians to warn that the nation is on the slope of moral and social decline.
Stunned by the killing on Feb. 10 of a 2-year-old boy in Liverpool at the hands, the police say, of two 10-year-old boys, and depressed by a recession that has left more than three million Britons out of work, Britons are asking what has gone so badly wrong.


On Turning 13: Reports from the Front Lines
Yesterday, Chelsea Clinton became a teen-ager.
The Week in Review asked an eighth-grade social studies class at the New York City Lab School for Gifted Education, a public junior high that selects students with diverse backgrounds from all over the city: "What did it feel like when you turned 13?" Here are excerpts from their written responses.


Congress Hears the Public And Moves Behind Clinton
President Clinton's economic plan gained support in Congress this week as lawmakers sensed that their constituents favored it and were willing to pay a price for lowering the budget deficit.
Senator David L. Boren, an Oklahoma Democrat who holds a swing vote on the critical Finance Committee and who had expressed skepticism when the plan was first announced 10 days ago, said in an interview on Friday that he supported it unconditionally.


2 Ways to Install Sinks: Freestanding or Vanity
THERE are two types of bathroom sinks.
One is freestanding, which is mounted directly on a wall and sometimes supported by legs or a pedestal, and the other is the vanity sink, which is attached to or part of a vanity top.
Installing a vanity sink is fairly easy, but installing a freestanding one can be more challenging.
To remove a sink before installing a new one, first shut off the water supplying the faucets or the main valve near the water meter.
Next, open the faucets to drain remaining water.
Then use a basin wrench to loosen the nuts beneath the sink that fasten the supply tubes to the faucet's base.
To use a basin wrench, fit it around the nut so that turning the handle counterclockwise tightens the jaw.
Otherwise, the tool will slip.


Yugoslav Borders
To the Editor:
In "Boundaries Hold Key to Yugoslav Solution" (letter, Feb. 4), Alex N. Dragnich states: "Tito had drawn the country's internal borders in a way that one-third (nearly three million) of the Serbs were outside the Republic of Serbia. The largest portion of these was in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the next largest was in Croatia."


White South African Party Seeks Black Maids' Votes
It was a political wooing of the revival kind, with a gospel choir from Alexandra township, orange squash in plastic cups, and sweet promises of justice and democracy.
The objects of this serenade -- black women who cook and scrub for white South Africa -- sat in the shade of umbrellas on a high school soccer field and um-um'ed enthusiastically as a speaker itemized their grievances: the paltry pay, the endless hours, the condescending bosses and those dreadful children.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Byram
GREENWICH has never been as unremittingly rich, white and Episcopalian as commonly believed, and many of its 12 distinct neighborhoods are widely divergent economically and ethnically.
In the last 100 years, as the town shifted from farming to a metropolis with large numbers of transient executives and anchored by a core of urbane shops and office buildings, some outlying districts remained untouched.
Byram, with its own mini-business center and strata of working-class, middle-class and wealthy residents, is the same self-sufficient village it always was.


A Black Cemetery Takes Its Place in History
IT took 200 years for the cemetery used by black New Yorkers in the Colonial era to move from the outskirts of city life to the center of municipal consciousness.
But that finally happened last week when the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission voted unanimously to create the African Burial Ground and the Commons Historic District.
Closed in the 1790's, the cemetery all but disappeared from civic chronicles.
In the fall of 1991, before excavations began for a Federal office tower on Broadway in lower Manhattan, archeologists uncovered the first of some 415 graves.
The significance dawned quickly on politicians and preservationists -- here, for the first time, was a moving, tangible link to a population that had been demeaned in life and forgotten in death.


On Turning 13: Reports from the Front Lines
Yesterday, Chelsea Clinton became a teen-ager.
The Week in Review asked an eighth-grade social studies class at the New York City Lab School for Gifted Education, a public junior high that selects students with diverse backgrounds from all over the city: "What did it feel like when you turned 13?" Here are excerpts from their written responses.
Turning 13 was an important period of my life.
It was the time when I started to mature physically.
It also was the time when more girls started to notice me.
My personality changed a lot from a boring nerd to an energetic, funny and athletic kid.


Splendors of Imperial Pasts With a Modern Point of View
TOM LOLLAR's "Commemorative Vessels," on view here at the Hudson River Museum, are replete with authoritative references not only to Europe's political history but also to its ceramic legacy.
Their rich overlay of cultural allusions extends from ancient Etruscan pottery to neo-classical German cityscapes; from Napoleon's sarcophagus to the interiors of Russian palaces.
While taking a playful view of the past, the artist is also commenting on the recent collapse of communist Europe.
Mr.
Lollar, a resident of Yonkers who heads the ceramics department at Columbia University, is represented in the permanent collections of the Cooper-Hewitt Museum and the American Craft Museum, both in Manhattan.
He is better known, however, as a designer of ceramic bas- relief for installation in corporate architecture than as a vessel maker.
In this show, his affinity for architecture has converged with his interest in historic presentational objects.
Three years ago, in Prague and Vienna, Mr.
Lollar visited major museum collections of commemorative vessels, a genre in which the forms are derived from functional objects but not meant for use.
He also visited a hunting lodge in the Grunewald, a wooded park in Berlin, to see a collection of tureens that had been commissioned as gifts for exchange among members of the aristocracy.
These encounters with objects from the past directly influenced the eight pieces in the show, the artist said in an interview.
Several are based on the tureen, a deep covered dish for serving soup or stew to a crowd.
Although its antecedents were communal bowls used by early humans, in 18th-century Europe the tureen had become a luxury object as well as a tour de force for pottery designers.
Mr.
Lollar has also used the kylix, a shallow drinking vessel used in ancient Greece, and historic vase forms as points of departure.
Mr.
Lollar's complex symmetrical forms, all heroic in scale and standing on bases suggesting pedestals or columns, project the formality of architectural monuments.
Yet there is a gutsy playfulness in such details as a series of finials rising to a bronze eagle on the handle of a lid, which seem intricately wrought but retain the memory of clay's pliability.
The works are further enlivened with inscriptions executed in spontaneous linear strokes.
Frequently depicting specific urban vistas, these images reflect the artist's interest in early 20th-century German woodcuts.
While Mr.
Lollar obviously respects history, he freely combines its ingredients for expressive purposes.
This exhibition as a whole seems to comment on the persistence of cultural fusion.
This is evident, for example, in "Schinkel Sarcophagus," at 40 inches high the largest, most imposing work and the show's centerpiece.
Here, the tapering rectangular walls echo the shape of Napoleon's burial vault, while the image of a plaza etched in sgraffito (a method of scratching through a layer of glaze to reach the color of the clay beneath it) is of a plaza in what was East Berlin.
This same scene had been depicted on a 19th-century tureen, a wedding gift for a Dutch prince and a Prussian princess; both Mr.
Lollar's piece and the historic tureen, which is in the Campbell Museum in Camden, N.J., are embellished with gold accents.
Areas of green glaze that resemble blowups of faux marble surfaces refer to the malachite interiors of Russian palaces.
Karl Friedrich Schinkel, for whom the piece is named, was a neo-classical German architect prominent in the 19th century.
Equally complex in cross references, "Dem Deutschen Volke" is a boat-shape tureen that commemorates the unification of Berlin.
As might be expected, a view of the city appears on one curving wall of the vessel.
On the other, however, are surprising images of pyramids and sphinxes.
The artist says those recall the European fascination with civilizations brought to light by 19th-century excavations.
Another telescopic view of history is seen in "Etruscan Vessel," in which the form and earthenware surface were inspired by the ancient Etruscan vases that Mr.
Lollar saw in an Italian museum.
Here, the jolting element is a band of painted silhouettes of figures displaying courtly manners in Baroque European costumes.
Shown side by side, two pieces based on the kylix, a classical Greek predecessor of the chalice, provide a striking contrast in spirit.
Despite the fact that the German words within the "Mozart Kylix" were from a requiem by the composer, this cup in light earthen tones on a gold pedestal seems lyrical compared with the "Nicholas II Kylix." That work, glazed in heavier-looking blues and greens, commemorates recent disclosures regarding the last czar's death.
Although the experience of viewing Mr.
Lollar's work is enriched by tracking down references and reflecting on their relationships, the forms themselves are compelling enough to demand a second look.
Charcoal and watercolor drawings of several of the vessels, with collaged photocopies of the buildings represented in clay, add a significant dimension to the show.
The exhibition will continue through April 25.
The museum, at 511 Warburton Avenue, is open Wednesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., Fridays from 10 A.M. to 9 P.M. and Sundays from noon to 5 P.M.
It is closed Mondays and Tuesdays.
The entry fee is $3, $1.50 for children under 12 and people older than 62.
The phone number is 963-4550.


Floating Hotel Off Russian City
A Commodore cruise ship, the Enchanted Isle, will be converted into a floating hotel in Russia this summer.
Starting in June, the 731-passenger ship will be permanently docked on the Neva River in downtown St.
Petersburg.
Renamed the Commodore Hotel, it will offer 375 rooms and six suites starting at $140 a person a night.
The ship, built for Moore-McCormack Lines and launched in 1958 as the Argentina, has a long history of conversions.
She sailed three times as the Veendam for Holland America and was also the Brasil, the Monarch Star, the Edam and the Bermuda Star.


Getting a Custom House From a Factory
THE weather outside is frightful, but inside the factory of Westchester Modular Homes in Wingdale, N.Y., workers are building houses as if it were summer.
"Because we control the climate, we have no down time, no season in which we can't build," said Steven Kerr, vice president of sales and marketing of Westchester Modular Homes, which is named for Westchester County even though the factory is in Dutchess County.
"We're able to produce more than one house every day that the factory is open, or 350 houses projected for this year, as compared to the 10 or 12 a year of a builder using conventional stick building -- piece-by-piece construction."


Raid Poses Risks at Angkor
The magnificent ruins of Angkor, which few foreign travelers dared to visit during Cambodia's long civil war, are once again a risky travel destination.
In an attack this month on Siem Reap, the provincial capital that borders on Angkor and is about 140 miles northwest of Phnom Penh, a Portuguese tourist was grazed in the forehead by a bullet that hit the window of his room in the Grand Hotel d'Angkor, and three Cambodians were killed.
The uniformed gunmen have not been identified; the Cambodian Government and the Maoist Khmer Rouge blame each other for the attack.


From Visions of Paradise to Hell on Earth
As fate or changing times would have it, two major projects now under way explore different but related aspects of the gay experience in America: life before the outbreak of AIDS, and life after.
Jonathan Demme's "Philadelphia," which just finished filming, is the first big-budget Hollywood movie to tackle AIDS and homophobia.
"Armistead Maupin's Tales of the City," a six-hour television mini-series starring Olympia Dukakis, begins filming in the spring.
The British production is based on Mr.
Maupin's novel of life -- largely gay life -- in San Francisco around 1974, before AIDS came to light.
The tangled tale of the Maupin "Tales" appears on page 27.
Here is the story of the making of "Philadelphia."


Works That Take Humanity as It Comes
BENNY ANDREWS arrives at the State Museum here with quite a record.
Since his first solo show, in Manhattan in 1962, there have been maybe three or four years when the artist has not been visible, alone or in group, somewhere in the United States or abroad.
Images by him are hanging at two galleries in Detroit and Atlanta and at the Butler Museum of American Art in Youngstown, Ohio.
Many more are to be found in public collections, notably those at the Metropolitan Museum, the Museum of Modern Art and, in New Jersey, the Newark and State Museums.
As he himself put it in a recent conversation, "I keep working at my work," adding that he takes pride in "still being around, like Richard Nixon."
The humor in the last remark will be lost on those unfamiliar with the work, which suggests that Mr.
Andrews is a republican only in the sense of not being a royalist.
Either way, he takes humanity as it comes -- in all shapes, sizes and colors.
As its observer, he belongs somewhere between Daumier and the cartoonist Gahan Wilson, but without the ferocity of the one and the Chicago-Imagist looniness of the second.


Comes the Revolution in Apt. 26 -- A special report.; Moscow Privatization Yields Privacy and Problems
In a few weeks Yuli A. Fayt will move out of his four-room apartment a few blocks from the Kremlin, where for the last 20 years or so he has lived in one room, sharing the bathroom, kitchen, telephone and front door with a hard-drinking, abusive policeman, an avant-garde artist, a cleaning lady, her juvenile delinquent son and their assorted spouses and guests.
Mr.
Fayt, who has not spoken to some of his fellow residents in years, can hardly wait.
"All I want, and please excuse me for the reference, is to be able to walk into my own bathroom without having to wear rubber boots," said the 55-year-old film director, in an oblique reference to the encrusted filth typical of a "kommunalka."


Day of Terror, and Questions
The deadly explosion that shook the World Trade Center Friday also shook loose a cascade of questions.
Once they might have seemed speculative, if not academic.
In the hindsight of horror, they become chillingly urgent.
How safe are the World Trade Center towers?
How safe are cities as the technology of terror escalates?
How safe is America itself?


Corps of Engineers Looking Warily for New Role
The Army Corps of Engineers, once the well-oiled machine that could be counted on to move earth and perhaps even a piece of heaven with the right Congressional appropriation, is agonizing in the opening days of the Clinton Administration over reorganization, lean budgets and belt-tightening.
Appropriations for the Corps have dried up faster than a dammed wetland in the last few years as Federal budget deficits and military cutbacks reduced money for massive engineering projects to a trickle.


Charlie Hustle's 2d Chance
In a modestly lighted corner of the Pete Rose Ballpark Cafe, the familiar-looking man with the broad face and direct eyes and slightly upturned lip sat in a booth and wrote his signature in blue pen on a stack of cards with his baseball picture.
It was early afternoon on a recent Sunday and Pete Rose handed the cards to the tourists and sundry locals who approached.


On Turning 13: Reports from the Front Lines
Yesterday, Chelsea Clinton became a teen-ager.
The Week in Review asked an eighth-grade social studies class at the New York City Lab School for Gifted Education, a public junior high that selects students with diverse backgrounds from all over the city: "What did it feel like when you turned 13?" Here are excerpts from their written responses.
Being Jewish, turning 13 is a big production.
I decided I wanted to have a bas mitzvah which is a ceremony that turns a child into an adult with obligations and responsibilities to the Jewish community and the world around them.


Hair Gone, Heart to Follow?
Loss of hair has symbolized a loss of strength since Samson's fall in Biblical times.
Now new evidence lends support to the mythical equation -- at least regarding the most important human muscle, the heart.
Researchers reported last week that men who were bald at the top were, inexplicably, somewhat more likely to suffer heart attacks than those with full heads of hair.
The more extensive the "vertex baldness" -- hair loss on the top or crown of the head -- the higher the risk, the report in the Journal of the American Medical Association said.
Men with receding hairlines but no baldness on top faced no increased risk.


Sydney L. Whitman, Caterer, 84
Sydney L. Whitman, the owner of a large kosher catering house in Brooklyn, died on Monday at Englewood Hospital in Englewood, N.J.
He was 84 and lived in Fort Lee, N.J.
He had bone cancer, said Stephen B. Wilson, his son-in-law.


FEB. 21-27: In in Seoul; Kim Vows to Ride Tiger To Reform in South Korea
Asia has been transformed over the past decade by a single force: feverish economic development.
The inauguration of Kim Young Sam in South Korea just may herald the emergence of a new regional force: political reform.
In taking office last week, Mr.
Kim, South Korea's first non-military President in more than three decades, pledged an end to the "dark political night" of repression, corruption and economic malaise under the old order.
And he boldly issued a call for fundamental change to produce a more equitable society and make the country more competitive against Asia's other economic tigers.


Out of the Mountains
Five cross-country skiers, lost last weekend in the treacherous Rocky Mountain back country, where avalanches had been thundering, were almost given up for dead.
At one point, experts estimated their chances of survival at 10 percent and probably less.
But the skiers were found alive in the Colorado mountains on Tuesday, after four days and nights in subzero temperatures and fierce gales.


Florio Gains In Popularity, New Poll Says
Eight months before New Jersey voters elect a new governor, there is more evidence that the incumbent, Jim Florio, is slowly but steadfastly making a political recovery.
In its first political poll of this election year, the Eagleton Institute of Politics at Rutgers University shows Mr.
Florio with the biggest improvement in his job performance ratings since his popularity plummeted three years ago after he pushed through a record tax increase.


Suzanne L. Pratt, Jonathan D. Davis
Helen Pratt Pritzker of Philadelphia has announced the engagement of her daughter Suzanne Leah Pratt to Jonathan D. Davis, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathan Davis of Harrington Park, N.J.
Miss Pratt is also the daughter of Roger Sherman Pratt, also of Philadelphia.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Pratt, 29, is a producer for the public television program "Nightly Business Report," in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Tulane University and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.


Forget The Fight: Islanders Win Game
Twelve minutes into today's contest between the Islanders and the Flyers, not a single player stood on the ice.
All that remained of a free-for-all -- sticks, gloves, helmets and a puck -- was strewn from blue line to blue line as most of the 17,380 fans at the sold-out Spectrum, understanding the urgency of the overall situation, stood on their feet and cheered wildly.
Such is life these days in the National Hockey League's Patrick Division, where the Islanders are engaging in an uphill battle for the fourth and final playoff spot in the division and the Flyers are trying to join in.


The Tricky Details of Refinancing
THE wave of mortgage refinancing last year prompted victorious smiles among the legions of homeowners who cut billions of dollars from their monthly payments.
But the advent of tax season brings a fresh challenge: winning maximum deductions for last year's paper shuffling.
The task has confused many people.
Julian Block, who answers tax-related queries on the Prodigy database service, said the most frequently asked questions this year concerned mortgage refinancing.
"In many instances, the actual mechanics of computing the deduction are straightforward," Mr.
Block said.
"The snag is if you don't fall into a cookie-cutter situation."


Deer Grazing


Wall Street's Rivalries Yield in Drive to Help Neediest Cases
Wall Street analysts usually regard their competitors with suspicion.
They know that if they do not haggle and finagle and strategize and painstakingly search for the slightest edge, they will fall victim to firms that do.
But once in a while, the soldiers of the financial world call a truce.
In recent months, several of these companies have united to raise money for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
On Thursday, they delivered an envelope to the fund stuffed with hundreds of checks totaling $77,507.
With the current appeal ending today, these donations will reduce a large shortfall in the Neediest Cases' 81st annual campaign.


How Clinton's Stimulus Plan Cuts Into Deficit; Fund for New Taxes
To the Editor:
For the President's economic program to be deemed credible by those of us who have the good fortune to be designated to pay most of the tax increase, it is important that the revenues raised by these new taxes be set aside in a trust fund and used solely to pay down the Government debt.


Leigh Weatherly, Anthony E. Flint
Michael M. Weatherly of Southport, Conn., and Eloise J. Weatherly of Baltimore have announced the engagement of their daughter Leigh Manning Weatherly to Anthony Evans Flint, the son of George S. Flint of New York and Mary Alice Flint of Princeton, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Weatherly, 29, is an editor in Cambridge, Mass., for Academic Press, a subsidiary of Harcourt Brace, the publishing company.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is a founder of the Forschner Group, an importer and distributor of Swiss Army products in Shelton, Conn.
The prospective bride is a stepdaughter of Ellis B. Weatherly of Southport.


Cheryl Lee Terry and Gerard Potier
TALL, blond and graceful, Cheryl Lee Terry looks more like an Ivory soap model than someone who reads palms and numerology charts.
Ms.
Terry, who is 46, writes the numerology column for Elle magazine and counsels thousands of private clients, ranging from F.B.I. agents looking for criminals, to politicians, playwrights and scientists wondering about their love lives.
She also advises couples wishing to set an auspicious wedding date.


Chili Country
From the air, Oaxaca is a tiny oasis in the bitter, parched plains of the Sierra Madre del Sur, a geological blip fringed with green.
After a two-hour flight over desert mountains, with nothing to look at but cactus and baked orange soil, it's a relief to peer through the trees and catch sight of the pink colonial buildings and Baroque church spire.
You can almost understand, given the exquisite isolation, why the inhabitants of this tiny town are such giddy survivors.
You arrive in Oaxaca (pronounced wah-HAH-kah) and immediately feel hopeful, as if this dusty refuge in southern Mexico is always on the verge of fiesta.


Correction
A report on Feb. 14 about the wedding of Chase Reynolds and Charles Ewald omitted the education of the bridegroom's mother, Dr.
Mary T. Ewald.
She holds a Ph.D. in English philology.


Indian Troops Accused of Kashmir Abuses
A report released today by two American human rights groups has accused Indian Government security forces of increasingly detaining, torturing and killing Kashmiris suspected of belonging to opposition groups and doctors who try to care for them.
The report, by Asia Watch and Physicians for Human Rights, lists incidents of violence against suspected Muslim militants living in the Kashmir Valley.


Plight of Muslims Reported to Ease In Bosnia Area Set for U.S. Airdrops
Just as United States military aircraft readied airdrops of relief supplies into eastern Bosnia, United Nations officials said today that new reports from one of the besieged Muslim towns they are intended to relieve suggested that the suffering was not as deep as it was several months ago.
United Nations officials who accompanied a relief convoy that reached Gorazde, a town 90 miles by road southeast of Sarajevo, said that there had been "a most remarkable change" in the town since the first United Nations convoy reached there six months ago.
Gorazde is one of half a dozen predominantly Muslim towns in eastern Bosnia on a priority list for the United States Airdrops.


A Heads Up on Fulsome
Senate investigations churn up testimony that reveals the language not as it is written -- with much of the blood and flavor squeezed out -- but as it is spoken by real people while squirming.
The staff of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence has given aficionados of colloquial lingo, as well as students of synonymy, a nice bunch of citations in its recent report on the involvement of our spooks in the Iraqgate affair.
The Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, William O. Studeman, went to his boss, Robert M. Gates, to -- in Studeman's words -- "give the Director a
heads up
that  [ Attorney General ]  Barr might be calling him."


Leading the U.S. Into the Balkans, on Tiptoes
BILL CLINTON, as a candidate for the Presidency, looked at the conflict in Bosnia very much through the lens of Munich, the city whose name is synonymous with the appeasement of Hitler before World War II.
The United States, Mr.
Clinton argued, simply could not stand idly by and watch history repeat itself by appeasing Serbian dictators, who were raping and stampeding their Muslim and Croat neighbors .
Since taking office Mr.
Clinton seems to be learning to look at the world through the lens of a different city: Beirut.
Unlike Munich, Beirut is synonymous with ambiguity.
It is a haunted place of feuding tribes, where right and wrong depend entirely on which page of history book you happen to have turned, and where Presidents Dwight Eisenhower and Ronald Reagan both tried to bring American values, only to find themselves conned and heartbroken by the locals.


Kohl, in Japan, Appeals for More Aid for Russia
A day after President Clinton called for increased American aid to Russia, Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany appealed today to Japan to increase its aid to Moscow and the former Soviet republics.
The request by Mr.
Kohl, who arrived here Friday for a four-day visit, together with Mr.
Clinton's appeal could increase the pressure on Japan to spend more to help Russia's shaky conversion to democracy and a market economy.
Tokyo has been reluctant to extend extensive aid to Russia until a territorial dispute is settled.


A Master Of Modern Hair
Vidal Sassoon's wife does not let him cut her hair.
"He cut my hair once and chased me around for most of the weekend with a pair of scissors, saying, 'Stop. Stop,' " Rhonda Sassoon said at lunch with her husband at the Russian Tea Room on Monday.
"He kept wanting to fix it."
It was the day that a photography show celebrating Mr.
Sassoon's 50 years in the hair cusiness opened at the Fashion Institute of Technology.
At the opening, Richard Martin, the curator of the Costume Institute of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, said, "Sassoon is in the small coterie of creative individuals who have defined what it means to be modern."


Beth T. Vesel, Frazier Moore Jr.
Beth Terace Vesel, a literary agent for the Sanford J. Greenburger Associates agency, and Frazier Moore Jr., a television critic and reporter for The Associated Press, both in New York, were married yesterday.
Jean Somerville Kotkin, an Ethical Culture Society leader, performed the ceremony at the Church Center for the United Nations in New York.
Ms.
Vesel, who is keeping her name, graduated from the University of California at Berkeley.
She is the daughter of Edward and Sonia Vesel of Floral Park, Queens.
Her father is a senior partner at Baron &amp; Vesel, a law firm in Kew Gardens, Queens.
Her mother, who is retired, taught English as a second language in Copiague, L.I., public schools.


In a Wheelchair
To the Editor: I read Betsy Wade's Practical Traveler column "Flying for Those in Wheelchairs" (Jan. 10) with much interest.
I am disabled and require a wheelchair to board and disembark aircraft.
Late in October, I accompanied my husband on a trip to Las Vegas on America West Airlines.
A wheelchair was provided on request at Kennedy Airport.
When it came time to board, I was wheeled to the gate, only to be told that there was no way for me to reach the aircraft unless I walked up two flights of steps and then down the long corridor to reach the aircraft.
They did not have an elevator to carry the wheelchair.
I was also told that if absolutely necessary, they would get someone to carry me in the chair.
I told them that this was against the 1986 Air Carrier Access Act.


Chinese Suffer From Rising Pollution As Byproduct of the Industrial Boom
Each winter the air here takes on the fragrance of sulfur, the acid fog becomes so dense that planes are often delayed, and the wilted leaves drop from the Chinese evergreen trees like portents of the early deaths that some here will suffer.
Half a century ago, this mammoth city was China's wartime capital, a vast grassy basin whose surrounding mountains could keep the enemy out.
But now the mountains lock in the soot, waste and chemicals that are by-products of China's industrial revolution.


CUNY Reorganization Unites Students and Faculty in Anger
In the two months since a panel appointed by Chancellor W. Ann Reynolds announced a sweeping plan to reorganize the City University of New York, an intense and emotional battle has spread across many of the system's 20 campuses, testing the ability of Dr.
Reynolds to sell such a far-reaching proposal.
In packed meeting rooms at many campuses, faculty members and students have gathered in recent weeks to make impassioned speeches against the reorganization and to sign documents saying that they cannot go along with it.


Dancers Stepping Out, Mexican and Modern
MANY events are scheduled today in the Westchester area, including ballet performances, piano recitals and vocal and chamber concerts.
The colorful and virtuosic Ballet Folklorico Nacional de Mexico performs at 2 P.M. at the Lehman Center in the Bronx.
For information and directions, the number to call is (212) 960-8833.


Say Goodbye to Hostetler, and Say Hello to Whom?
When free agency comes to the National Football League tomorrow, there may be only a few changes in store for the Giants -- but they may be dramatic ones.
A person familiar with the Giants' plans says Dan Reeves, the team's new head coach, has decided that his No. 1 quarterback will be 37-year-old Phil Simms rather than 31-year-old Jeff Hostetler.
That means the Giants will not try to sign Hostetler, creating the likelihood that at least a half-dozen other teams will pursue him.
Simms and Hostetler will both become free agents at midnight tonight.


Cuts Set Off a Fight for Federal Broadcasting
The collapse of Communism and the push to trim the Federal budget have set off a battle to determine who will run the United States Government's far-flung radio and television empire.
But even as traditional rivals -- he Board for International Broadcasting and the United States Information Agency -- are set to fight it out over the shrinking broadcasting budget, a new contender, the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, is poised to enter the ring.


When the Ludicrous Becomes the Inspired
IT seems that North-South have had a slight misunderstanding in bidding on the diagramed deal: South is headed for slam, but his Blackwood bid is passed by a partner who is either sleepy or inspired.
Six spades and six hearts are both sensible contracts, but are ruined by the bad breaks foreshadowed by West's four-diamond opening.
The central question is whether four no-trump can be made against best defense, and the reader should make up his mind before continuing.
In fact this is the only question, for the deal is a double-dummy problem and the bidding is imaginary.
The would-be solver is shown the 52-card layout, given the opening lead and asked to make 10 tricks in no-trump.


IN SHORT: FICTION
REFINEMENTS OF LOVE A Novel About Clover and Henry Adams.
By Sarah Booth Conroy.
Cornelia and Michael Bessie/Pantheon, $22.


Mutual Funds; Quirky Year-End Drop in Yields
TAX-FREE money fund investors may have wondered what happened last month when their fund's yield fell through the floor.
Take heart.
The drop in yields was created by seasonal factors, according to a recent study by Ralph Norton, who edits The Money Fund Report, a money fund data service in Ashland, Mass.
Institutional dealers generally push interest rates up in December to encourage investors to hold on through the end of the year, and rates then drop in January.


EXPLOSION AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Scene; An Underground Crater Filled by Twisted Debris
From above there was little indication yesterday of the enormity of the damage, only the lingering stench of smoke, the bent heap of the metal doors to the parking garage and the litter of rescue and repair on West Street, in the lobby of 1 World Trade Center and along the arcade that connects the center's buildings.
Below the surface, though, lay devastation: a gaping, jagged crater, more than 100 feet wide and partly filled with twisted concrete and steel.


Fleshing Out The Credits
To the Editor:
In "A Poet of the Proletariat Finds an Unlikely Subject"  [ Feb. 7 ] , Richard Sandomir refers to "footage of a film shot between 1980 and 1982" as "the archival gem" of Barbara Kopple's documentary on Mike Tyson.
The film to which Mr.
Sandomir referred (and failed to credit) is "Watch Me Now," which was produced and directed by Michael Marton.
Marton, a documentary film maker, spent several years observing Cus D'Amato and the young boxers he trained.
Using a one-person crew (the artist Leslie Parke), Marton's film has a fascinating immediacy.
It should not be relegated to the "archives."  MONA D. SHAPIRO Katonah, N. Y.


By Any Name, They Still Set Off Those Bells and Whistles
THE Internal Revenue Service doesn't like the term "red flag" to describe those deductions on income tax returns that set the alarm bells clanging.
"But a rose by any other name is still a rose," said Jeff Saccacio, a certified public accountant with Coopers &amp; Lybrand in Los Angeles, "and whether they're called red flags or triggers, what we're talking about are claims the I.R.S. is sure to look at closely and probably challenge."
Tax experts say that even without red flags -- woops!, make that triggers -- in any given year some taxpayers are subject to auditing under the Taxpayer Compliance Measurement Program, a random selection that analyzes all items on tax returns in order to measure and evaluate compliance.
But most audits result from a screening of tax returns by a computer program called discriminant function system, which assigns scores according to a mathematical formula.


Royal at Last; 3-2-1 Smile
KRISTEN McMENAMY was flattened out like a basset hound on a vintage green sofa in a dressing room at Webster Hall on Tuesday night.
Totally relaxed, the 28-year-old model with the plain Jane eyebrowless face was having six red ribbons painted down her back by two women dressed in black.
The audience at the Mardi Gras benefit for the American Foundation for AIDS Research would get to see those ribbons later on, when Ms.
McMenamy dropped her dress after being crowned queen of the jubilee by Leanza Cornett, the reigning Miss America.
"I need a straw," Ms.
McMenamy said in her husky I-love-you-but-you-can-go-to-hell-for-all-I-care voice when someone brought her a glass of red wine.
"I can't move. I need a little intravenous through my mouth."


Steinbrenner Is Back With His Old Pitches
What the advertising executive Jerry Della Femina saw in the lobby of the Regency Hotel in Manhattan on Tuesday morning was unexpected and peculiar: George M. Steinbrenner, momentarily all alone, with no one to talk to.
"But he had this look that said, 'I dare you not to recognize me,' " said Della Femina.
Since Tuesday, hardly anyone sensate has been immune from recognizing the familiar face, voice and style of the New York Yankees' principal owner, who tomorrow will return to active control of the team he acquired 20 years ago.


Joe Henderson Pushes the Limits
In June 1963, the tenor saxophonist Joe Henderson embarked on a series of recordings for Blue Note Records that count as some of the best jazz albums ever made.
Henderson used the projects to advance jazz harmony with gorgeously intelligent, occasionally dissonant tunes that quickly became standards.
In an era of polarization, the music preached balance, mixing experimentation with hard-driving swing.
As an improviser, Henderson used a harsh tone and blunt rhythms.
His solos were architectural, with recognizable elements -- a be-bop line, some trills, a stairlike sequence of notes -- adding up to a formidable new style.
As aware of the expressionistic avant-garde of the 1960's as he was of the be-boppers who had come before him, Henderson picked ideas from both camps, merging textural extremes with sophisticated harmony.


Besieged President of Zaire Goes Home to New Turmoil
President Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire ended a weeklong visit to France today for dental treatment and returned home to a political situation that was further complicated by army threats against an interim Parliament.


Sound Bytes; Hedging Bets in a World of Open Systems
TEN years ago, Casey Powell led a band of 17 defectors from the Intel Corporation to found Sequent Computer Systems Inc. in Beaverton, Ore.
Sequent was an early proponent of open systems (the use of processors, software and peripherals that are not dependent on one company's technology) and of multiprocessing (the linkage of many small microprocessors to handle complex tasks at higher speed and lower costs than large computers).
As such, Sequent has always been a leading proponent of Unix, the operating system developed by A.T.&amp; T. that is synonymous with open systems.
Recently, however, Sequent announced that it would support Windows NT, the new operating system from the Microsoft Corporation, and that it would produce special hardware for NT.
Although Mr.
Powell would rather talk about fast cars, fine wine or his children, he consented to discuss this step.


Sports of The Times; Giants Will Keep Simms, Let Hoss Go
PHIL SIMMS apparently hasn't been told yet by Dan Reeves that he, not Jeff Hostetler, is the quarterback the new Giants coach wants to keep.
Simms, like hundreds of other National Football League players, will become an unrestricted free agent at midnight tonight.
And at a charity dinner honoring Lawrence Taylor here Friday night, Simms was asked about the reports that the Washington Redskins, of all teams, were interested in signing him.


Nowadays, Nets Can't Shoot And Can't Beat Anybody
Three.
It's supposed to be a charm.
But just try telling that to the New Jersey Nets, who are in the midst of a three-game slide since the All-Star Game break and are staring at another possible loss when they face the Knicks (36-17) on Sunday afternoon at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
There is nothing charming about the way the Nets (30-24), in second place to the Knicks in the Atlantic Division, dropped their last three games.


EXPLOSION AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Mayor; Dinkins Arrives From Japan and Views Damage
Mayor David N. Dinkins, who was nearing the end of his nine-day trade mission in Japan at the time of the World Trade Center explosion, arrived in New York City yesterday afternoon and immediately met with First Deputy Mayor Norman Steisel and Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly at Kennedy International Airport.
Flown to the disaster site by helicopter at 5 P.M., he put on a blue hard hat and, guided by Stanley Brezenoff, executive director of the Port Authority, toured the site for 10 minutes.


Sharon Thibeault, David Bagatelle
Sharon Marie Thibeault, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin Thibeault of Enfield, Conn., was married last evening to David Samuel Bagatelle, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Warren D. Bagatelle of Wayne, N.J.
Rabbi Milton Weinberg performed the ceremony at the Yale Club in New York.
Mrs.
Bagatelle, 31, is an account representative for Konica Business Machines U.S.A., the office equipment manufacturer and distributor, in Hawthorne, N.J.
She graduated from Western New England College.


Cheer Up, It Could Be Worse
THE tax season may be bleaker than usual this year, what with taxpayers getting smaller refunds or writing bigger checks as a result of George Bush's decision to withhold less tax -- but not reduce the liability -- during the 1992 campaign.
And with the new President, Bill Clinton, likely to raise taxes not once, but twice, in coming months.
But there is at least a small bit of comfort.
People in most other countries pay more, in some cases lots more.
Like two-thirds of a $100,000 income in Egypt and two to five times the American price for a gallon of gasoline or a pack of cigarettes in most of Western Europe and in Canada.


A la Carte; Uncorking Facts About Island Wines
THE red wines of Bordeaux and Burgundy, like most of the world's other great wines, are largely blends of two or more varieties of grapes.
Most American wines, including those made on Long Island, are varietals named for a single type of grape like chardonnay, merlot or cabernet sauvignon.
A few years ago, some venturesome California vineyards started to produce blended wines, and Long Island has done the same more recently.


State's Case Links Poverty to Students' Performance
THE Sheff v.
O'Neill desegregation trial is nearly over, and soon a single Superior Court judge, Harry Hammer, will take on the task of sorting out Connecticut's responsibility for how poorly children do in the public schools of Hartford.
In its defense this month, the state argued that the last-place ranking of Hartford students on mastery tests for reading, writing and mathematics did not mean that they had inferior schools, or that they were denied the equal educational opportunity guaranteed by Connecticut's Constitution.


On Turning 13: Reports from the Front Lines
Yesterday, Chelsea Clinton became a teen-ager.
The Week in Review asked an eighth-grade social studies class at the New York City Lab School for Gifted Education, a public junior high that selects students with diverse backgrounds from all over the city: "What did it feel like when you turned 13?" Here are excerpts from their written responses.
As you go to school, things get harder.
You sort of realize that you're getting older.
Adults treat you like an adult and don't give you the breaks you got when you're a child.


The Terrors of Being Abused by a Cult
CHILD abuse never fails to surprise and shock.
Yet even a sophisticated awareness of that dark side of society may not be preparation enough for the world premiere of "Satan in Wonderland" at the Arena Players Theater in East Farmingdale.
The new play by Ron Mark would be unbelievable if it were not based on a documented account of the experiences of a young girl in the grasp of a satanic cult.
The story is about a vivacious young woman who is dancing with her husband at a costume ball when a couple dressed as the king and queen of hearts enters the room.
The woman takes one look at the couple and has an immediate and serious breakdown.


Taxes and Subsidies For and From Olympus
Kenji Fujii, Olympus president, in his letter "Where Olympus Stands on Its Move"  [ Jan. 10 ]  is decidedly self-serving.
And the financial numbers provided by Steve Villano, the State Economic Development spin doctor in his letter "What Olympus Means in Jobs and Revenues, are equally unpersuasive.
Olympus's annual payroll, whether it remained in Nassau County or comes to Suffolk County, isn't going to impact the region any differently.
For a company to move a few miles east on the L.I.E. and then have its promoters suggest that the entire region of L.I. will benefit is absurd.


Making a Difference; An Executive Laugh-In
WEARING pajamas in public.
Gluing toilet paper rolls to his feet.
Standing backward in elevators.
It's all in a day's work for C. W. Metcalf, 47, a humorist whose 10-year-old C. W. Metcalf &amp; Company offers humor training programs to clients like A.T.&amp; T., I.B.M., Xerox and General Motors.
He teaches executives how to use humor to create a happier work environment that ultimately reduces stress and absenteeism, and increases creativity and productivity.


2 Ways to Install Sinks: Freestanding or Vanity
THERE are two types of bathroom sinks.
One is freestanding, which is mounted directly on a wall and sometimes supported by legs or a pedestal, and the other is the vanity sink, which is attached to or part of a vanity top.
Installing a vanity sink is fairly easy, but installing a freestanding one can be more challenging.
To remove a sink before installing a new one, first shut off the water supplying the faucets or the main valve near the water meter.
Next, open the faucets to drain remaining water.
Then use a basin wrench to loosen the nuts beneath the sink that fasten the supply tubes to the faucet's base.
To use a basin wrench, fit it around the nut so that turning the handle counterclockwise tightens the jaw.
Otherwise, the tool will slip.


Audrey L. Ruggiero, John A. Kallassy
Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony W. Ruggiero of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Audrey Loren Ruggiero to John Anthony Kallassy, a son of Nita Kallassy of Whitesboro, N.Y., and the late Peter Kallassy.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Ruggiero graduated from Western Maryland College.
Her father is a vice president and the chief financial officer of the Reader's Digest Association in Pleasantville, N.Y.


Data Update
MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE PRICES
Dec. 92
Nov. 92
Dec. 91
Nation
$ 103,900
103,000
$ 100,300
Northeast
135,600
137,600
137,300
Midwest
81,500
82,400
78,200
South
92,600
92,000
89,400
West
142,600
138,700
143,200
*4*Source: National Association of Realtors
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
7.83
7.99
9.02
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.11
5.14
6.00
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.71
7.84
8.86
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.97
5.03
5.88
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.74
7.84
8.94
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.66
4.72
5.99
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
7.93
8.09
9.15
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.65
5.61
6.50
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.36
3.45
4.37
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.53
7.53
8.25
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Mountain Manners
For two years we poked through other people's paradises until finally, on a mountaintop lake far back in the woods in upstate New York, we found our own.
The old farmhouse wasn't much to look at.
No one had lived there regularly for 20 years, and on our first day I nearly stepped on a three-foot-long Eastern timber rattlesnake that had made the house its home.
But working weekends and vacations, we imposed some order.
I cut waist-high weeds that hid old field-stone walls.
My wife, Miriam, and I replaced the caved-in cover of the septic tank and hauled out moldy furniture that made the place smell like a camp footlocker.


Valenzuela's Return
He pitched his team to a World Series victory on the way to a rookie Cy Young Award and a sparkling 11-year career, and now, after a season as a Mexican League standout, he wants a chance to break into the majors once again.
Is that too much to ask?
Not for FERNANDO VALENZUELA .
The former Dodger star, who ended his first major league career with the Angels in 1991, signed a minor league contract with the Orioles and a letter of agreement for a big league contract if he makes the team.


You Can't Take the Hackensack Out of This Guy
Not only does pro golfer Jim McGovern share his hotel room with his caddie, he also lets the caddie heap T-shirts, socks and putters all over the carpet.
McGovern, who lives in River Edge, N.J., is no elitist.
One day, he will play nine holes with Mets owner Nelson Doubleday; the next, he'll play nine with the caddie master at Hackensack Golf Club.


Small College Builds a Team Dynasty
GOOD as she is, Allegra Schell is used to being overshadowed by male basketball players.
Though she was the star of a Providence high school team that won back-to-back state championships, Ms.
Schell and the other members of her Central High School team played second fiddle to Abdul Abdullah, currently a star at Providence College, and the rest of the school's boys team, even though she gave Mr.
Abdullah a run for his money in their occasional one-on-one games.
Nowadays, Ms.
Schell, 19, continues to excel in virtual anonymity as the star of the women's basketball team at Mitchell College in New London.
With two regular season games remaining at mid-week, the team had won 162 consecutive regular-season games, a national junior college record.


Neil Simon Faces Humor's Hurtful Side
ALL through an astounding career that has flourished for more than 30 years, Neil Simon has teetered on the brink of an artistic breakthrough.
He has adapted Chekov ("The Good Doctor"), retold the tale of Job ("God's Favorite") and dabbled in ancient Russian folklore and mysticism ("Fools").
In its filmed version, his chronicle of an alcoholic actress ("The Gingerbread Lady") had a title change that intimated the Simon credo of comedy: "Only When I Laugh." None of these departures from the playwright's customarily glib comedies were successful.
It is on home ground that Mr.
Simon has come closer to exploring humor's hurtful side -- and having a hit, too.
Witness his autobiographical forays into psychodrama ("Chapter Two," "Jake's Women") and pathos (the Brighton Beach trilogy).


Sports of the Times; Mets' Young Shrugs At Streak
YOU could say Anthony Young was the epitome of the entire last season.
The Mets lost 90 games and he lost his last 14 decisions, straight out of the old Mets tradition of Roger Craig and Bob Miller and Craig Anderson with their double-digit losing streaks.
But if all the Mets returning to the scene of the disaster had an attitude like Young's, they would stand a chance for respectability.
In the midst of all the losing, the 27-year-old right-hander impressed management with his poise and his stuff and his courage as a makeshift relief pitcher.


How to Age Gracefully: An 89-Year-Old's Primer
THERE'S a good reason Sarah Foote of Middlebury, a diminutive 89-year-old great-grandmother, was one of just five Connecticut residents to receive a Successful Aging Award from Community Care Inc. last year.
"My calendar fills up pretty fast," she said, relaxing on a free day in the comfortable white farmhouse she and her husband, the late LeRoy Foote, built back in 1936.


Courtney Bauer, C. B. Burnham
Mrs.
Henry P. Warren of Delray Beach, Fla., has announced the engagement of her daughter Courtney Anne Bauer to Christopher Bancroft Burnham, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander Burnham of Stamford, Conn.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Bauer, a graduate of the University of Vermont, is the Northeast advertising sales manager for Modern Healthcare magazine in New York.
Her father, the late Dale R. Bauer, was an executive vice president of the Macmillan publishing company and the chairman of its Rate and Data Service subsidiary.


How Clinton's Stimulus Plan Cuts Into Deficit; Women Bear the Brunt
To the Editor:
Proposals to cut the deficit have shown an unexamined regional and gender bias.
Proposals to tax Social Security and raise Medicare premiums for "wealthy" recipients define wealthy as an income level of $25,000 for individuals and $32,000 for married couples filing jointly.


For Each Transgression the I.R.S. Has a Penalty
ANYONE can bounce a check -- on the phone bill, the credit card -- but then there are those who try stiffing the I.R.S.
The tax collectors, at no loss for a response, come right back with a 2 percent penalty, $15 minimum, plus any late payment charges that apply.
Still, the I.R.S. received more than 247,000 bad checks last year.
For every transgression, the Internal Revenue Service has a penalty.
From the tardy, the negligent and the downright fraudulent, the I.R.S. collected 18.2 million penalties last year, worth nearly $3.4 billion.
The number of penalties has risen sharply since the mid-1980's, a phenomenon the I.R.S. attributes to changes in the laws and more rigorous enforcement.


For AIDS, In Disguise
Amfar Mardi Gras gala, Webster Hall, Feb. 23.


Baja Rains Bring Discounts
After the rainiest January since 1850, many hotels in Tijuana and other towns in Mexico's Baja California are reporting a 15 percent occupancy rate, compared with the usual 60 percent at this time of year, according to a spokeswoman for the region.
In an attempt to lure visitors, some hotels are offering discounts of 20 to 50 percent through much of March.
For example, at Tijuana's Fiesta Americana, $120 double rooms are now $79.
In Rosarito, the Rosarito Beach Hotel, which dates from the 1920's, has oceanfront doubles, with two dinners included, for $49 on weeknights.
That package usually costs $79.


Eighteen Is a Crowd, And Two Are Winners
Two new candidates joined the crowd on the road to the Kentucky Derby today when Duc d'Sligovil won the first section of the Fountain of Youth Stakes at Gulfstream Park and the undefeated Storm Tower captured the second.
But both did it without command.
Looking at it another way, several previously announced candidates took some tumbles.
In the first section of the race, the favorite Silver of Silver ran third for the second time in two months and the co-favorite Woods of Windsor ran second for the second time in two weeks.
And in the next section, Great Navigator ran second just three weeks after running fourth in the Hutcheson Stakes, and It'sali'lknownfact ran sixth and now has lost four races in a row.


Tracy Nichols, Benjamin Busch
Sandra J. Hoefflinger of Mentor, Ohio, has announced the engagement of her daughter, Tracy Susan Nichols, to Lieut.
Benjamin Burroughs Busch, a son of Frederick and Judith Busch of Sherburne, N.Y.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Nichols, 23, and her fiance, 24, graduated from Vassar College, she cum laude.
She is a researcher in Washington with the Kennan Institute at the Woodrow Wilson Center for the Humanities, a foundation.


Public &amp; Private; Let's Anita Hill This
The name Anita Hill now conveys so much more than the woman herself that it can be used as a verb, as in "Let's Anita Hill this thing." That's what many women are saying about the issue of child care, that now that current events have brought it to the forefront of national consciousness, as Anita Hill's testimony did for sexual harassment, it is time to act.
A march for child care as big as those for abortion rights, one woman said, and it sounded good.
At a professional meeting last week, one woman after another talked about the sick sitter, the late sitter, the illegal sitter paid off the books, while the others nodded with sisterly solidarity.
What you could clearly see were the beginnings of a middle-class all-female movement, and that reminded me of something, and that reminder made me uneasy.


EXPLOSION AT THE TWIN TOWERS: Voices; Reporting on Progress, Calling for Calm
Exerpts from a news conference yesterday at One Police Plaza.
RAYMOND W. KELLY - Police Commissioner


The Latest Pitch: 1040PC and the Promise of a Speedy Refund
AS taxpayers sit down to prepare about 115 million returns in the next few weeks, the Internal Revenue Service hopes that many will do the job not with a sharpened pencil but with a computer.
The tax agency has its own convenience in mind, but many taxpayers will find that computer-assisted filing helps them, too.
This year the basic tax instructions mailed to most taxpayers with Form 1040 include a special pitch for a new form, 1040PC, which is done on a personal computer.
The I.R.S. promises that people who use the computer form and are due a refund will get their money faster.


Don't Cut Jobs, Cut Working Hours . . .
To the Editor:
"Stanching the Loss of Good Jobs" (Jan. 31) notes problems with the two methods by which our nation has traditionally generated more jobs: creation of new products and economic growth.
Not mentioned is a third method that has operated historically: a reduction in working hours.


The Rhyme And Reason Of Rhythms
It has become relatively easy in New York to hear music that Westerners could once have heard only after dangerous and difficult journeys to isolated cultures in distant lands.
We seem to have entered a world supermarket.
Compact disks and tapes and concerts have conspired to create an abundance of choices and a confluence of styles.
Just as African drumming and Balinese gamelan music have influenced Western art and popular music, Western sounds have entered other cultures.
In the 1850's, the King of Madagascar sent musicians to train in Europe so they could return to play Mozart and Rossini.
Now Western pop has also become part of the African patrimony.
But the disciplined study of the music of different cultures has been an exclusively Western preoccupation.
Rousseau's 1768 Dictionary of Music included examples of Chinese and North American Indian music.
Theoretical studies of scales tried to take the systems of other cultures into account. (Scales, said one theorist in 1885, are "very diverse, very artificial and very capricious.") And it was in the West that the effort to record and analyze the wide variety of musical systems became a profession, one that was given a name only in 1950: ethnomusicology.


Corrections
The Practical Traveler column on Feb. 7 about waivers and insurance covering cancellation of a cruise misidentified a cruise line whose cancellation insurance is administered by Berkelycare.
It is Dolphin Hellas, not Dolphin.


Julianne Morledge, Robert Bertagna
Julianne Morledge, the daughter of Rosann Morledge of New York and the late Roy Morledge, was married yesterday to Robert Bertagna, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Bertagna of Meriden, Conn.
The Rev.
Eugene Connelly performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York.
Mrs.
Bertagna, 26, is an associate in the securities trust department of Morgan Guaranty Trust Company in New York.
She graduated from Colgate University.
Her father was a lawyer in Billings, Mont.
Her mother is an elementary science teacher at Public School 41 in Manhattan.


Dread Days in American History
"WHO do you think you are?" Alexander asked Young Mickey in 1968, when they were both 13 years old.
A young black in the South Bronx who wrote poetry, took piano lessons, played baseball, practiced karate and aspired to be somebody -- that's who Mickey thought he was.
Now Mickey -- Big Mickey -- lives in an exclusive Manhattan doorman building where, he recalls, his "mother toiled as a domestic." That's just the place to be somebody.
But Big Mickey no longer thinks so.
His son has been beaten up by a gang in the subway.
"I stand here waiting to hear the outcome of his operation," Big Mickey tells the audience.


Explosion Rocks World Trade Center, Killing at Least 5 and Injuring Hundreds


Weeds: Nutrient, Vegetable or Nuisance?
THE next time anyone considers weeds as mere nuisances, they just may want to think again.
No one knows what value some of these ordinary plants may have, and there could be a beneficial function to society in their future.
As a case in point, look at what is happening to purslane, a rather common garden weed.
It sprawls, has fat rounded leaves and is a nuisance, even though a somewhat attractive one.


200-Year-Old Tavern Offers Improved Menu
SILVERMINE TAVERN in Norwalk is so much an institution -- it's been around for more than 200 years -- that it's easy to overlook, especially given the number of new restaurants that have opened in recent years.
Though it has long been easy to dismiss the tavern for fine dining, its marvelous atmosphere -- the uneven brick floors, walls hung with 18th- and 19th-century folk art and native paintings, fireplaces, various cozy dining areas -- make it a great place to bring visitors for cocktails.
Warm weather has always been especially inviting, when guests could sit on the deck and watch the swans and waterfall below.
And now the food at Silvermine Tavern has improved.
Recent visits have confirmed that rumored changes in the kitchen have all been to the good.


LONE STAR
I gloried in your coverage of our Governor. We are all very proud of Ann Richards.
When I heard her speak to a group of Houston women as she was campaigning, I remarked to a tall, handsome young man who stood next to me: "You could diagram her every sentence; her rhetoric is flawless."


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York Senate The Senate did not vote last week.
House
1.
Unemployment Benefits: Vote on passage of a $5.7 billion package extending jobless benefits to the long-term employed.
The current program expires March 6.
Approved 254 to 161, Feb. 24.
2.
Hatch Act: Procedural vote on passage of bill that would ease the law restricting political activity by Federal workers.
Failed, with 275 in favor and 142 opposed (short of the two-thirds required for passage under the special procedure), Feb. 24.
Connecticut . . . 1. - 2. 1.
Kennelly (D) . . .
Y - Y  2.
Gejdenson (D) . . .
Y - Y  3.
DeLauro (D) . . .
Y - Y  4.
Shays (R) . . .
N - Y  5.
Franks (R) . . .
N - N  6.
Johnson (R) . . .
N - N New Jersey  1.
Andrews (D) . . .
Y - Y  2.
Hughes (D) . . .
Y - Y  3.
Saxton (R) . . .
N - Y  4.
Smith (R) . . .
Y - N  5.
Roukema (R) . . .
Y - N  6.
Pallone (D) . . .
Y - Y  7.
Franks (R) . . .
N - N  8.
Klein (D) . . .
Y - Y  9.
Torricelli (D) . . .
Y - Y  10.
Payne (D) . . .
Y - Y  11.
Gallo (R) . . .
Y - Y  12.
Zimmer (R) . . .
N - N  13.
Menendez (D) . . .
Y - Y New York  1.
Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
Y - Y  2.
Lazio (R) . . .
N - N  3.
King (R) . . .
N - N  4.
Levy (R) . . .
N - N  5.
Ackerman (D) . . .
A - A  6.
Flake (D) . . .
Y - Y  7.
Manton (D) . . .
Y - Y  8.
Nadler (D) . . .
Y - Y  9.
Schumer (D) . . .
Y - Y  10.
Towns (D) . . .
Y - Y  11.
Owens (D) . . .
Y - Y  12.
Velazquez (D) . . .
Y - Y  13.
Molinari (R) . . .
Y - N  14.
Maloney (D) . . .
Y - Y  15.
Rangel (D) . . .
Y - Y  16.
Serrano (D) . . .
Y - Y  17.
Engel (D) . . .
Y - Y  18.
Lowey (D) . . .
Y - Y  19.
Fish (R) . . .
Y - Y  20.
Gilman (R) . . .
Y - Y  21.
McNulty (D) . . .
Y - Y  22.
Solomon (R) . . .
A - A  23.
Boehlert (R) . . .
Y - Y  24.
McHugh (R) . . .
Y - Y  25.
Walsh (R) . . .
Y - Y  26.
Hinchey (D) . . .
Y - Y  27.
Paxon (R) . . .
N - N  28.
Slaughter (D) . . .
Y - Y  29.
LaFalce (D) . . .
Y - Y  30.
Quinn (R) . . .
Y - N  31.
Houghton (R) . . .
N - Y  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Campaign Reform: An Idea Whose Time Drags On
THOUGH President Clinton has vowed to change how candidates get elected by pushing through a campaign finance reform package, the passage of a serious bill anytime soon is far from assured.
Congress has its reasons for stonewalling.
And so, after all, may the President.
Goaded by Ross Perot, who helped make campaign reform a front-burner issue last fall, Mr.
Clinton told Congress in his address on Feb. 17 that "real political reform" was a priority.
He assigned Michael Waldman, the former director of Public Citizen's Congress Watch, a group that has called for far-reaching changes in how campaigns are paid for, to draft a legislative package.


An Eastern Lesson
To the Editor:
As a young practicing architect facing scarce opportunities to serve society today, I agree with Herbert Muschamp that the problem with architecture in recent years has not been merely an overemphasis on art but a disconnection between esthetics and sociology  [ "Thinking About Tomorrow and How to Build It," Jan. 10 ] .


A Man For This Season
It wasn't the most original collection.
No dramatic new silhouettes were introduced.
But what Ralph Lauren's spring collection did was something better: it pulled together -- in just the right way -- several enticing but difficult trends.
This spring, there are some pretty incendiary fashion ideas around, including that of rather shocking transparency.
This was first floated in Paris -- beautifully by Karl Lagerfeld for Chloe -- then wittily by a few others like Jean-Paul Gaultier.
The New York fashion market took up the show-it-all notion with surprising vigor.
During the spring market week last November, the scene often seemed more like a peep show than a parade of wearable fashion.
There was also the "grunge" aspect to spring sportswear -- a deliberate mishmash of disparate separates purposely meant to appear sloppy.
One was left with the thought that most fashion-conscious women would either be stuck revealing all or looking like rebellious teen-agers.


Taking Cues From the Japanese; In a Polite Country, a Polite Dinkins Proves He's Not Bush
When George Bush visited Japan last year, he arrived in very American style: a list of trade demands in hand, a parade of angry carmakers in tow.
The trip was widely judged a disaster, largely because Mr.
Bush needed tangible results for an upcoming Presidential election while the Japanese were looking for a reaffirmation of their alliance.
Forewarned by that example, Mayor David N. Dinkins moved through Japan over the last week doing business the Japanese way.
With an economic downturn jolting Japan, there was no way he would emerge with big new Japanese investments in New York.
So instead, he lowered his sights and settled for what the Japanese call "nemawashi," or consensus building, this time a consensus about the role of Japanese business in New York.
The results were hard to define -- they always are in Tokyo -- but Mr.
Dinkins and his parade of business executives left Japan today convinced that the Japanese businesses that already have a big stake in the city are there to stay.


Wall Street; Cisco's Stunning Rise Puts It in the Big Leagues
FOR those who bought in at the February 1990 offering price of $4.50, adjusted for splits, Cisco Systems, now at $87.75, has been one of Wall Street's greatest recent successes.
For the many who sold it short, hoping to profit from a decline, it has been a graveyard.
Cisco, based in Menlo Park, Calif., makes software and switches for linking vast networks of smaller computers to handle tasks formerly performed by much larger ones, especially by I.B.M.'s machines.
If Intel and Microsoft are eating much of I.B.M.'s lunch, then Cisco at least wants to swipe the dessert.
Annual sales and profits have been doubling for the last few years.


Taxes and Subsidies For and From Olympus
Regarding the Olympus project dispute in Melville, it is public officials like Huntington Town Supervisor Stephen Ferraro and Town Board members Stephen Hackeling and Kenneth Christensen, Republicans, and William Rebolini and Ann Hurley, Democrats, and Suffolk Legislators Jim Gaughran and Maxine Postal, Democrats, and Allen Binder, Republican, who should be commended for their public spirit, farsightedness and concern for the welfare of their community.
They have taken a courageous stand against the special-interest groups who are well financed to override the town zoning code and master plan.


A Dancer Dances, Against All Odds
DAWN STORRS could hardly have been happier.
Classes at Torrington High School had just been dismissed for the Christmas break, and she and five friends -- two other cheerleaders and three male athletes -- got in a car and headed for Waterbury to do some last-minute shopping.
It was early afternoon on Dec. 23, 1988, and a mixture of snow and sleet was falling as their car traveled along Route 8.
Suddenly, in Thomaston, the laughter inside the car turned to screams and panic as the car skidded on the icy highway, careened wildly and slammed into a guardrail.
As it did, Dawn, and her best friend, Shawn Collins, and Chris Samele, a burgeoning basketball star, were catapulted through the rear window that had blown out on impact.


EXPLOSION AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Overview; INQUIRY INTO EXPLOSION WIDENS; TRADE CENTER SHUT FOR REPAIRS
The mystery of the explosion that killed five people and injured more than 1,000 others at the World Trade Center in lower Manhattan deepened yesterday as the impact of the apparent bombing on the city's economy and its shaken psyche widened dramatically.
In a move that was expected to deal a heavy blow to Wall Street, officials ordered the sprawling trade center -- with its hundreds of firms, its 55,000 workers and its tens of thousands of visitors daily -- closed indefinitely for repairs and extensive security and safety changes.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
SQUASHED
By Joan Bauer. 194 pp. New York: Delacorte Press.


The Struggle for Freedom and a Proper Burial
PATRICK M'ROBERT, an Englishman touring New York City in 1774, wrote "It rather hurts an Europian eye to see so many negro slaves upon the streets tho' they are said to deminish yearly here." M'Robert estimated the city population between 26,000 and 30,000 and thought that non-whites were about a fifth of it.
Most slaves were black, some were captured Indians.
One hundred and fifty years after the Dutch brought the first slaves to New Amsterdam, abolitionists in New York City were arguing that people striving for their freedom from Great Britain should not be holding other people as slaves.
Slave uprisings in the city in 1712 and 1741 brought curfews, prohibitions on meeting and burial restrictions.
As war with Britain began in 1775, racial tensions were still high.
The British, making this tension a tactic, promised freedom to any slave who served in their army.
After slaves began to flee to the Redcoats in great numbers, the Revoluntionaries adopted the same policy.
On March 20, 1781, the New York General Assembly authorized the enlistment of slaves: "And such slave, so entered as aforesaid, who shall serve for a term of three years, or until regularly discharged, shall immediately after such service or discharge be, and is hereby declared to be a free man of this state."
One historian of that time, Willian Smith, wrote that blacks in Washington's army "mix, march, mess &amp; sleep with the White." Smith also took note that the black soldiers complained of a "want to Pay" and many were "in Rags without Shoes &amp; Stockings." By the war's end in 1783, 5,000 black men had served as Revolutionary soldiers.
By the time the new Federal Government conducted its first census in 1790, New York City's population was about 10 percent non-white - 7 percent slaves and 3 percent free.
One of the slaves who rose above the indignities of the time was Peter Williams.
His Loyalist owner fled to Britain after the war.
The Trustees of John Street Methodist Church bought Williams for $40 in 1783.
He worked as the sexton, and purchased this freedom in 1785, then became a prosperous tobacconist and undertaker.
At that time, blacks were not not allowed to be full members of New York's churches.
They were relegated to balconies or back pews, and had to bury their dead out of town instead of in sanctified church yards.
Frustrated, Williams and other black members of the John Street Church founded the city's first black congregation, Mother African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, in 1796. (The congregation is now located at 137th Street near Lenox Avenue.) Because Williams had donated the land and much of the money to build the first church, he laid the cornerstone on July 30, 1800, at Church and Leonard Streets, a year after New York State passed a law to abolish slavery.
In 1794, black New Yorkers petitioned the City Common Council for a better cemetery and proposed a plot on Chrystie Street.
After the city determined that it was "in a proper Place," the Council chipped in $:100 of the $:450 price tag, and set up a "trust for a burying Ground for the black People."
As this new burying ground and other black churches with cemeteries began to be built, those bodies at the Negros Burial Ground who could still be identified were disinterred and moved to safer ground.
But an unknown number of graves remained.
By the end of the 1700's, the city's growing population was forcing expansion uptown.
The Collect Pond was filled in, the burial ground was built over and the city's street grid continued northward directly over the dead.


Software as Accountant
NO software can replace a top-flight accountant, but today's simple-to-use and remarkably sophisticated tax programs can outperform an assembly-line-style preparer who is churning out as many returns as possible during the tax season.
Software also can help the taxpayer who relies on a professional to get ready for the visit, thereby keeping down the pro's hourly fee and making their time together more productive.


Blandy Achenbach-Uzielli, Yvon Coty
Anne Blandy Achenbach-Uzielli, a daughter of Barbara B. Uzielli of New York and L. John Achenbach 2d of Chicago and Wilmington, Del., was married Tuesday to Yvon Coty, the son of Antoinette Coty of Paris and the late Roland Coty.
The Rev.
Charles Amstein performed the ceremony at the Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Coty, 29, is known as Blandy.
She is also an adoptive daughter of Philip A. Uzielli of Florence and a stepdaughter of Melinda Achenbach.
The bride's mother is an interior designer in New York.
Mr.
Achenbach is a partner in Lotsoff Capital Management, an investment management company in Chicago.
Mr.
Uzielli is a private investor in Florence.


Fitness Gets a New Face
The wave of exercise videos by models has spawned a television fitness show with a model as host.
"Body by VH-1," with Rachel Hunter, begins tomorrow and will be shown at 7 A.M. and noon on weekdays on VH-1, the music-video channel.
"I'm not an expert," the 23-year-old New Zealander said by telephone from Hamburg, Germany, which she was visiting with her husband, the rock singer Rod Stewart.
"There's a professional trainer who makes the exercises. I'm the normal Joe Blow out there who has to get up and do them."


Ms. Taliaferro, C. P. Hiland
Mr. and Mrs.
Leland L. Taliaferro of New York have announced the engagement of heir daughter, Cassandra Lee Taliaferro, to Christopher Page Hiland, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce Hiland of Cornwall, Vt.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Taliaferro, 24, graduated magna cum laude from Williams College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a consultant with Goodale Associates, fund-raising consultants to nonprofit organizations, in New York.
Her father, now retired, was an architect in New York.
Her mother, Frances Taliaferro, teaches English at the Brearley School in New York.


In a Daylight-Saving Fight, an Hour of Defeat
Every April, clocks in 47 states spring forward to daylight saving time.
But in Indiana, clocks spring in all directions.
The capital, Indianapolis, spends five months a year on Eastern time and seven months on central time -- and that's the
official
practice.
Life gets even more confusing in the Ohio River town of Vevay, where some downtown businesses remain on Eastern standard time year-round and others turn their clocks ahead one hour every spring to synchronize with nearby Cincinnati, a daylight saver.


Black Tie And Tattoos
Uptown mingles with downtown at a party at the David Barton Gym, Feb. 20.


Corrections
The Talking column on page 5 of the Real Estate section today, about appraisals, refers imprecisely to the tax deductibility of interest payments on a margin loan used to finance the purchase of a home.
They are unlikely to qualify as a deduction unless the home is an investment property.


Corrections
CORRECTION: Because of an editing error, a letter on Feb. 14 misidentified a character on the television show "Gilligan's Island." He was Thurston Howell 3d.
The letter writer had identified him correctly.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Glen Head  $351,200
40 Roosevelt Street  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old split level; family room, office, 2 fireplaces, oak floors, cul-de-sac; taxes $5,500.
Kings Park  $170,500
85 Broadview Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 31-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, patio, hardwood floors, 1-car garage; taxes $5,300.
Levittown  $139,000
1 Celestial Lane  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 43-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, new windows, 1-car detached garage; taxes $3,500.
Nesconset  $286,000
10 Rolling Hills Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new Victorian; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, patio, 2-car garage; estimated taxes, $7,000.
Sea Cliff  $215,000
105 Altamont Street  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 70-year-old colonial; new eat-in kitchen, dining room, terrace; taxes $900.
Smithtown  $220,000
3 Ward Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 22-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den with fireplace, 0.5 acre; taxes $6,700.
OTHER AREAS Edison, N.J.  $140,000
156 Fourth Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old ranch; fireplace in living room and recreation room, 1-car garage; taxes $3,032.
Orange, Conn.  $179,000
773 Dennis Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old ranch; formal dining room, new furnace, in-ground pool, 1 acre; taxes $3,703.
Bedford, N.Y.  $243,000
75 Lakeside Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 49-year-old cape; den, fireplace, office, 1-car garage; taxes $5,175.


Making a Difference; Black Culture, Computerized
KAMAL AL-MANSOUR likes to take notes -- lots and lots of notes.
During trips to African and Caribbean countries a few years ago he compiled more than 50 notebooks of information about the cultures and peoples he saw.
Combining those notes and his background in computer software, he formed AfroLink, a Los Angeles company that sells software programs with information on black and African history, culture, health, politics and education.
Some of the programs recreate African and black cultural images for use by graphic artists, newsletters and magazines.


Home Offices: Tough, Not Impossible
STEPHEN SAVITT, a New York City lawyer, opened two offices last year: one in Manhattan, where he spends about 80 percent of his working hours, and one in his home in Forest Hills, Queens, where he spends the other 20 percent.
At the time, he intended to take a Federal income tax deduction on his 1992 tax return for his office in the home.
"But because of the Supreme Court decision, it seems to be foolhardy to take the home office deduction," he said.
"For direct expenses, like telephone and lighting, I think there is much less of a problem."


FEB. 21-27: The Middle East; Christopher May Do More Than Just Listen Well
Warren Christopher set out on his first trip to the Middle East as Secretary of State with a modest agenda: listen well, get acquainted and try to bring Israel and the Arabs back to the negotiating table.
At the end of his trip last week, it appeared that he may have been successful on all counts.
Chances are now considered good that all the Arab parties will return to talks in April, accepting a public invitation issued by Mr.
Christopher and his Russian counterpart, Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev, last week in Geneva.


Lawmaker's Trial Is Entwined With Racial Issues
Representative Harold E. Ford, Tennessee's first and only black member of Congress, goes on trial on Federal bank fraud charges on Monday, two years after a first jury deadlocked along racial lines.
The case centers on what seems to be a straightforward charge that he accepted up to $1.2 million in personal payments under the guise of business loans.
But the case has become entwined with the rise of black political power here in the last two decades and the ascendancy of Mr.
Ford and his family.


A School's Role in Getting Students to the Stage
THEIR names pop up regularly now in theater reviews, news of the film world and celebrity profiles.
Graduates of the State University of New York's division of theater arts and film at Purchase have reached a kind of critical mass and their success is drawing attention to the program that helped start their careers.
In addition to a full-fledged movie star -- Wesley Snipes, known for his roles in such films as "Jungle Fever" and "White Men Can't Jump" -- the 20-year-old school has produced graduates like the writer and director Hal Hartley, whose most recent film, "Simple Men," has won critical praise; Nick Gomez, who wrote and directed the film "Laws of Gravity," and the actors William Sage and Robert Burke, who starred in "Simple Men."


Airline and Hotel Discounts for Seniors
IN a survey of the current crop of discounts for older travelers, probably the most entertaining is the weekend hotel discount offered by SAS International Hotels.
A guest 65 or older can claim a discount equal to his or her age; at 73, the guest gets 73 percent off the regular price, and so forth.
Yes, people 100 years old stay free.


County Weighs 3 Plans to Handle Sludge
AS the environmental clock ticks toward a court-imposed July deadline, Westchester County officials last week moved closer to a decision on a long-term sludge-management plan for the Yonkers Joint Treatment Plant in the face of overwhelming local opposition to two proposed sites in the county.
Residents of Yonkers and Peekskill, two of three sites (the other is in Putnam County) being considered, do not want more sludge -- the thick liquid residue left after treating raw sewage -- in their backyards.
Like their neighbors on Long Island and in Brooklyn, the message these residents are sending to their local officials is clear: take it somewhere else.


Library Buys Piece Of Altman's
Dormant three years, the mammoth limestone building at Fifth Avenue and 34th Street that was once B. Altman's flagship is showing signs of life.
Most apparently, it is clean.
And the cleaning has left the structure radiant, revealing a warm, straw-like color where there were once forbidding expanses of darkly streaked, cold gray stone.


THE GUIDE
BOOK SIGNING
Charlayne Hunter-Gault will give a talk and sign copies of her new book, "In My Place," at the Elimu Book Store in New Rochelle today from 2 to 5 P.M.
The book was published last year by Farrar Strauss Giroux in Manhattan, and the event has been co-sponsored by the book shop and the Westchester Black Journalists Association.


Caught in Tale of Revenge and Death
To those who knew him, Elliot Lopez did not seem to be the sort of teen-ager likely to be seduced by the street code of easy money, short tempers and rapid retribution.
A star athlete with a ready smile, his goal was college and a way out of a South Bronx neighborhood whose streetcorners were dotted with dozens of other young men who had long ago traded the promise of the future for the grim pickings of the present.
But there were times when it appeared that his perspective on the crazy life was more than that of an outsider.


For Shrubs, God Is in the Pruning
IT'S time to prune, this month and next, while the trees and shrubs are still dormant.
If you wait until April, when days get even longer and energy starts making new leaves, plants will have less energy for callusing over any cuts made by a pruning saw, and for walling off healthy wood from any damaged tissue.
So, prune trees and summer-blooming shrubs like vitex now, leaving spring bloomers, like lilacs and mock orange, for later, after the blossoms fall off.
It's perfectly O.K. to prune spring bloomers now if you want to renovate the shrubs.
But remember that every branch removed is full of flower buds.


After 40 Years in Films, Piper Laurie Is Still Here
It has been more than 40 years since Piper Laurie made her movie debut, playing Ronald Reagan's daughter in a forgettable film called "Louisa." What followed was a series of equally forgettable films, opposite actors like Tony Curtis, Tyrone Power and Rory Calhoun, that turned her into a star as well as a desperately unhappy woman who fled Hollywood at the age of 23.
Even today, she rankles at the memories of her years as a contract player under the old studio system.
But now, at the age of 60 and with two new movies set for release, Ms.
Laurie believes that her Hollywood career is finally in place.


Corrections
A chart on Jan. 24 with an article about traveling by bus from Newark, Del., to Old Saybrook, Conn., gave incorrect times for two of the legs.
The No. 5 bus of the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transit Authority leaves Third and Market Streets in Philadelphia at 10:15 A.M. and arrives at the Bridge-Pratt Terminal at 10:57.
The Milford Transit No. 1 bus leaves Stratford, Conn., at 11:30 A.M.
A reader's letter dated Feb. 3 led to further research.


Emily Bakemeier, Alain Moureaux
Emily Paviour Bakemeier, a candidate for a Ph.D. in art history at Princeton University, is engaged to be married to Alain Gislain Moureaux, the president of Moureaux Associes, an international investigative company in Paris and in Princeton, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Bakemeier, 32, graduated cum laude from Dartmouth College and received a master's degree in art history from Princeton University.
She is the daughter of Cynthia Farnum Bakemeier of Pittsford, N.Y., and Dr.
Richard F. Bakemeier of Denver.
Her father is a professor of medicine and the associate director of the cancer center at the University of Colorado at Denver.
Her mother is a social worker with the Family Service of Rochester Inc., a nonprofit community service agency.


Shriver: Women Pros Felt Special Kinship to Ashe
To the Sports Editor:
"Some Absences Make Hearts Grow Fainter" (The Times, Feb. 21) by Robin Finn did not portray a fair picture.
Finn singled out Zina Garrison-Jackson as one of the very few current pro tennis players who cared enough about Arthur Ashe to attend either his funeral in Richmond or his memorial service in New York City.


An Effective Weapon Against Premature Births
To the Editor:
Regarding "Effective? Maybe. Profitable? Clearly." (Feb. 14), about obstetrical services provided by the Tokos Medical Corporation to women with high-risk pregnancies: The United States has a higher infant mortality rate than 22 other industrialized nations, and the leading cause is preterm birth.
Efforts to reduce premature births need to be at the top of our health care agenda.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Feb. 13  MANHATTAN  East Midtown  $660,000
400 East 56th Street  (Plaza 400)  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,959-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, 2 exposures; maintenance $2,286, 57% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Greenwich Village  $140,000
39 East 12th Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 800-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; 24-hr. doorman, 11-ft. ceilings, 250-sq.-ft. mezzanine, north exposure; maintenance $803, 57% tax-deductible (Broker: Delson/Ginsberg Real Estate)  Sutton Place  $372,500
35 Sutton Place (58th St.(  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned elevator, dining room, 3 exposures, East River view; maintenance $1,127, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Arthur P. Brooks Realty)  Upper West Side  $795,000
211 Central Park West (81st St.)  (Beresford)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,300-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned elevator, dining room, fireplace, 2 exposures, Central Park view; maintenance $1,862, 41% tax-deductible (Brokers: Corcoran Group-Halstead Property Co.)  West Village  $282,000
256 West 10th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. loft co-op; elevator, fireplace, 11-ft. ceilings; maintenance $927, 57% tax-deductible (Broker: Herbert H. Kliegerman &amp; Associates)  BRONX  City Island  $215,000
17 Deepwater Way  (Boat Yard Condominiums)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. duplex condo in a 10-year-old building; dining area, fireplace, deck, mooring, health club, tennis courts; common charge $440, taxes $1,900 (Broker: Jacqueline Kyle Kall)  Wakefield  $180,000
650 East 225th Street  4-family semiattached brick house; 2 bedrooms, dining room, eat-in kitchen in three units; 1 bedroom in other; 1 bath in each; full basement, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: ERA/Best Match Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Ditmas Park  $215,000
23 Wellington Court  5-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family detached brick house; dining room, double parlor, butler's pantry, 1-car garage, 40- by 115-ft. lot; taxes $1,700 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  Park Slope  $112,000
372 Eighth Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. duplex co-op; bay windows, common roof deck; maintenance $300, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Warren Lewis Real Estate)  Windsor Terrace  $190,000
135 East 3d Street  2-family detached brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; eat-in kitchen, 1 bath in each; 1 bath in finished basement, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Homes R' Beautiful)  QUEENS  Astoria  $280,000
28-32 33d Street  2-family detached brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; dining room, eat-in kitchen in each; full basement, 3-car garage, 28-by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,800 (Broker: Century 21/Tri-Boro Terrace Realty)  East Elmhurst  $135,000
25-17 99th Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family detached brick colonial; dining room, finished basement, detached 1-car garage, 25- by 110-ft. lot; taxes $1,260 (Broker: Kremer Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Lighthouse Hill  $285,000
83 Scheffelin Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, one-family detached colonial; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 60.4- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)  Sunset Hill  $172,000
548 Bard Avenue  2-family detached stucco and wood-frame house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; full basement, 2-car garage, 34- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,650 (Broker: Foreman/Rand Properties)


Jana N. Fromer, Scott H. Cook
Mr. and Mrs.
David M. Fromer of New York have announced April wedding plans for their daughter Jana Nicole Fromer and Scott Henry Cook, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerry Cook of Salt Lake City.
Ms.
Fromer is a freelance graphic designer in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Parsons School of Design.
Her father is the president of Harbor Group, a real-estate development company in New York.


Poverty Becomes Oh So Chic
Two years ago, Matty Rich's "Straight Out of Brooklyn" sailed out of the Sundance Film Festival and into theaters, propelled by the behind-the-scenes story of the teen-ager who rehearsed actors in his mom's apartment and made a movie for $77,000.
Two days ago, "El Mariachi" opened in theaters.
It was made for $7,000 by the 24-year-old Robert Rodriguez, who thought his movie would go straight out to video.


335 Await The Signal To Sign Elsewhere
Gene Upshaw, head of the National Football League Players Association, had a statistic he liked to use when he was lobbying his friends in Congress.
"In the last 15 years of N.F.L. free agency, more teams have changed cities than players have changed teams," Upshaw would say.
Then he would add, "3 to 1."


Sally MacCowatt And Josh Black
Mr. and Mrs.
Haskell P. MacCowatt of Summit, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Sally Pawling MacCowatt to Josiah Milton Black, the son of Timothy N. Black and Martha W. Black, both of Washington.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
MacCowatt, 25, is an assistant manager of marketing analysis at Tiffany in New York.
She and her fiance graduated cum laude from Duke University.
Her father, now retired, was a senior vice president of administration at CBS in New York.


BEST SELLERS: February 28, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
29
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
2
6
DRAGON TEARS, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $22.95.) Two police detectives try to cope with a demonic serial killer in southern California.
3
3
5
DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Knopf, $23.) The case of a woman journalist charged with killing an eminent novelist: was it self-defense or murder?
4
5
26
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
5
6
4
ALONG CAME A SPIDER, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) Detective Alex Cross on the trail of a psychopathic serial killer in Washington.
6
4
5
CLOSE COMBAT, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Putnam, $22.95.) In the sixth volume of the series "The Corps," there are new challenges for the Marines all over the Pacific in World War II.
7
7
5
DEVIL'S WALTZ, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware investigates the strange series of illnesses that befalls a small child. (LP)
8
11
2
EINSTEIN'S DREAMS, by Alan Lightman. (Pantheon, $17.) A series of fantasies said to be dreamed by Albert Einstein in 1905, when he was a young clerk in a Swiss patent office.
9
10
20
SABINE'S NOTEBOOK, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Continuing the epistolary romance begun in "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
10
8
34
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
11
13
13
DOLORES CLAIBORNE, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) After being accused of murdering her employer, a woman tells of killing her husband almost 30 years earlier and of her life ever since.
12
14
MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.50.) Three couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.
13
12
14
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) The adventures of a 16-year-old vaquero from Texas in the Mexico of 1950.
14
1
THE TALISMANS OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The fourth and concluding volume in a series about a fantasy land.
15
9
15
THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $21.95.) The investigation of the murder of an officer, a general's daughter.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
24
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
2
2
29
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales.
3
4
2
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) The relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
4
3
15
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The authors predict the collapse of America under Government debt and suggest ways to cope with it.
5
5
37
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
6
6
23
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
7
9
21
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Linda Grey/ Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the general.
8
7
4
MAKING THE MUMMIES DANCE, by Thomas Hoving. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The reminiscences of the former director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
9
10
11
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $20.) Spirituality in everyday life.
10 *
13
2
AROUND THE CRAGGED HILL, by George F. Kennan. (Norton, $22.95.) Philosophical meditations on the world and its future.
11
12
37
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
12
11
4
THE WIVES OF HENRY VIII, by Antonia Fraser. (Knopf, $25.) The lives of the six spouses of the 16th-century English monarch.
13
8
6
NOBODY NOWHERE, by Donna Williams. (Times Books/Random House, $21.) The autobiography of an autistic woman.
14
1
ASSEMBLING CALIFORNIA, by John McPhee. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) Investigations into the geological history of California, as well as Arizona, Cyprus and northern Greece.
15
1
MARLENE DIETRICH, by Maria Riva. (Knopf, $27.50.) The legendary actress as remembered by her daughter.
16 *
14
6
LIBERATION MANAGEMENT, by Tom Peters. (Knopf, $27.50.) How American industry is reorganizing to deal with changing times.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
51
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual advice for married couples.
2
2
6
EXCESS BAGGAGE, by Judith Sills. (Viking, $21.) A psychologist's counsel about conquering character traits that make one's life harder.
3
3
51
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
4
5
33
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf by a legendary teacher.
5
1
COOKING WITH REGIS &amp; KATHIE LEE, by Regis Philbin and Kathie Lee Gifford with Barbara Albright. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Tips on cooking and more than 150 recipes from the talk show hosts.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,997 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
UPON THIS ROCK: The Miracles of a Black Church, by Samuel G. Freedman. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A report on a year spent with St.
Paul Community Baptist Church in a black section of Brooklyn and with its wise and sophisticated pastor, who has made the church a locus of organization, rescue and healing.
FLAUBERT-SAND: The Correspondence, based on the French edition by Alphonse Jacobs. (Knopf, $35.) The record of a 10-year friendship that follows the events of a historic decade (1866-76) with lucidity and refreshing, passionate disagreements.
INSIDE GORBACHEV'S KREMLIN: The Memoirs of Yegor Ligachev. (Pantheon, $27.50.) The recollections of a tough, honest Bolshevik who was instrumental in bringing Mikhail S. Gorbachev to power but could not follow where Mr.
Gorbachev wanted to go.
FAMILY NIGHT, by Maria Flook. (Pantheon, $21.) Ms.
Flook's astute first novel examines the erotic undercurrents in an extended family of bright, twerpy people who are reaching their 30's but are basically career teen-agers at heart.
VERTIGO PARK: And Other Tall Tales, by Mark O'Donnell. (Knopf, $18.) Expertly paced mock essays, playlets, yarns, poems and even cartoons by a lively, fertile humorist.
HELLO DOWN THERE, by Michael Parker. (Scribners, $20.) This serious, memorable novel shows a deep affection for its chief characters: a man who is hooked on morphine and jazz and the high school student he falls in love with.
THE ORACLE AT STONELEIGH COURT: Stories, by Peter Taylor. (Knopf, $22.) Mr.
Taylor's latest superb collection (a novella, 10 stories, 3 plays) concerns the ghostly influences from the past that can decide much of our destinies before we are born.


Sarah Bleasdale, John Coleman Jr.
Sarah Marvel Bleasdale, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
L.
T.
Bleasdale of Scottsdale, Ariz., was married yesterday to John A. Coleman Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Coleman of White Plains.
The Rev.
Michael McClan performed the ceremony at the Good Shepherd of the Hills Episcopal Church in Cave Creek, Ariz.
Mrs.
Coleman, 27, is a mezzo-soprano with Opera A La Carte, a Gilbert and Sullivan touring company based in Pasadena, Calif.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University and received a master's degree in music from the University of Arizona.


On Turning 13: Reports from the Front Lines
Yesterday, Chelsea Clinton became a teen-ager.
The Week in Review asked an eighth-grade social studies class at the New York City Lab School for Gifted Education, a public junior high that selects students with diverse backgrounds from all over the city: "What did it feel like when you turned 13?" Here are excerpts from their written responses.
As the hour drew near I had to reflect on the past 12 years and think about what I had accomplished as a child.
I had my fun and excitement but I was approaching what society views as a teen-ager.


These Fire Engines Spark The Imagination
Toy fire engines are among the trappings of childhood that often evoke two kinds of nostalgia in adults -- for the toys and for their real-life counterparts.
These miniatures spark memories of sirens in the night, not to mention the hook-and-ladder toy owned decades ago or the pumper that remained in a shop window.
Most of the wagons and trucks exhibited in "19th- and 20th-Century Firefighting Toys," at the New York City Fire Museum, 278 Spring Street, through May 15, are engaging and quirky enough to appeal to children and grown-ups alike.
Primarily American-made, the 82 vehicles on display come from the museum's permanent collection.


Courting a Monster Star In Hopes of a Monster Film
Robert De Niro, who proved in "Cape Fear," two years ago, how frightening he could be, is being wooed to play a genuine horror character.
Francis Ford Coppola has asked the actor to star as Dr.
Frankenstein's monster in his production of a film adaptation of the classic tale.


Turn Up the Amps and Pass the Maalox
The camera pans in to find Alistair Cooke wearing tie-dyes on a set recreating the Fillmore East.
Love beads dangle from his neck, and on the coffee table a lava lamp bubbles away.
Well, not quite -- but PBS is making a foray into the world of aging rock-music legends: an eight-part series of concert documentaries, called "In the Spotlight" and produced by WNET in New York, begins on Saturday with Bob Dylan, and a two-hour documentary on Paul Simon also shows up in March under the "American Masters" banner.
Aside from proving that dinosaurs still roam the earth, will these shows find the Henry James in Bob Dylan?
Will they bathe the unruly stars of the 60's in that "Masterpiece Theater" glow?
Bear in mind that the rock-and-roll aging process has become the butt of entirely too many jokes.
Only last week a writer for New York magazine, David Blum, envisioned an 87-year-old Mick Jagger, in the year 2030, tossing his dentures to cane-tapping fans and singing updated versions of once-defiant hits (e.g., "Grandma's Little Helper" and "Sympathy for the Dead").
We would all find this a lot funnier if it weren't in the process of actually happening, and not only to the rock legends themselves.
Will the aura of PBS respectability make rock seem just that much more old and gray?


Polish Image


Foreign Affairs; Balkan Strategy, Part II
The main problem with my idea of limited Western intervention to create a fair fight in Bosnia is that I can't sell it to anyone in power.
Even if President Clinton bought it, he would have a very tough time getting Western Europe, Russia or the U.N. to go along.
Here are my ideas as laid out in my last column: All the West's options in Bosnia reek of terrible risks and uncertain gains, but the least conscionable and ultimately riskiest courses would be to legitimize Serbian "ethnic cleansing" in a "peace" treaty or to simply stand by and allow a bloody Serbian victory on the battlefield.


Civil Rights Roster
To the Editor: Thank you for the article on the new Civil Rights Institute in Birmingham (Travel Advisory, Jan. 17).
One of the more moving exhibits in the museum, not mentioned by your story, is the registry that greets people when they enter.
Visitors who participated in the civil rights movement from 1957-65 are invited to sign the registry and indicate how they participated.
Several categories are indicated: marched, security guard, arrested, jailed, voter registration, etc.
Although not a participant myself, I was inspired to see the names of hundreds of people inscribed in the book, mostly Birmingham residents.
Even the names of those who have since died have been added by friends and family.
While the institute showcases famous civil rights heroes and leaders, this registry, perhaps more than anything else in the institute, is a reminder that it was ordinary people who committed, risked and sacrificed their lives in building the most significant movement of 20th-century America.


Uprising


EXPLOSION AT THE TWIN TOWERS: Voices; Reporting on Progress, Calling for Calm
Exerpts from a news conference yesterday at One Police Plaza.
RAYMOND W. KELLY - Police Commissioner


Julie A. Simon, Donald Munro
Mr. and Mrs.
William E. Simon of New Vernon, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Julie Ann Simon to Donald William John Munro, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William N. Munro of Sao Paulo, Brazil.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Simon, 29, graduated from the University of Vermont.
She is a competitive equestrian based in San Francisco.
Her father, the chairman of William E. Simon &amp; Sons Inc., a private merchant bank in Morristown, N.J., was the Secretary of the Treasury in the Nixon and Ford Administrations.


Michael Reisman, Elizabeth Comte
Elizabeth Anne Comte, a reporter in New York for Forbes magazine, and Michael Jonathan Reisman, a sports-marketing executive, plan to marry in June.
Ms.
Comte, 29, graduated from the University of California at Davis and received a master's degree in journalism from Northwestern University.
She is the daughter of Renee June Comte of Redwood Valley, Calif., and Harry R. Smallenburg of Los Angeles.


N.R.A. Makes Beating Florio Its Prime Issue
The National Rifle Association is preparing to spend hundreds of thousands of dollars and recruiting new members in New Jersey as potential footsoldiers in what may be the most expensive political fight in the N.R.A.'s 122-year history: trying to unseat a governor.
Over the last three years, the gun lobby has spent hundreds of thousands to help elect legislators who are friendly to their cause and unfriendly to Gov.
Jim Florio.
The campaign is driven largely by gun owners' anger over a Florio-inspired gun ban, the toughest in the nation, and by a genuine dislike of Mr.
Florio, who against conventional political wisdom has repeatedly challenged the gun lobby.
And it has intensified this year, when the Governor and all 120 members of the Legislature face re-election.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 14 about a new library building in Paris misstated the administrative affiliation of the Jussieu campus.
It is a branch of the University of Paris.


You Can Escape to the Outdoors While Staying Inside
If in recent weeks you have been titillated by a vague yearning to set forth on stream, lake or ocean with rod in hand, you can intensify that anticipation by visiting the World Fishing &amp; Outdoor Exposition, which opens Wednesday at the Rockland Community College Field House in Suffern, N.Y., and continues through Sunday.
The exposition, now in its 16th year, is, of course, a place where one can ogle the latest in fishing and hunting gear and also boats and motors, but it also provides an opportunity for chatting with charter-boat captains, guides, operators of hunting and fishing lodges and representatives of state and provincial governments who are eager to tell of the outdoor experiences they have to offer.
Spend a day or two talking to those manning such booths at Suffern and you'll come away with more information than you could gather in a month of telephone calls.


Chili Country
From the air, Oaxaca is a tiny oasis in the bitter, parched plains of the Sierra Madre del Sur, a geological blip fringed with green.
After a two-hour flight over desert mountains, with nothing to look at but cactus and baked orange soil, it's a relief to peer through the trees and catch sight of the pink colonial buildings and Baroque church spire.
You can almost understand, given the exquisite isolation, why the inhabitants of this tiny town are such giddy survivors.
You arrive in Oaxaca (pronounced wah-HAH-kah) and immediately feel hopeful, as if this dusty refuge in southern Mexico is always on the verge of fiesta.


Mediums With Messages
Nino Fidencio was a Mexican folk healer who lived in the northeastern state of Nuevo Leon in the early part of the 20th century.
When he died at the age of 40 in 1938 (at the hands of jealous doctors, his followers believed), he was the country's most prominent healer -- it was even said that he had cured the Mexican President of a serious illness.
Since his death his cult has spread, particularly among Mexican-Americans in south Texas; tens of thousands make a pilgrimage to his tomb every year.
NINO FIDENCIO: A Heart Thrown Open (Museum of New Mexico Press, $34.95) presents a reverential look at the experiences of his contemporary followers through Dore Gardner's documentary photographs of the pilgrims, and through testimonials from the women who are his mediums.
Frequently these women go to Nino Fidencio's shrine (often over the objections of their husbands) seeking to cure themselves or their children of debilitating illnesses after traditional medicine has failed.
If they or their children are healed, the women often pay their debt by allowing Nino Fidencio's spirit to take over their bodies so that they may cure others, and by making the arduous pilgrimage to the remote village where he lived.
Few who knew Nino Fidencio are still alive, and details about his life are vague and subject to constant revision by his devotees.
An essay by the folklorist Kay F. Turner offers some historical and psychological insight into the cult, but more information would have been welcome, not only about Nino Fidencio but about his followers as well.
For example, biographical sketches of the people giving testimonials might have made clear that many references to Nino Fidencio are actually about a medium who has taken on his spirit in a trance.
However, this book offers a fascinating glimpse into a little-known phenomenon as well as a testament to the power of belief.


On Turning 13: Reports from the Front Lines
Yesterday, Chelsea Clinton became a teen-ager.
The Week in Review asked an eighth-grade social studies class at the New York City Lab School for Gifted Education, a public junior high that selects students with diverse backgrounds from all over the city: "What did it feel like when you turned 13?" Here are excerpts from their written responses.
When I turned 13 it was like starting a new life.
It was the year I was finally going to be allowed to do more things.
For one thing I was able to hang out later.
I wasn't a child anymore.
I knew it and my parents knew it, too.


Semak and the Devils Slam Door on Senators
Aleksandr Semak has been the most productive member of the Devils the last month, but he was kept scoreless in two games before the Devils met the Ottawa Senators this afternoon.
Semak was not to be denied this time.
The diminutive Russian center scored his 25th and 26th goals and assisted on two others to lead the Devils to a 5-2 triumph before a crowd of 18,111 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


County Guide for the Compleat Environmentalist
THE little spiral-bound book with its green and white cover is bound to make any lonely Westchester environmentalist feel good.
The Westchester Environmental Directory, published by the Federated Conservationists of Westchester County last week, contains more than 200 listings of parks, preserves and nature centers, local and regional environmental organizations and government agencies.


Taxes and Subsidies For and From Olympus
While Action Long Island has taken a supportive position in connection with locating the Olympus Corporation at the Long Island Developmental Center in Melville, it was well reasoned and balanced.
We, however, do not support the position as stated in the "The Olympus Dispute's Broad Reach" that if Olympus is not allowed to locate on this site that this should cause a "blacklisting of Long Island by other companies." This should not necessarily convey a global message that towns on Long Island are antibusiness.


Puppy Love


A Jaunty Jester Finds a New Voice on Broadway
Martin Short, not exactly known as a singer or a romantic leading man, is on the brink of his Broadway debut in a musical -- "The Goodbye Girl." So he might be excused for a momentary freakout.
But he seems to enjoy chaos, or maybe it's just that he's equipped to deal with it, as he's demonstrated over the last couple of months.
The show, a comic love story based on the 1977 Neil Simon film and opening on Thursday at the Marquis Theater, had a rocky Chicago tryout.
Almost daily, changes were made in the script, about a new-in-New York actor and an unlucky-in-love former dancer who find themselves sharing an apartment.
Musical numbers regularly appeared and disappeared.
The director, Gene Saks, was fired six days into the run, while the gossip mill turned out rumors that Mr.
Short's co-star, Bernadette Peters, would either quit or be dismissed, as massive revisions were made in her part.


To Sell, To Buy, To Give
Preview of the Art Dealers Association show, 7th Regiment Armory, Feb. 24.


Conversations/Clarissa Pinkola Estes; A Message for All Women: Run Free and Wild Like the Wolf
THE wildness of the wolf is not readily apparent in the easy manner of Clarissa Pinkola Estes, a cheerful, soft-spoken woman who wears a red ribbon in her hair and a medal of the Virgin Mary around her neck.
"Mary is a girl gang leader in Heaven," said Dr.
Estes, who has ordered the lunchtime special of meat loaf and mashed potatoes.
"She is fuerte -- strong, fierce. We have been given this cleaned-up, Anglicized version of her. But the saints had calluses on their hands."


World Atomic Agency Needs Beefing Up
To the Editor:
"Stopping the Next Nuclear Renegade" (editorial, Feb. 15) demands a stronger International Atomic Energy Agency, citing its weaknesses and the need for better methods of stopping the spread of nuclear weapons.


EXPLOSION AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Towers; Flaws in Emergency Systems Exposed
Port Authority officials acknowledged yesterday that Friday's explosion and the chaotic evacuation that followed it exposed flaws in the World Trade Center's emergency systems.
But they defended the existing systems as adequate for almost any emergency, saying the explosion was perfectly, even eerily, situated to cripple the massive complex.
Evacuation Criticized
After feeling their way down dozens of flights of steps in smoky darkness without benefit of emergency instructions, many office workers emerged from the towers on Friday criticizing the Port Authority for lacking proper evacuation procedures in its huge complex.


A View on 'A Sense of Place'
The new column "A Sense of Place," by Michael Norman, appears to be a very unwelcome addition to the New Jersey Weekly.
What a morose column!
What a morose and depressing neighborhood he moved to!
Naturally, these are not things one looks forward to reading in the Sunday paper.
I would much rather read more positive, uplifting information about New Jersey (for example, the periodic articles regarding the history of the state).


Chanel Goes to the Front
There's a new boot camp in town along Fifth and Park avenues, where the first rank of a new fashion army is strutting in lace-up black Chanel boots.
With spit-and-polish gold metal plaques riveted to the back and double-C logos embellishing the toes, the boots help to secure the wearer's fashion status, both coming and going.
And why not -- at $1,190 a pair?
With thick crepe soles, they are the Chanel challenge to Doc Martens.
The boots come with 7 or 16 eyes, and the taller versions are topped with three buckles.
Whoever said high fashion was effortless?
While a few women wear them with slim below-the-knee suit skirts, most pair them with leggings, stirrup trousers or narrow-legged jumpsuits, all topped with a variety of sporty parkas, Chanel jackets and even a blond sable.
The look includes an abundance of Chanel gold-chain accessories -- necklaces, hatbands, belts and straps for black quilted shoulder bags -- not to mention gold buttons, zippers and earrings.
There's even a leather Chanel biker's cap.
In redesigning the Chanel look, Karl Lagerfeld has given the boot to the signature sling-back shoe.


THE HIGH COST OF LIVING
I was dismayed by the cover caption as well as the content of your article.
Perpetuating the myth that transplant surgeons are little more than "grave robbers," accepting patients only to harvest their organs, does a great disservice both to potential recipients and to surgeons.
With the critical shortage of available donor organs, every effort should be made to educate the public about organ donation and not to instill fear.
ROBERT A. FRANK, M.D.
New York, N.Y


On Turning 13: Reports from the Front Lines
Yesterday, Chelsea Clinton became a teen-ager.
The Week in Review asked an eighth-grade social studies class at the New York City Lab School for Gifted Education, a public junior high that selects students with diverse backgrounds from all over the city: "What did it feel like when you turned 13?" Here are excerpts from their written responses.
As you go to school, things get harder.
You sort of realize that you're getting older.
Adults treat you like an adult and don't give you the breaks you got when you're a child.


Two Players Suspended
DANNY MANNING of the Los Angeles Clippers and CHRIS GATLING of the Golden State Warriors yesterday were suspended for one game and fined $7,500 each by the National Basketball Association for fighting.
The incident occurred in the third quarter of Friday night's 106-98 Clippers victory at Golden State.


2 Ways to Install Sinks: Freestanding or Vanity
THERE are two types of bathroom sinks.
One is freestanding, which is mounted directly on a wall and sometimes supported by legs or a pedestal, and the other is the vanity sink, which is attached to or part of a vanity top.
Installing a vanity sink is fairly easy, but installing a freestanding one can be more challenging.
To remove a sink before installing a new one, first shut off the water supplying the faucets or the main valve near the water meter.
Next, open the faucets to drain remaining water.
Then use a basin wrench to loosen the nuts beneath the sink that fasten the supply tubes to the faucet's base.
To use a basin wrench, fit it around the nut so that turning the handle counterclockwise tightens the jaw.
Otherwise, the tool will slip.


Corrections
An article in The Times Magazine on Feb. 7 about efforts to protect elephants misstated amounts spent by the International Wildlife Coalition for preservation in 1988.
In the fiscal year that began on May 1, 1988, it spent $52,370 on elephants, $34,757 on kangaroos, $40,841 on sea turtles, $72,727 on large whales and $1,233,932 on its whale adoption project, according to the group's financial statement. (The figures were not $11,000 for elephants and $120,000 for whales.)


How Clinton's Stimulus Plan Cuts Into Deficit; Leave It to Moynihan
To the Editor:
"Complexity of a Fiscal Giant: A Primer on Social Security" (front page, Feb. 11) and "A Cowardly Retreat" by Jon Cowan and Rob Nelson (Op-Ed, same day) attack the essence of Social Security by proposing to treat it simply as a revenue cow for general governmental activity.


Wall Street; Some Dissatisfaction in Disneyland
MINNIE and Mickey Mouse were strolling around, characters from the hit movie "Aladdin" were on display, and the Anaheim, Calif., Convention Center was packed with kids who probably do not consider financial reports required reading.
Still, many of the youthful shareholders who attended the Walt Disney Company's annual meeting last Tuesday had an advantage over Richard Kossman, a 59-year-old retired accountant from Syosset, L.I., who owns 400 Disney shares.


On Per-Bag Garbage Systems
I read with interest the Jan. 17 article on per-container trash systems ("Per-Bag Garbage System Creeps Along"):
The system in place in Chester Township is based on a 30-pound container of garbage, not 30 gallons as the article said.
For all practical purposes, a 30-gallon container typically holds less than 30 pounds of residential trash.
Weight, rather than volume, was used because tipping charges at the transfer station are by the ton.
Currently the charge for a 30-pound sticker is $2.


The Risky Allure of 'Strategic Trade'
IN a single day last week, President Clinton promised Silicon Valley executives research subsidies and government contracts, said he would pry open Japan's market and told Boeing workers that he would fight Europe's subsidies to its Airbus Industrie.
That same day, the Commerce Secretary hinted that America might consider imposing punitive tariffs on Japanese car makers.
The tough talk raised tempers around the globe, and it came from a new Administration that had already carved out a hawkish position on several trade issues, from imposing stiff tariffs on foreign steel to threatening to bar European telecommunications companies from United States government contracts.


At Your Front Door, a Remnant of 50's-Era Medicine
BOUNDING out of his car, Dr.
Luigi M. Capobianco looked like robo-doc.
A cellular phone stuck to his ear.
A beeping beeper clung to his waist.
And a hi-tech plastic stethoscope hugged his neck.
But where was his little black bag?
"Actually it's brown," he said, taking from the car a slim leather satchel shaped like a woman's shoulder bag.
Very stylish.
"You like it?" Dr.
Capobianco said.
"I got it in Italy."


Carol M. Towey, Crayton L. Bell
Carol M. Towey, a daughter of Hugh and Mary Lou Towey of Short Hills, N.J., was married yesterday to Crayton L. Bell, the son of William H. Bell of Boynton Beach, Fla., and the late Joan L. Bell.
The Rev.
Thomas D. Bowers performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Bartholomew's Church in New York.
The bride is the eastern regional director of Private Health Care Systems Inc., a company in New York specializing in managed health care.
She graduated from the University of Maryland and received a master's degree in health-care administration from the University of Connecticut.


Weeds: Nutrient, Vegetable or Nuisance?
THE next time anyone considers weeds as mere nuisances, they just may want to think again.
No one knows what value some of these ordinary plants may have, and there could be a beneficial function to society in their future.
As a case in point, look at what is happening to purslane, a rather common garden weed.
It sprawls, has fat rounded leaves and is a nuisance, even though a somewhat attractive one.


On Turning 13: Reports from the Front Lines
Yesterday, Chelsea Clinton became a teen-ager.
The Week in Review asked an eighth-grade social studies class at the New York City Lab School for Gifted Education, a public junior high that selects students with diverse backgrounds from all over the city: "What did it feel like when you turned 13?" Here are excerpts from their written responses.
As the hour drew near I had to reflect on the past 12 years and think about what I had accomplished as a child.
I had my fun and excitement but I was approaching what society views as a teen-ager.


A BLACK PANTHER'S LONG JOURNEY
I appreciate Rosemary L. Bray's attempt to let people know more about my early years, in her article about my cousin, Elaine Brown ("A Black Panther's Long Journey," Jan. 31).
Bray reports that Elaine would have challenged my testimony on behalf of Clarence Thomas because she did not believe that I had lived in a "ghetto," since I was living in a "comfortable" home when she visited my family in Pasadena, Calif., in the early 1950's.
Such bull.
My parents moved from Harlem to the Hunters Point housing project in San Francisco during World War II.
They made that move so my father could establish a Methodist Church for African-American workers from the South who came to San Francisco to work in the shipyards.
I was born while they were living there and spent the first years of my life living at Hunters Point and in a church gymnasium in Oakland, Calif.


22 Years as a Class Enemy
A SINGLE TEAR
A Family's Persecution, Love, and Endurance in Communist China.
By Wu Ningkun, in collaboration with Li Yikai. 367 pp.
New York:  The Atlantic Monthly Press. $21.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-21  IN MOSCOW, NEW DAY FOR HOUSING


How Jack Kemp Lost the War on Poverty
On the afternoon of July 2, 1991, Jack Kemp received a surprise visit from the man he variously called "pencilneck" or "the Prince of Darkness": the White House budget director, Richard Darman.
It had been a year since Kemp was named chairman of the Economic Empowerment Task Force, a Cabinet subgroup formed to develop antipoverty policy.
During that time, he and Darman had repeatedly clashed over the substance and tone of domestic policy, where little could happen without the budget director's approval.


A True Trouper
To the Editor:
Some people are easy to remember, impossible to forget.
They stay in the mind and heart.
Patricia Brooks, who died last month, was one of those people.


Perspectives: Park Slope Condominiums; Finding the Iron Hot, Young Buyers Strike
A PROFESSIONAL bass player named Yasutomo Takeda has yet to meet a professional sax player named Jeff Lederer.
But once they meet they will find they have more in common than their careers.
And meet they will.
They and their wives have gone into contract to buy condominium apartments in the newly renovated four-story walk-up at 1405 Eighth Avenue in the Park Slope section of Brooklyn, on the corner of 14th Street.
Apartments in the 15-unit building went on the market in December.
There have been six sales so far.


Around New England, Main Street Faces Peril
There has been a lot of snow here this winter, but people in this declining, 240-year-old factory town are not much concerned with the weather or the Celtics or President Clinton's new tax plan.
They are obsessed by something else: Wal-Mart is coming.
And Wal-Mart is not just another discount store.
The retail chain, with its rock-bottom prices and highly developed consumer research, has already swept the South and Midwest, swallowing small businesses, overtaking giants like Sears and multiplying at the rate of one Wal-Mart every other day.
In some rural towns, Wal-Mart, which sells everything from toothpaste to children's clothes, is the new Main Street.


EXPLOSION AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Background; A Long List of Possible Suspects, as Inquiry Into the Bombing Begins
Trying to determine who might bear responsibility for Friday's huge explosion at the World Trade Center, Federal officials are examining chronologies of terrorist groups in search of clues showing similarities in methods.
In that history there may be nothing that can give a particular clue as to who was responsible for the Manhattan attack, or even if terrorists were involved at all.
But in their choice of targets and in their use of explosives, those who have in the past resorted to car bombs -- the type of blast that Friday's may have been -- have displayed a wide range of skill and inventiveness.


NOTES
In March, Stagebill, the program for performances at Carnegie Hall and Lincoln Center, will have a red AIDS ribbon on its cover.
The cover was planned to coincide with "Music for Life," a benefit for the Gay Men's Health Crisis at Carnegie Hall on March 14.
"I really wanted to do what I could to awaken the consciousness of the country to this issue and make it a badge of pride," said Arthur Levitt Jr., chairman of Levitt Media Company, which publishes of Stagebill.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
KEEPERS OF THE FLAME The Role of Fire in American Culture, 1775-1925.
By Margaret Hindle Hazen  and Robert M. Hazen.
Princeton University, $29.95.


In the Region: Connecticut; Recent Sales
Hartford, Conn.  $215,000
150 Kenyon Street  6-bedroom, 3-bath, 83-year-old Victorian; moldings, wood stove, 3d-floor apartment, 75- by 185-foot lot; taxes $4,702.
New Haven, Conn.  $106,400
62 Lawncrest Road  56-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, breakfast nook, choice Westville district, 50- by 100-foot lot; taxes $2,774.
Orange, Conn.  $179,000
773 Dennis Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old ranch; formal dining room, new furnace, in-ground pool, 1 acre; taxes $3,703.
Bedford, N.Y.  $243,000
75 Lakeside Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 49-year-old cape; den, fireplace, office, 1-car garage, partial basement; taxes $5,175.
Yorktown, N.Y.  $139,900
1135 Stonegate Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 21-year-old townhouse; family room, eat-in kitchen, den, patio, yard; taxes $5,272.
Lewisboro, N.Y.  $277,200
Debbie Lane 3-bedroom, 2-bath, 28-year-old ranch; skylight, deck, fireplace, office, playroom; 1.1 acres; taxes $5,041.
OTHER AREAS Glen Head, L.I.  $351,200
40 Roosevelt Street  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old split level; family room, office, 2 fireplaces, oak floors, cul-de-sac; taxes $5,500.
Kings Park, L.I.  $170,500
85 Broadview Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 31-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, patio, hardwood floors, 1-car garage; taxes $5,300.
Edison, N.J.  $140,000
156 Fourth Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old ranch; fireplace in living room and recreation room, 1-car garage; taxes $3,032.


New &amp; Noteworthy
A COMPLICATED WAR: The Harrowing of Mozambique, by William Finnegan. (University of California, $13.) This book examines the seeds of the grueling civil war in Mozambique, which began after the country obtained independence from Portugal in 1975.
The author shows how Rhodesian military intelligence gave birth to the rebel Renamo movement, which opposed the new socialist state, and how South Africa supported the insurrection for its own ends.
Last year our reviewer, Thomas Pakenham, praised the book as a "brilliant, devastating eyewitness report."
THE TAX INSPECTOR, by Peter Carey. (Vintage International, $11.) This novel's main characters, the members of the Catchprice family of Australia, were described last year by our reviewer, Francine Prose, as "the Beverly Hillbillies on bad acid." They are, however, far from rich, and their already disturbed lives become even more disturbed when they are targeted for audit by an unmarried, pregnant tax inspector.
Ms.
Prose said the book's "pattern of mini-surprises followed by small, jarring pleasures prepares us, phrase by phrase, for the novel's greater rewards -- for its wit and density, its sympathy and wacky inventiveness and its exhortation to step farther back and see more." Vintage International has also reissued Mr.
Carey's 1980 collection, THE FAT MAN IN HISTORY: AND OTHER STORIES ($10), which contains stories one critic found "as brilliant as they are bizarre."


Helping Children Start A Healthy Life
BECAUSE her husband is unemployed, Xioma Hernandez has no insurance to cover routine medical expenses for her 7-month-old daughter, Laura -- and no choice, she said, but to take the baby to a public health clinic.
Mrs.
Hernandez held the infant in her lap recently as she waited to see a doctor at the county-run Pediatric Treatment Center here, one of three in Westchester.
Laura was to be immunized against the hepatitis B virus, a sometimes deadly infection that attacks the liver and is prevalent in the Dominican Republic, where Laura was born.
A Place for Vaccinations
Mrs.
Hernandez and two other mothers in the waiting room knew only a few words of English.
Speaking through a translator who works as a nurse's aide, they said they had brought their children here because they could not afford a private doctor.
They also said that long waits and limited hours would not deter them because it was important that their children be inoculated against diseases like polio, mumps, measles and whooping cough.


On Turning 13: Reports from the Front Lines
Yesterday, Chelsea Clinton became a teen-ager.
The Week in Review asked an eighth-grade social studies class at the New York City Lab School for Gifted Education, a public junior high that selects students with diverse backgrounds from all over the city: "What did it feel like when you turned 13?" Here are excerpts from their written responses.
It was at the end of August, last sumer.
I had too many other things to worry about.
I had broken my toe, summer homework and I had to worry about the upcoming school year and my gymnastics career.
Only now, after half the school year has gone by, can I reflect.


Alison G. Finn, J. M. Bogert Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
Harold B. Finn 3d of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Alison Gallagher Finn to Jeremiah Milbank Bogert Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bogert of Bedford Hills, N.Y.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Finn, 24, graduated cum laude from Yale University and received a master's degree in history from Columbia University.
She teaches history at the Marymount School of New York.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of Finn Dixon &amp; Herling in Stamford, Conn.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Voracious Venison
RESIDENTS have armed their cars with deer alarms and barricaded their gardens, and still it's not enough.
Deer are taking over the tiny Village of North Haven.


How Did I Get to Be So Rich?
Richard Branson is horizontal.
Feet up on a salmon-colored sofa, head propped on a cushion, notes and numbers scrawled schoolboy-fashion on the back of his hand, gaze flitting over the comfortable clutter of his Virgin Group headquarters.
It is just after lunch -- for which he hoisted himself briefly into a sitting position -- and the founder of Virgin Records and chairman of Virgin Atlantic Airways is indulging in some postprandial musings on how he has contrived a vertiginous, but unusually laid-back, ascent to wealth and international power.
"Aaahm," he says in a mild English public-school voice, running a hand lazily through a mop of mousy hair.
"Back in 1970 I couldn't decide whether to call the company Virgin or Slipped Disk Records. I guess I chose Virgin because it reflected an inexperience in business -- among other things -- and also a freshness and a slight outrageousness. I still like to think that people associate Virgin with something a bit different, something that has not been done before."


Daniel Weiner, Elizabeth Fuerstman
Two associates at New York law firms, Elizabeth Anne Fuerstman of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett and Daniel Hyam Weiner of Hughes Hubbard &amp; Reed, were married last evening.
Rabbi Ari Fridkis performed the interfaith ceremony at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University in New York.
Ms.
Fuerstman, 27, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Barnard College and received a law degree from Columbia.
She is the daughter of Myron and Noreen Fuerstman of Pelham Manor, N.Y.
Her father is a consultant on textile engineering and a developer of fabric formulations in Pelham Manor.
Her mother teaches English at Public School 113 in the Bronx.


Confusion


Moose-Hunting in Japan?
Just a few years ago, it seemed as if nothing could pry fashionable young Tokyoites away from such symbols of youthful self-expression as Louis Vuitton handbags and Valentino suits.
But times have changed in the recession-battered 1990's, and so have the strategies of the well-turned-out.
If you want to navigate the urban jungle in style these days, there is no better way than hitting the paved-over wilds in a pair of amphibious L. L. Bean boots, or perhaps a Bean fly-fishing vest.
European chichi has given way to what some see as the American basic look.


S. Gregg Renfrew, William D. Orr
Susan G. Renfrew and Robert M. Bender of New York have announced the engagement of Mrs.
Renfrew's daughter, Susan Gregg Renfrew, to William Dennison Orr, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Orr of Darien, Conn.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Renfrew, 24, is known as S. Gregg.
She is a marketing representative for CCA Financial Services Inc., a computer and industrial-equipment leasing company in Richmond.
She is also the daughter of Reno Bartlett Renfrew of Dallas.
Her mother is the president of Carnegie Hill Properties Inc., a real-estate agency in New York.
The prospective bride's stepfather is the chief executive of the American Red Cross in Greater New York.


A Trap to Avoid: Alternative Tax
EXECUTIVES in high-tax states often find that they are liable for the alternative minimum tax because deductions for state and local taxes and the bargain element in incentive stock options can spring this tax trap, which is payable to the extent it exceeds a taxpayer's regular tax bill.
And if Congress votes to raise the rates on the A.M.T. narrowing the difference between the regular tax system and the alternative one, more taxpayers could be snared.
Consequently, it is important for taxpayers to monitor their tax and financial situations with care.
An A.M.T. liability calls for many changes in financial and investment planning.


A Dancer Dances, Against All Odds
DAWN STORRS could hardly have been happier.
Classes at Torrington High School had just been dismissed for the Christmas break, and she and five friends -- two other cheerleaders and three male athletes -- got in a car and headed for Waterbury to do some last-minute shopping.
It was early afternoon on Dec. 23, 1988, and a mixture of snow and sleet was falling as their car traveled along Route 8.
Suddenly, in Thomaston, the laughter inside the car turned to screams and panic as the car skidded on the icy highway, careened wildly and slammed into a guardrail.
As it did, Dawn, and her best friend, Shawn Collins, and Chris Samele, a burgeoning basketball star, were catapulted through the rear window that had blown out on impact.


Steps Remain in School Case
Testimony in the Sheff v.
O'Neill desegregation case has ended, but months will pass before a decision is handed down and more than a year before a final legal judgment is likely.
These are the steps that remain in the lawsuit's progress:
*The civil-rights lawyers representing the 19 children named as plaintiffs in the suit, and the assistant attorneys general representing the state, will write memorandums stating their arguments and outlining what they seek from the Superior Court judge in the case, Harry Hammer.
This could take four to six weeks.


Black Colleges Put at Disadvantage
The increased competition for black students has put added pressure on historically black colleges, most of which lack the financial resources of top universities like Harvard, Duke or Emory.
"We are at a disadvantage, with folks talking about money these days," said Cindy Brooks, an admissions counselor at Spelman College, a black institution in Atlanta.
But a $35 million gift from Readers Digest and gifts from the comedian Bill Cosby have helped Spelman increase its own incentives.


Subaru Introduces a New Subcompact
REMEMBER the good old days, when cars were named after things we
knew
? Animals, birds, even fish.
Chevrolet had its Impala.
There was the Studebaker Lark.
The American Motors Marlin and Plymouth's Barracuda.
That was before the manufacturers jumped into a sea of alphanumerics, of course, baffling us with things like the Infiniti G20, the Lexus ES300 and the BMW 318iC.


Commercial Property: Prebuilding; Small Space in Move-In Shape Rents in Slow Market
JOSH N. KURILOFF, the Cushman &amp; Wakefield director who handles leasing at 450 Park Avenue, was having a really rough time moving the building's smaller spaces.
The location, at 57th Street, was certainly good, and the tenant roster, heavy on international banks and financial services, was stellar.
Yet when it came to spaces of less than 4,000 feet, no one even wanted to look.
Then Mr.
Kuriloff got an idea.
How about "prebuilding" the small raw spaces, subdividing them into offices, carpeting and painting them, and offering them in move-in condition?
He figured that such space would attract smaller tenants who need offices immediately and would be delighted to dispense with workletter negotiations and dealing with architects.


The Executive Computer; A Web of Networks, an Abundance of Services
BILL CLINTON and Al Gore made a campaign promise to help build a national data network, hoping it would lead to new digital information services.
While waiting to see if the new Administration follows through, businesses can get a taste of the future with the rapidly growing commercial networks of computer services.
The first networks were on-line services like Prodigy, Compuserve and America Online.
Although they provide useful services, these networks are based on minicomputer and mainframe technologies of the 1960's and 1970's, in which thousands of users can connect simultaneously by telephone to a central system that dispenses electronic information.
And that technology has drawbacks: the systems can become congested, and for the most part customers have limited options.


Editors' Note
An essay on page 37 of the Travel section today discusses the rewards of a visit to Cairo, even in the face of risks, which it says are "worth taking." On Friday an explosion in a coffee shop in downtown Cairo caused fatalities and injuries among foreigners.
It occurred after the section was printed.


Frederica Wald, Roger Sherman
Judge Patricia M. Wald and Robert L. Wald of Washington have announced the engagement of their daughter Frederica Nora Wald to Roger Sherman, a son of Justice and Mrs.
Burton Sherman of New York.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Wald, 35, is a senior marketing manager at Time Warner Inc. in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Wesleyan University.
She and her fiance received M.B.A. degrees from the University of Pennsylvania.


Alexis Van Brero, John C. Belman
Alexis Allene Van Brero, a civilian water-survival combat trainerfor the United States Army at Fort Benning in Columbus, Ga., was married yesterday to Specialist John Chase Belman, an Army Ranger there.
The Rev.
Tom Jones performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church in Columbus.
Mrs.
Belman, 26, graduated from LaGrange College.
She is a daughter of Eva Chappelle of Columbus and Maj.
Erik Van Brero, retired, of Pasadena, Md., and a stepdaughter of Lieut.
Col.
John C. Chappelle, retired, and Gay Van Brero.
Her father served with the Army in Hanau, Germany.
Her mother is a speech and language pathologist for the public schools in Talbot County, Ga.
The bride's stepfather had been stationed at Fort Benning.


How Clinton's Stimulus Plan Cuts Into Deficit; Social Security Siege
To the Editor:
You call America's retirees "one of Washington's most ferocious lobbies" in "Press Harder on Deficit Reduction" (editorial, Feb. 5).
Far more ferocious and, alas, more effective, has been the lobby against retirees.
One of its favorite weapons is the charge that "current retirees get back from Social Security much more than they paid."


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: February 28, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
2
6
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor.
3
4
BYGONES, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $5.99.) A dinner party reveals family strains and love.
4
10
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A woman's death leads to an investigation involving the American-Japanese rivalry.
5
57
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
6 *
6
THE ROAD TO OMAHA, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $6.99.) A retired general and a lawyer scheme to take possession of the state of Nebraska on behalf of an Indian tribe.
7
2
DARK FORCE RISING, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is still threatened by aliens.
8
5
GUARDIAN ANGEL, by Sara Paretsky. (Dell, $5.99.) The private eye V. I. Warshawski probes a case involving pet dogs and Chicago scandals.
9
46
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
10
32
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
11
2
GROUNDED, by David Bischoff. (Pocket, $5.50.) "Star Trek" 's U.S.S.
Enterprise encounters a new form of alien life.
12
1
THE ELF QUEEN OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) The third volume in a series about a fantasy land.
13
1
THE FIRST WIVES CLUB, by Olivia Goldsmith. (Pocket, $5.99.) Three women conspire to get even with the men who divorced them for younger wives.
14
5
BLINDSIGHT, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $5.99.) A woman physician seeks to find the cause of a series of strange deaths of Manhattan yuppies.
15
23
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a family that operates a large industrialized farm in the Midwest.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
21
ALIVE, by Piers Paul Read. (Avon, $5.99.) How some of the members of a rugby team survived a plane crash in the Andes in 1972.
2 *
7
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
3
1
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $5.99.) The autobiography of the retired commander of a Navy counterterrorist unit.
4
9
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Plume, $13.) The Vice President discusses factors affecting the environment.
5
3
HILLARY CLINTON: The Inside Story, by Judith Warner. (Signet, $4.99.) A biography of the First Lady.
6 *
18
THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF MALCOLM X, with the assistance of Alex Haley. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The life story of the black leader.
7
4
WOMEN ON TOP, by Nancy Friday. (Pocket, $5.99.) The changes in social life during the past two decades that have affected the sexual fantasies of women.
8
93
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
9
486
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
10
20
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
123
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
2
106
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
3
81
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
12
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1993. (World Almanac/Pharos, $7.95.) The latest edition of a standard reference work.
5
2
THE TIGHTWAD GAZETTE, by Amy Dacyczyn. (Villard, $9.99.) Ways to save money.
6 *
6
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Indians in County on a Spiritual Quest
THE gently tinkling sounds of the handbells, usually used in temple services, mingled with the haunting tones of a classical sitar, as a group of eight Indian youngsters ranging in age from 5 through 13 sat in a semicircle around their instructor while she led them in a traditional Indian music class.
As Chander Kala Ahuja, a special-education Montessori teacher from Scarsdale, played a harmonium, her young students accompanied her with Hindustani chants and rhythmic beating of the tabla, a pairof small drums that look like bongo drums.
"I want to communicate my culture," said Mrs.
Ahuja, a former music teacher from New Delhi who wore a shimmering fuchsia sari.
"This is what we have, and we should do more and more of it. Music is very important in Indian education."


Attention, Free Agents: Sky Seems to Be Limit for Jets
The Jets will be operating under the theory of quality over quantity in the initial stages of the National Football League free-agent signing period that runs from March 1 through July 15.
They will try to replace valuable players lost to injury last year before looking at upgrading their overall talent.
That's the plan of Jets General Manager Dick Steinberg, who said the team owner, Leon Hess, had given him a generous shopping allowance to fill his needs, but doesn't want him spending it in the bargain basement.


Mutual Funds; 'Spiders' Take on Index Funds
FOR investors who like index mutual funds, the American Stock Exchange says it has a better idea: "spiders."
Formally known as Standard &amp; Poor's depositary receipts, spiders generated so much investor enthusiasm that they were one of the exchange's five most active securities in the five trading days that began with their Jan. 29 debut.


Defense Aide a Favorite to Succeed Mulroney
Kim Campbell, a 45-year-old former lawyer from Vancouver who is now Defense Minister, has emerged as the early favorite in the contest to succeed Brian Mulroney as Conservative Party leader and Prime Minister.
Not only do many political analysts and polls suggest that she is the one to beat in June, when the Conservatives hold their first convention to pick a leader, but the front-running Liberals have also already begun challenging her in the House of Commons.


Madrid Museum For Blind People
A museum designed primarily for people who are blind or visually impaired, where visitors are encouraged to touch the exhibits, has opened in Madrid.
The Tiflological Museum, one of the few of its kind in the world (another is the Musee Valentin-Hauy in Paris), emphasizes tactile appreciation of the arts while maintaining a visual presentation for sighted visitors.
Exhibits are accompanied by audio tapes that guide the visitor's hands over the exhibits.
Pamphlets printed in both large-type characters and in Braille are provided.
One part of the museum displays paintings, sculptures and tapestries created by blind artists, including Jose Antonio Brana and Miguel Detrel.
Another section features small-scale reconstructions of the world's great monuments, ranging from the Eiffel Tower to the Statue of Liberty to the pre-Columbian pyramids of Mexico.
The museum's final section presents an historical overview of the technological developments leading to the invention of Braille.


Different Drummer


A Cultural Feast in Washington
IT'S not the budget part that makes a $500 Washington weekend tough.
It's the weekend part.
There is so much to see in the capital that planning a mere two days there is daunting.
With just one prior Washington weekend under our belts, my husband and I were pretty green: we knew where the Mall was, and we had seen a smattering of the most compelling sights.


IN SHORT: FICTION
REFINEMENTS OF LOVE A Novel About Clover and Henry Adams.
By Sarah Booth Conroy.
Cornelia and Michael Bessie/Pantheon, $22.


Music for Antiquity
Annual benefit recital, Pierpont Morgan Library, Feb. 22.


THE HIGH COST OF LIVING
Lisa Belkin's story of a young man permanently paralyzed by a gunshot wound to the neck places a human face on the dilemma posed by the spiraling costs of health care in the United States ("The High Cost of Living," Jan. 31).
What her article also highlights is our inability to resolve the human and financial aspects of this crisis.
Can we bring ourselves to accept the fact that what
can
be done no longer may be synonymous with what
will
be done, regardless of what patients or their families may desire?


How Clinton's Stimulus Plan Cuts Into Deficit; Stock Market Casino
To the Editor:
The low rates of interest on savings deposits, now ranging from 2 percent to 3 percent for regular savings accounts and one-year certificates of deposit, are driving the consumer into the stock market.
Most of these investors are unsuited to the seesaw effects they must encounter and the risks involved.


Martha Roberts, John Schneiderhan
Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph H. Roberts Jr. of Elmira, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Martha Landon Roberts to John William Schneiderhan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles W. Schneiderhan of Harwich, Mass.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Roberts, 28, is the manager of the Rand McNally Map and Travel store in Short Hills, N.J.
She graduated from the University of Hartford.
Her father is the vice president of the Hilliard Corporation, a manufacturer of industrial products in Elmira, where her mother, Mary Booth Roberts, is the director of development for Planned Parenthood of the Southern Tier.


Colleges Luring Black Students With Incentives
George Watson is a high school senior in great demand.
More than 100 colleges have sent him unsolicited application material, filling two crates in his house in South Orange, N.J.
Some have offered to waive their normal $35 application fee.
One invited him for an all-expenses-paid visit.
Another promised him a $20,000 scholarship, although his parents own a successful business.
Last week Harvard University wrote to say that it had waived its Jan. 1 application deadline for Mr.
Watson so he could still apply.
When he called to check, a woman in the Harvard admissions office said she knew nothing about the change, until he identified himself as a black student.


Judge Delays Challenge to Congressional Districts
Even when it's over, it's not always over.
After a brutal fight about the Congressional redistricting of New York State last year, the whole matter is hanging fire again.


Pedophiles and the Law
To the Editor:
I would like to respond to your review of my "Sexual Science and the Law" (Jan. 31).
I did not conclude in the book that "we have no reliable psychiatric evidence that  [ child-adult sexual ]  relations harm children." I reported the findings of a 1986 review of the scientific literature that maintained that "from one-fifth to two-fifths of abused children seen by clinicians manifest pathological disturbance." I reported the findings of a 1991 review that maintained "there is still a lack of consensus regarding
the proportion
of children who have been psychologically harmed" (emphasis added). Regarding incest experiences, I concluded, "
Not all
reports . . . document harm" (emphasis added). For homosexual child-adult experiences, I concluded, "
Not all
. . . are necessarily viewed by the younger person as traumatic" (emphasis added). And I noted that two factors seem to be associated with more harm to the child -- when the sexual contact is forced and when the adult is the father. The reviewer makes it appear that I support the extremist views held by pedophile groups like the North American Man-Boy Love Association.


Don't Cut Jobs, Cut Working Hours. . . And Count In the Computer Effect
To the Editor:
In "Stanching the Loss of Good Jobs," the word "computers" appears not once.
This is astonishing because for anybody not sleeping it must must be crystal clear that the progress in computer technology is the fundamental reason for disappearing jobs.


The Rope
WHAT: The ultimate icon of New York night life.
A tube of burgundy velour or velour blend -- but seldom real velvet -- three to six feet long, held up by aluminum or steel stanchions.
It's used to guard the doors of all night spots that aspire to hotness.
WHERE IT RULES: Everywhere that's anywhere: China Club, Grand, Club USA, a Susanne Bartsch party.
Up to 800 people wait behind it on Saturday night at Webster Hall.
Getting past it requires prospective patrons to be (a) on the list or (b) beautiful or famous enough not to have to be on the list.
Those who are neither may wait humiliating hours only to be told, "Sorry, private party." Erich Conrad says the only people his rope excludes at the Friday party he promotes at the Supper Club are the "glamourphobic" ones.
"Unfortunately," he said, "on weekends New York is littered with glamourphobic people."


INSIDE
Bosnian Plight Said to Ease
The U.N. said reports from a besieged Bosnian town that is likely to receive airdrops of aid suggested that the suffering there was not as deep as it was several months ago.
Page 8.
Sun Shines Again on Florida
After three years in which it struggled with recession, Florida's economy is now poised for a burst of expansion.
Economic Pulse, page 28.
Bill Clinton's Washington
The advent of the Clinton Administration has produced a seismic shift in the ethos of the capital, with a younger, hipper and more inclusive crowd than any since the heyday of the Kennedys.
Page 24.


Editorial Notebook; The Roots of Bosnia's Anguish
When Yugoslavia was still a country, foreigners complained that political arguments seemed never to get beyond the year 1945.
After Yugoslavia crumbled, startled outsiders discovered that Serbs spoke of the Battle of Kosovo in 1389 as if it had happened yesterday.
Now that horizon needs another shove: the sources of blood hate are even remoter in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
A plurality of Bosnians -- about 44 percent -- identify with the Muslim faith.
Americans have come to understand that this Slavic tribe converted to Islam long ago.
What hasn't come through clearly is why.
After all, nearly all other Slavs -- notably Serbs and Bulgarians -- stubbornly clung to Christianity during long centuries of Ottoman rule.


CONDEMNED INDIAN GAINS SPECIAL RITE
A Sioux Indian convicted of murder and kidnapping will be allowed to have a tribal medicine man perform final rites for him before he is executed on Wednesday.
A Delaware Superior Court judge on Friday rejected a motion by lawyers for the condemned man, James Allen Red Dog, to block the execution.


A Cautionary Tale for the Little Investor
IT had all the earmarks of a classic whistle-blowing saga: a disgruntled employee, a trove of internal documents and a laundry list of explosive allegations.
There was even the de rigueur bland setting -- a noon lunch of hot dogs at the Tampa-St.
Petersburg airport -- to mask the transfer of sensitive evidence to the Government.
But little else about Dave Jonsson's April Fool's Day meeting in 1989 with Tim Barker, a Securities and Exchange Commission investigator, has followed the standard script.


POSTINGS: Break Out the Spaldeen; Restoring A Stoop
The word comes from the Dutch
stoep,
a front veranda.
It is the first syllable of stoopball, a quintessential New York game that kept generations of youths busy throwing a pink rubber ball (a spaldeen) against the steps and trying to catch the ball on the fly.
It is a crucial part of city life, and now there will be one more.
A town-house co-op at 60 West 70th Street is planning to restore its original high stoop, which was removed years ago and replaced with a basement entrance.
The building is one of a group of 12 designed by Hubert Pirsson and Company in 1886: six apartment buildings on Columbus Avenue, three one-family dwellings on West 69th Street and three on West 70th.
The West 69th Street buildings still have their original stoops, but those on West 70th were removed.


Making Soups and Stews With Seafood
ALTHOUGH I spent a great deal of my childhood in Dorset in the southwest of England not far from the sea, I don't remember eating shellfish until I moved to New York.
On my first day in the city, my mother took me to the Oyster Bar at Grand Central Terminal, where I tasted bluepoints for the first time and had my first bowl of clam chowder.
I was 17, and for me the experience was an initiation into an exciting new world.
Since then, I have discovered the seafood soups and stews of the Mediterranean, Italian zuppa di pesce, mussels mariniere loaded with garlic, bourride with aioli and countless other ways of cooking different kinds of shellfish and seafood in a pot.
The recipes sometimes look rather daunting at first, because there are so many ingredients, but the stews or soups take only a short time to cook, which makes them particularly good for informal entertaining or for a dinner prepared after work.


Guatemala Round Ends; Some Gains Cited
The Guatemalan Government and the rebels who have been fighting against it for 32 years have concluded their first round of peace talks in six months here, claiming "important advances" but detailing few.
Bishop Rodolfo Quezada Toruno, the Roman Catholic cleric who is mediating the talks, said at the end of four days of meetings that there had been a narrowing of some differences between the two sides.


Do-It-Yourself Autobiography, Ready for Prime Time
Frankie C. always strapped on a gun when he ventured into his bullet-pocked North Philadelphia neighborhood.
Now the stocky young gang member packs something else: a video camera.
"The camera is my weapon," he says.
"For people living here, eyes are a punishment. But I'm going to take this camera and film the pain straight up."
Frankie tells his story in "Teen Dreams: Unheard Voices of America's Youth," a forthcoming documentary commissioned by British television.
But no professional camera crew trailed him.
Frankie is creating his own "video diary," a new form of television journalism that has proved popular with British viewers and is poised to leap across the Atlantic.


In India, Nationhood Rips Along Old Seams
PEACE has never come easy to India.
At independence in 1947, the blood of more than a million Muslims and Hindus was spilled as colonial India was sundered into India and Pakistan.
India has since endured decades of caste wars and sectarian strife.
But through it all, the country has been ruled virtually unchallenged by the Congress Party, India's most important unifying force, the architect and exponent of the ideal of secular democracy.
Now, in a drama that is only beginning to unfold, the central tenets of India's political unity are being severely challenged by a newly invigorated national force -- Hindu fundamentalism as organized in the Bharatiya Janata Party.
Last week, the Congress Party Government found it necessary to garrison the capital and arrest 100,000 people to forestall the threat that enormous Hindu demonstrations would bring the Government down.
It defended its ideal behind barbed wire, steel-pipe barricades and 100,000 police and paramilitary troops.
The tactic worked, for the moment, but the need to employ it suggested far more trouble to come.


With the 1993 Athletics, Introductions Are the Order of the Day
The subject is not restricted to fans and reporters.
It has infiltrated the Oakland Athletics' clubhouse, too.
"Among the players, we're talking about it," catcher Terry Steinbach said.
"Who's going to replace Stew? Who's going to replace Mike Moore? Who's going to take Carney's job? But you can't do it. These guys are gone. We had great times together. Now we have new guys and we have to use their talent."


What's Possibly Left? Winfield Wants to Pitch
He pitched his collegiate team to the College World Series, and now, after proving his major league mettle, he wants a chance to pitch just one inning before he retires.
Is that too much to ask?
Not for DAVE WINFIELD .
"Let me just mop up," said the 41-year-old Minnesota oufielder and designated hitter.
"I don't care if I just get one guy out."


Making Soups and Stews With Seafood
ALTHOUGH I spent a great deal of my childhood in Dorset in the southwest of England not far from the sea, I don't remember eating shellfish until I moved to New York.
On my first day in the city, my mother took me to the Oyster Bar at Grand Central Terminal, where I tasted bluepoints for the first time and had my first bowl of clam chowder.
I was 17, and for me the experience was an initiation into an exciting new world.
Since then, I have discovered the seafood soups and stews of the Mediterranean, Italian zuppa di pesce, mussels mariniere loaded with garlic, bourride with aioli and countless other ways of cooking different kinds of shellfish and seafood in a pot.
The recipes sometimes look rather daunting at first, because there are so many ingredients, but the stews or soups take only a short time to cook, which makes them particularly good for informal entertaining or for a dinner prepared after work.


Moving Step by Step Through Form 1040
This sample tax return, prepared using the popular program Taxcut from Meca Software, and the accompanying comments by Jan M. Rosen are intended to help taxpayers with the annual ordeal.
The return can also serve as a model for people who fill the forms out by hand or use another program.
People who go to professional preparers can study it for help in getting their paperwork organized, thereby reducing the preparer's hourly bill.
Daniel Caine, a tax lawyer and author of Taxcut, said many buyers, particularly the first time, used the program to get organized and produce a draft return, which they then submitted to an accountant for checking.
Mr.
Caine checked this return.


New Book Says U.S. Plotted To Kill Top Nazi Scientist
A new book says that in World War II American spies and generals tried to kidnap, assassinate or kill in bombing raids the German scientist Werner Heisenberg, a Nobel laureate in physics thought to be the brains behind Hitler's bid for the atomic bomb.
The episode is one of only a handful of known cases in which a scientist was marked for death by military rivals, and apparently the sole time a Nobel laureate was so targeted.


New Issues: Sellers Win, Buyers Lose
Initial public offerings, as any broker will be happy to tell you, are often great investments.
They are your chance to get in on the ground floor, to share in the growth of business.
Now along come a couple of academics who studied the record of companies that went public over a 20-year period.
Tim Loughran, a graduate student at the University of Illinois, and Jay R. Ritter, a finance professor, found the brokers are wrong.
Most I.P.O.'s are overpriced, and that problem is worst when the market is hot.


Weeds: Nutrient, Vegetable or Nuisance?
THE next time anyone considers weeds as mere nuisances, they just may want to think again.
No one knows what value some of these ordinary plants may have, and there could be a beneficial function to society in their future.
As a case in point, look at what is happening to purslane, a rather common garden weed.
It sprawls, has fat rounded leaves and is a nuisance, even though a somewhat attractive one.


Hartford Benefit for People With AIDS
A PAIR of benefit concerts can be heard today at 4 P.M.: the double bassist Gary Karr and the pianist Harmon Lewis will play in Hartford at Immanuel Congregational Church, while choral and instrumental ensembles of South Church in Hartford will perform at the Second Congregational Church in Middle Haddam in a program directed by Richard Donohue.
The Karr-Lewis duo has donated its services to support Bread and Roses, an organization providing residential care for people with AIDS-related diseases, and while there is no formal admission charge, donations are requested.
For more details, call 527-8121.


On Turning 13: Reports from the Front Lines
Yesterday, Chelsea Clinton became a teen-ager.
The Week in Review asked an eighth-grade social studies class at the New York City Lab School for Gifted Education, a public junior high that selects students with diverse backgrounds from all over the city: "What did it feel like when you turned 13?" Here are excerpts from their written responses.
I was going through a depressing phase when I turned 13.
I felt like I was being greedy by asking for anything expensive, so I only asked for one expensive gift.
On my birthday, I received that gift, and discovered that I didn't want it anymore.
My mother yelled at first.
Then tried to return it.
It was nonrefundable.
I started having mood swings over every little thing.
I screamed at my parents constantly and got into big fights with my twin sister, who was perfectly satisfied with her birthday.


On the Upgrade of the Dining Slope
MUCH like a veteran skier who has seen many mountain peaks and valleys, the Chalet in Roslyn has had its ups and downs in its 20 years.
This winter, with the naming of David Joyce as executive chef, the venerable restaurant is again reaching for the heights.
Mr.
Joyce earned his culinary stripes at Prix Fixe and La Reserve in Manhattan.
His training is classical French, his inclinations are sunny Mediterranean, and his cooking is exciting.


The Jackpot in Television's Future
On the morning of Nov. 7, Barry Diller glimpsed the future of television in an unlikely place.
The former chairman of Paramount Pictures and Fox Inc. was in suburban Philadelphia, in the studios of the QVC video retail channel.
QVC usually fills its air time with discount diamond rings, nonstick frying pans and collectible dolls.
But this morning, Diller's friend Diane Von Furstenberg, the designer, was selling her dresses.
Thousands of calls flooded in from all over the country.
As Diller watched the show unfold, QVC's computer system captured names and addresses, took down orders and worked out complex credit transactions, all in a matter of seconds.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about efforts to appeal the conviction of Bonnie Foreshaw, who is serving a 45-year sentence for murder, referred incorrectly to Mary Werblin, a lawyer involved in the case.
She lives in Woodbury, not Stonington.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 7 about the appointment of an environmental specialist from Greenlawn as a trustee for a bankrupt manufacturer in Brooklyn misidentified the company.
The company in bankruptcy is Plated Plastics Industries, Inc., not SC Plated Plastics Industries, Inc.
Because of an editing error, the article also referred incorrectly to the trustee, James Schirripa.
He is chief executive of Life Support Sciences Inc. of Greenlawn, and is not a lawyer.


Michael Is Taking 'the Return' in Stride
Gene Michael welcomed a reporter into his office this morning by smiling and then quickly posing a question.
"So are you here to do a story on me getting fired?" he asked.
No laughter followed the awkward moment because everyone knows Michael's status as the Yankees' general manager will be closely evaluated once George Steinbrenner returns to power with the team on Monday.


Take That! A 19-0 Run Propels Hall
Seton Hall gained further command of the Big East today by sweeping aside a challenging Connecticut team in a game that suddenly became easy near the end.
The Pirates came up with a 19-0 run that lasted for six of the final seven minutes of the game.
The stampede propelled Seton Hall from 7 points down to 12 points ahead, at 75-63.
The Huskies, with a capacity crowd of 16,294 in the Civic Center urging them on, had hit a wall.


CRYING WOLF OVER ELEPHANTS
I will never be prouder of any action taken by the African Wildlife Foundation than its leadership in protecting the African elephant by calling for an end to its destruction ("Crying Wolf Over Elephants," by Raymond Bonner, Feb. 7).
A total ban on commercial trade in ivory made sense, and will continue to make sense until the elephant numbers rebound and the healthy principle of sustainable use of natural resources takes root.
PAUL T. SCHINDLER President, African Wildlife Foundation
Washington


Still Photos Trace The Moving Image Of Blacks
Motion pictures, needing shortcuts and symbols to speed communication, are a most ingenious device for the production and dissemination of stereotypes.
When it comes to black Americans, the stereotypes have been particularly potent and lasting (although other groups are not lacking for reasons to complain).
As late as 1970, John O. Killens, a black film writer, said that the movie industry was "the most anti-Negro influence in this nation." It has filled many minds with pictures of happy blacks having fish fries in a "Green Pastures" heaven and Butterfly McQueen as a flustery pickaninny with a weak-tea voice in "Gone With the Wind."
"Imaging Blacks: African-Americans in American Films" is a capsule history told through 150 film stills, press kits, posters, lobby cards and clippings at the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture (135th Street and Malcolm X Boulevard, through May 25).
This kind of show, packed with single photographs from little-known or dimly remembered films, depends heavily on a text; fortunately, the labels give it point and punch.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
In POINT OF IMPACT, by Stephen Hunter (Bantam, $21.95), the protagonist is a former Marine sniper who served in Vietnam and had more than 80 verified kills -- the best of his kind, a world-class shot.
Now living in seclusion in Arkansas, Bob Lee Swagger spends his time hunting and taking care of his firearms collection.
Hired by a mysterious organization as a consultant, he discovers too late that he has been set up.
He becomes the most hated man in America.
He is on the run, wanted by every police department in the country, targeted by the F.B.I. and also on the hit list of the powerful, shadowy group that originally approached him.
Yes, Bob Lee Swagger is in a lot of trouble.


Making Soups and Stews With Seafood
ALTHOUGH I spent a great deal of my childhood in Dorset in the southwest of England not far from the sea, I don't remember eating shellfish until I moved to New York.
On my first day in the city, my mother took me to the Oyster Bar at Grand Central Terminal, where I tasted bluepoints for the first time and had my first bowl of clam chowder.
I was 17, and for me the experience was an initiation into an exciting new world.
Since then, I have discovered the seafood soups and stews of the Mediterranean, Italian zuppa di pesce, mussels mariniere loaded with garlic, bourride with aioli and countless other ways of cooking different kinds of shellfish and seafood in a pot.
The recipes sometimes look rather daunting at first, because there are so many ingredients, but the stews or soups take only a short time to cook, which makes them particularly good for informal entertaining or for a dinner prepared after work.


Hillary Clinton's Potent Brain Trust On Health Reform
THE CLOCK is running on the Clinton Administration's task force on health care, which now has only two months to produce a comprehensive restructuring of a system that has resisted comprehensive restructuring for years.
But Ira C. Magaziner, who is running the mammoth policy-making enterprise with First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton, still found time last week to make the long trip to the Tetons.
There he met with a loose-knit group of experts that has become one of the most important influences in the shaping of the Clinton plan.
Known as the Jackson Hole Group for the Wyoming ski town where its members meet, it has included over the past three years about 100 academics; executives from the insurance, hospital and pharmaceutical industries; physicians; representatives of business and assorted policy makers.


3 Killed and 10 Injured in a Brooklyn Fire
Two children and an adult were killed and 10 people were injured when fire swept through a two-story house in the Borough Park section of Brooklyn yesterday morning.
Neighbors said they heard an explosion about 7 A.M. and saw flames shooting from three windows on the second floor of the house at 1364 63d Street, near 14th Avenue.
When firefighters arrived, the building was engulfed in flame.


On the Road, Christopher Is Finding His Footing
In his meeting with President Hafez al-Assad in Damascus the other day, Warren Christopher joked that he was old enough to be Bill Clinton's father, getting a laugh out of the Syrian leader.
In Kuwait City, he pressed the Emir -- unsuccessfully -- to give women the right to vote, noting that America's own history on the subject was far from perfect.
And in Amman, he took reporters along to a soccer field for his daily 20-minute, two-mile run, graciously insisting that they do another lap while he waited in the car.
On his 10-day, 10-country overseas debut as Secretary of State, Mr.
Christopher began to define himself.
Struggling to shed his image as the loyal, but colorless No. 2 to Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance during the Carter Administration, Mr.
Christopher is smiling more, making himself more accessible to reporters and trying to act, well, robust, an adjective he likes to use in discussing what good diplomacy should be.


Ex-Officer Guilty in Sale of Information to Gotti
A retired New York City police detective pleaded guilty on Friday to selling secret police information about the mob to John Gotti and other crime figures.
Law-enforcement authorities have termed his action as a mob mole one of the biggest and most stunning security breaches the Police Department has suffered in years.


Fletcher Knebel, Writer, 81, Dies; Co-Author of 'Seven Days in May'
Fletcher Knebel, co-author of the best-selling cold war novel "Seven Days in May" and a retired syndicated newspaper columnist, died on Friday at his home in Honolulu at the age of 81.
Mr.
Knebel, who as a member of the Hemlock Society had supported a right to suicide, took his own life with sleeping pills, said his wife, Constance.
She said he had left two notes saying he was ending his suffering from lung cancer and heart ailments.


Silence After Slaying Stuns Officer; Pleas of Victim, and Later of Police, Brought No Assistance
Joe Constance and his Trenton Police Department homicide detectives were still struggling to put together the details of the murder of Kristin Huggins when television pictures flashed from Liverpool, England, showing a crowd attacking a police van carrying two young boys accused of killing a 2-year-old.
"I would love to see the kind of anger that those people in England expressed," said Mr.
Constance, who is Deputy Chief for Criminal Investigations.
"I want to see the idea that it's obscene to kill someone, where you go crazy when it happens. Those people were stoning the police van. Why aren't we like that anymore?"


A Terrible Thing to Waste
To the Editor:
I say "Bravo!" to Carol Ann Francis.


Eagleson, Stopped in F.B.I Net, Blames It on Orr's Shots
Alan Eagleson's memoirs "Power Play," (McClelland &amp; Stewart, 1991) includes nine pictures of Bobby Orr.
Eagleson often has said that his relationship with Orr helped Eagleson become hockey's top power broker for a quarter century.
In that what goes around can come around, Eagleson's bitter break with Orr may have helped topple Eagleson from power two years ago and may have spurred continuing investigations of Eagleson by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, a grand jury and several news organizations.
At least Eagleson thinks so.


Talking: Appraisals; Getting Around the Evaluation
SINCE the residential real estate market took a turn for the worse in the late 80's, buyers, sellers and owners struggling to refinance have seen their plans repeatedly undermined by the low values appraisers have pinned on their homes.
For example, even though a buyer might have been willing to pay $230,000 for a three-bedroom home, the lender's appraiser may have insisted it was worth only $210,000, based on recent sales of similar homes in the area.
This instantly curtailed the amount the lender was willing to finance.


Technology; From the Rugged Outback, A Quick-Fix Modular Tire
ALAN R. BURNS has reinvented the wheel, or at least the tire around it, and now finds demand outstripping supply for his modular tires.
During years of traveling through Australia's outback as a mining surveyor, Mr.
Burns learned that in off-road conditions, conventional air-filled tires are subject to multiple hazards that cause tire loss and costly down time on the job.
The alternative that Mr.
Burns developed is a modular hollow rubber tread that bolts around the circumference of a steel wheel hub, using a steel retaining plate.
There is no air under pressure, so tires cannot go flat.
This system results in a blend of the traction and comfort provided by a pneumatic tire with the stability and hazard resistance of a solid tire or tractor belt.


New Rule Is Aiding Deals
The buying and selling of formerly state-owned apartments became possible in Moscow only a year ago, when the city adopted a procedure through which occupants could privatize such dwellings for a fee of 1,400 rubles ($2.40).
Privately owned cooperative apartments, available in the Soviet era to those who could afford a small down payment, account for 9 percent of the city's housing stock.


CLASSICAL BRIEF
Webern: Works for String Quartet; Gielen: Variations for String Quartet
Artis Quartet. Sony Classical SK 48059; CD.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Bristol, R.I.; State's First Law School
CONTINUING an expansion that began in 1969 when it moved from Providence to this seaside community, the 3,600-student Roger Williams University is just a few months away from completing Rhode Island's first law school.
The $10 million project is scheduled to be completed in July andthe first class at the school will enroll in September, said Betty Vanlersel, the university's spokeswoman.


Mementos of Stress In the 1860's Economy
WHILE President Clinton is going around the country trying to sell his economic recovery program, it's nice to think that things have changed a lot in 130 years.
President Lincoln had trouble selling not only his policies but also money itself.
In the early years of the Civil War, major Confederate victories combined with few Union victories led many people in the North to put their faith in harder currency than greenback dollars.
So they hoarded silver,gold and coins.
By 1863, any type of money -- coins or paper -- was hard to find.
Merchants were accepting postage stamps as money, and the Union itself was nearly bankrupt after two years of war.


Taxes and Subsidies For and From Olympus
The one argument against Olympus that I find totally incomprehensible is the assumption that it would endanger drinking-water supplies  [ "The Olympus Dispute's Broad Reach," Feb. 7 ] .
How could 600 people in an office building accomplish this catastrophe when the same area housed 1,000 people and a working staff of 2,000 without contaminating the water supply?


Roadside Attractions To Reckon With
Architects who hope that infrastructure holds the magic key to rebuilding American cities need to reckon with a sobering truth: throughout this century, infrastructure -- highways, communications, even mass transit -- has been the major force responsible for dismantling American cities.
And they will also have to reckon with Frank Lloyd Wright -- the greatest "infra structural" architect America has produced.
Wright didn't build highways.
He made images.
His residential architecture beckoned to city dwellers with the promise of a bold adventure in living that could be theirs if they would leave the city behind.
For Wright, the city was "the triumph of the herd instinct," "the great mouth," "the Moloch that knows no god but More." His houses offered the hearty independence of life on the prairie, but with all the modern conveniences.
As the century unfolded, increasing numbers of Americans responded to his call.
In the postwar years, Wright lent cultural prestige to those who abandoned the city for the suburbs.


Maori Art Comes to Chicago
At dawn on March 9, more than 30 Maori people who have traveled from New Zealand for the occasion will hold a private ceremony to dedicate the newly restored Maori meeting house at the Field Museum of Natural History in Chicago.
The public opening on March 13 will be marked by a Maori art exhibit through early May and dance performances in late March.
Named after Ruatepupuke, the celebrated Maori ancestor who is said to have founded wood carving, the sacred meeting house has been part of the Field Museum's collection since 1905.
It was on permanent display at the museum from 1925 to 1977, and has been on view only intermittently since.
Its origin was confirmed only in 1986, by a Maori delegation to the museum.


LONE STAR
Your article on Ann Richards will reinforce the conviction many Americans have that our present-day political system doesn't attract people of solid accomplishment to run for office.
Richards seems not to have the talent or the broad perspective for serious, creative thought on the serious problems of Texas and the nation.
She utters the standard cliches about children, the poor, the elderly.


Debra G. Match, Chalmers I. Morse
Dr. and Mrs.
Ronald Match of Glen Cove, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Debra Gayle Match to Chalmers Ingersoll Morse, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Charles H. Morse Jr.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Match, 29, is the director of education and membership at the Aspen Art Museum in Aspen, Colo.
She graduated from Emory University and received a master's degree in education from Northwestern University.
Her father is a hand and orthopedic surgeon at North Shore Hospital in Glen Cove.
Her mother, Susan Match, is in the chorus of the Dessoff Choirs in New York.


Tika Pinther, William Brewer
Mr. and Mrs.
Miklos Pinther of Teaneck, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Tika Liang Pinther, to William Logan Brewer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Brewer Jr. of Stamford, Conn.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Pinther, 22, is an account administrator in trusts and estates at the Bankers Trust Company in New York.
She and her fiance graduated from Connecticut College.


This California Dream Is All About Auto Insurance
WANT to cut auto insurance premiums by a third -- and, as a bonus, rid the roads of uninsured drivers, untangle traffic, reduce highway fatalities and help clean up the air?
This may sound suspiciously like the teaser for one of those late night infomercials on the miraculous rejuvenating powers of pureed vegetables, but read on.
Inspired by proposals from the financial writer Andrew Tobias and the National Insurance Consumer Organization, some influential Democratic politicians in California are pressing for radical changes in how motorists pay for auto insurance and collect for injuries -- changes that they believe would slash consumer costs and improve the quality of insurance.


Washington Has an Oval Office That's Decidedly Not Square
Forget Georgetown salons, blazers and designer frocks; forget pearls and power meals in red-meat restaurants like Morton's or Duke Zeibert's with its curmudgeonly male patrons.
Think ethnic food, the eclectic Adams-Morgan neighborhood, dark dives like Chief Ike's Mambo Room.
Think renting over buying.
Think movies.
Most of all, for the moment, think work.


The Struggle for Freedom and a Proper Burial
PATRICK M'ROBERT, an Englishman touring New York City in 1774, wrote "It rather hurts an Europian eye to see so many negro slaves upon the streets tho' they are said to deminish yearly here." M'Robert estimated the city population between 26,000 and 30,000 and thought that non-whites were about a fifth of it.
Most slaves were black, some were captured Indians.
One hundred and fifty years after the Dutch brought the first slaves to New Amsterdam, abolitionists in New York City were arguing that people striving for their freedom from Great Britain should not be holding other people as slaves.
Slave uprisings in the city in 1712 and 1741 brought curfews, prohibitions on meeting and burial restrictions.
As war with Britain began in 1775, racial tensions were still high.
The British, making this tension a tactic, promised freedom to any slave who served in their army.
After slaves began to flee to the Redcoats in great numbers, the Revoluntionaries adopted the same policy.
On March 20, 1781, the New York General Assembly authorized the enlistment of slaves: "And such slave, so entered as aforesaid, who shall serve for a term of three years, or until regularly discharged, shall immediately after such service or discharge be, and is hereby declared to be a free man of this state."
One historian of that time, Willian Smith, wrote that blacks in Washington's army "mix, march, mess &amp; sleep with the White." Smith also took note that the black soldiers complained of a "want to Pay" and many were "in Rags without Shoes &amp; Stockings." By the war's end in 1783, 5,000 black men had served as Revolutionary soldiers.
By the time the new Federal Government conducted its first census in 1790, New York City's population was about 10 percent non-white - 7 percent slaves and 3 percent free.
One of the slaves who rose above the indignities of the time was Peter Williams.
His Loyalist owner fled to Britain after the war.
The Trustees of John Street Methodist Church bought Williams for $40 in 1783.
He worked as the sexton, and purchased this freedom in 1785, then became a prosperous tobacconist and undertaker.
At that time, blacks were not not allowed to be full members of New York's churches.
They were relegated to balconies or back pews, and had to bury their dead out of town instead of in sanctified church yards.
Frustrated, Williams and other black members of the John Street Church founded the city's first black congregation, Mother African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, in 1796. (The congregation is now located at 137th Street near Lenox Avenue.) Because Williams had donated the land and much of the money to build the first church, he laid the cornerstone on July 30, 1800, at Church and Leonard Streets, a year after New York State passed a law to abolish slavery.
In 1794, black New Yorkers petitioned the City Common Council for a better cemetery and proposed a plot on Chrystie Street.
After the city determined that it was "in a proper Place," the Council chipped in $:100 of the $:450 price tag, and set up a "trust for a burying Ground for the black People."
As this new burying ground and other black churches with cemeteries began to be built, those bodies at the Negros Burial Ground who could still be identified were disinterred and moved to safer ground.
But an unknown number of graves remained.
By the end of the 1700's, the city's growing population was forcing expansion uptown.
The Collect Pond was filled in, the burial ground was built over and the city's street grid continued northward directly over the dead.


Don't Confess to Anything You Didn't Do
TESTING TESTING
Social Consequences of the Examined Life.
By F. Allan Hanson.
Illustrated. 378 pp.
Berkeley: University of California Press. $28.


Heels Look Out for No. 1 As Reese Eases the Pain
If it wasn't the pulled back muscle that clouded Brian Reese's mind and limited his ability, it was the hyperextended finger on his shooting hand.
If it wasn't the finger, it was the sprained ankle.
If not the ankle, the pulled hamstring muscle.
But today, more than any other in this memorable North Carolina basketball season, each of those obstacles became distant memories.
With Reese's health allowing him to operate freely and confidently at last, he helped the Tar Heels take an important step toward becoming the closest thing to a leading contender for a national championship.


Deadly Nuclear Waste Seems to Have Leaked in Washington State
About 7,500 gallons of deadly radioactive waste have apparently leaked from a tank at the Government's Hanford reservation in Washington State, raising serious questions about the success of efforts to improve safety of the storage of waste from the production of nuclear weapons.
Federal officials say they do not know when the leak occurred or where the toxic waste went.
To make matters worse, some officials said they were not certain there even was a leak.


BENEFITS
Compassionate Siblings
MONDAY -- Big Brothers/Big Sisters of New York City will hold its annual Sidewalks of New York awards dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria.
The actor-dancer Gregory Hines, Jane Pauley, the co-anchor of the "Dateline NBC" program, Carl H. Pforzheimer 3d, an investment banker, and Dr.
Alvin F. Poussaint of the Harvard Medical School, are to be honored.
Cocktails at 6 P.M.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 580-5511.
Think, and Eat, Duck
TUESDAY -- The Lesbian and Gay Community Services Center will benefit from a Duck Festival at the New Deal Restaurant, 133 West 13th Street.
It will include a dizzying array of duck dishes, from duck prosciutto and duck rillettes to duck foie gras, duck mousse and duck yakitori.
Dinner starts at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 620-7310.
Double Jewish Celebration
WEDNESDAY -- A masked Purim Ball at the Waldorf-Astoria will celebrate both the Jewish holiday and the reopening in June of the Jewish Museum.
The benefit for the museum starts with cocktails at 7:30 P.M., followed by dinner and dancing.
Black tie or costume.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 245-6570.
Honoring Barbara Jordan
WEDNESDAY -- Barbara Jordan, the former Texas Congresswoman who now holds the Lyndon B. Johnson Centennial Chair in National Policy at the Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs at the University of Texas, will be inducted into the African-American Hall of Fame of the Southern Queens Park Association.
A reception at 6:30 P.M., followed by dinner at the Holiday Inn-Crowne Plaza at La Guardia Airport, is sponsored by and will benefit the association, an umbrella group of several community, educational and civil-rights groups.
Tickets, $100, from (718) 276-4630.
For Puerto Rican Families
THURSDAY -- The Puerto Rican Family Institute, a 33-year-old human-services organization in New York City, will hold its annual fund-raising party at the Grand Hyatt Hotel.
Among those to be honored are Representative Nydia Velazquez, Democrat of New York, Cesar Perales, the Deputy Mayor for Health and Human Services, and the singer Celia Cruz.
Black tie.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets, $200, from (212) 924-6320.
Party Under the Whale
THURSDAY -- The American Museum of Natural History's annual winter dance, with a "Treasure Island" theme, will be held in the museum's Hall of Ocean Life, under its suspended 94-foot-long replica of a blue whale.
The event, which starts at 9 P.M., will benefit the museum's scientific research.
Black tie or buccaneer dress.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 769-5166.
Evening for Ballet School
THURSDAY -- The Feld Ballets/NY will celebrate the 15th anniversary of its New Ballet School, a tuition-free, professional training program for New York City public-school children.
A performance by the ballet and by 120 students will start at 7:30 P.M. at the Joyce Theater, Eighth Avenue at 19th Street.
A post-performance dinner will be at Prix Fixe, 18 West 18th Street.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 777-7710.
Singles for UJA-Federation
THURSDAY -- Business and Professionals of New York, a division of the UJA-Federation, will hold its Winter Benefit at Tavern on the Green, starting at 7 P.M.
The party, with an open bar, hors d'oeuvres and dancing, is geared to single people between 35 and 49.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 836-1734.
Boys and Girls Club Benefit
SATURDAY -- The Madison Boys and Girls Club will hold a Mardi Gras Mambo at the Puck Building, 295 Lafayette Street, at Houston Street, to raise money for the educational, recreational and guidance services it provides for thousands of poor children at four clubhouses and a summer camp.
There will be cocktails, appetizers and dancing from 9 P.M. to 2:30 A.M.
Tickets, $60, from (212) 532-5751, or $69.95 at the door.
Dinner-Dance for Rye Arts
SATURDAY -- The Rye (N.Y.) Arts Center's benefit dinner-dance will be at the Hyatt Regency in Greenwich, Conn.
Cocktails and an auction of vacations and other events start at 7:30 P.M., followed by dinner and dancing until 1 A.M.
Tickets, $130, or $75 for people 30 and under, from (914) 967-0700.
Classical Get-Together
SATURDAY -- The Sylvan Winds will be joined by the Guarneri String Quartet for a concert at 7:30 P.M., celebrating the 15th anniversary of the Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street.
A dinner to benefit the Sylvan Winds will follow at Shun Lee West, 43 West 65th Street.
Tickets, $100 for concert and dinner, or $75 for dinner alone, from (212)869-8653, or $25 for concert alone, from (212) 362-8719.
Katonah Beaux-Arts
SATURDAY -- The Katonah (N.Y.) Museum of Art's associates' committee, made up of people between 21 and 31, is holding a Beaux-Arts Headdress Ball from 9 P.M. to midnight at the museum, on Route 22 just south of Route 35 in Katonah.
Partygoers will also view the exhibit "Frederic E. Church: Under Changing Skies." Dress is black tie with headdress.
Tickets, $125 a couple or $70 a person, from (914) 232-9555.


