F.N.B. Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cultivating the Grass Roots To Reap Legislative Benefits
At first glance, the letters looked innocent enough, just a few dozen pieces of mail among the 1,000 or more that most members of Congress receive every week.
But as Sean Cavanaugh, a Congressional aide, read through them, it almost seemed as if vipers were slithering out of the envelopes.
Most of the letters were handwritten, some with the trembling script of the elderly, and they cried out with fear and despair: If Congress approved an obscure proposed change in Medicare policy, "then my husband will die."


The Talk of Hollywood; It Seems the Father Of the Child Star Is the Enfant Terrible
All weekend the phones have been ringing in Hollywood about the humbling of Macaulay Culkin, or, more specifically, the humbling of the star's manager and father, Kit Culkin.
"Enough!" said Arnon Milchan, one of the producers of the star's newest film, "George Balanchine's 'The Nutcracker.' " Mr.
Milchan, one of the more formidable producers and businessmen, said furiously in a telephone interview from Paris on Saturday: "I can take so much harassment, so much extortion, so much blackmail. Enough!"
Mr.
Milchan's tough stance and tougher words are, at first glance, a little funny because they deal, after all, with an 11-year-old boy who earns $8 million a picture and whose father demanded, and also got, major changes in the film that is to open on Nov. 24.
But Mr.
Milchan's comments are shocking by Hollywood standards because, over the last few years, studio heads, producers and agents have melted before the demands of the boy's father for, among other things, script and billing changes and just about anything else.
Most recently, in "The Good Son," where Macaulay plays an evil child, Kit Culkin's demands resulted in a year's delay in filming, in script changes and in a revolving door of directors and producers.
No one, until Mr.
Milchan, who is an Israeli, has taken him on.


Tibetans Sell Off Cultural Riches
To the Editor:
Under the counter over the Tibetan borders and beyond China's reach, behind drawn curtains and locked doors in two-story towns dwarfed by the peaks of the snowy Himalayas, you can find Tibet's sacred treasures.
They are all for sale.


WSFS Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


East China Sea Opened to Oil Exploration
Chevron, Texaco and two foreign oil companies have signed contracts with the Chinese Government to begin exploration in the East China Sea, opening another front in China's search for oil for its booming economy.
In a contract signed Friday and announced yesterday in Beijing, Chevron Overseas Petroleum Ltd., a subsidiary of the Chevron Corporation, was granted a seven-year contract to explore for crude oil and natural gas in a 700-square-mile area southeast of Shanghai.
Terms were not disclosed, and a Chevron Overseas spokeswoman, Pam Low, declined to place a dollar value on Chevron's commitment.


Essay; Stay Out of Touch
"We see wireless as fiber to the person," says the boss of Bell Atlantic.
He is not talking of moral fiber, which each person needs.
This waver of the future, steering his company into some supercolliding communications combine, speaks of optical fiber, a wire capable of transmitting zillions of unwanted messages into my home -- and interactively, yet, which means I would soon have the capability of, and therefor the responsibility for, answering them all.


Review/Fashion; Carefree Confidence at DKNY, Street Savvy at CK
The fashion industry knows a thing or two about ribbons.
So yesterday, when Donna Karan scissored the one across an entrance to Bryant Park, fashion's weeklong home during the New York collections, she cut it on the bias.
And it wasn't a red ribbon but a rusty gold one, fitting for fall.
Inside the tent where Ms.
Karan's lower-priced line, DKNY, was shown, a banner read, "Don't Knock New York," with the first letters of each word highlighted.
That was the message of Ms.
Karan's collection and the message for the first day of shows.


Arthur D. Greenleigh, 90, Expert On Welfare and Refugees, Is Dead
Arthur D. Greenleigh, who led Federal and private programs to help victims of the Depression and World War II and later founded a consulting firm on welfare issues, died on Friday at home in Manhattan at the age of 90.
The cause was cardiac arrest, his family said.


Firstfed Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Louis Heller, a New York Justice And Congressman, Is Dead at 88
Louis B. Heller, who was a supervising justice of the Matrimonial Division of the State Supreme Court in Brooklyn in the 1970's and a Democratic Congressman from Brooklyn from 1949 to 1954, died on Saturday in Hospice House, part of the Universal Medical Center complex in Plantation, Fla., near Fort Lauderdale.
He was 88 and lived in Lauderhill, Fla., near Fort Lauderdale.
The cause was colon cancer, said his son, Bobby.


First Western Financial Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


F&amp;M Bancorp (Wis.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Felicia Grumet, Mitchell Levine
Felicia Michelle Grumet, a senior associate at Deloitte &amp; Touche, was married yesterday to Mitchell Eric Levine, a securities trader at Kidder Peabody &amp; Company.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Arnold Marans performed the ceremony at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.


In an Endorsement, a Search for Signals
A newspaper's editorial stance is often central to its identity with readers.
So it was with special interest that news professionals took note of The Daily News's endorsement of Rudolph W. Giuliani for mayor last week.
With racial politics so much the subtext in the election, some of them said, it was revealing that The News under Mortimer B. Zuckerman chose to urge the ouster of David N. Dinkins, the city's first black mayor, because of his "unfulfilled promise."


Independent Bank (Mich.) (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jets Are the Talkers of the Town After Silencing the Giants
When Jets running back Johnny Johnson hit Giants linebacker Carlton Bailey in the helmet with a right hook that would have floored Tommy Morrison, it was only one of many examples of an ornery Jets team.
That play occurred in the first half, but the Giants and Jets got in shoving matches all day.
The Jets definitely had more attitude, even pointing at and mocking the Giants' home crowd.
In the past week there was more hype about this game, more talking back and forth than at a World Wrestling Federation match.
That didn't change today.
After the game it was as if the Giants couldn't accept that the Jets had beaten them.
There were complaints from Giants defenders that the Jets were taking cheap shots all afternoon, that the Giants got caught up in the Jets' trash-talking and were brought down to their level.
As if the Giants live in a penthouse and the Jets live in a box on the 50-yard line.


Stacy L. Levy, Steven Tanner
Stacy Lynn Levy, a daughter of Myrna and Fred Levy of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Steven Mitchell Tanner, the son of William Tanner of Great Neck, L.I., and the late Mitzi Tanner.
Rabbi Stanley Platek performed the ceremony at the Hewlett-East Rockaway Jewish Center in East Rockaway, L.I.
Ms.
Levy, 33, is keeping her name.
She is a vice president at Republic National Bank in New York.
She graduated cum laude from the State University at Albany and received an M.B.A. from Pace University.


CHRONICLE
ELAINE STEINBECK , the widow of John Steinbeck, will be taking a most sentimental journey on Friday when she travels to New Haven to see the operatic adaption of "Burning Bright," a play her husband wrote as they were falling in love 44 years ago.
"It will be very emotional, but I wouldn't miss it," she said the other day from her home in Sag Harbor, L.I., where she said, "I am looking out at his little writing house."


President of Harvard Cites Need For Commitment to Social Service
Harvard University needs to become less intellectually aloof and more engaged in social service, the university's president, Neil L. Rudenstine, says in a report to the university's Board of Overseers.
A principal goal for Harvard, says the report, which was released on Friday, is "to serve society by helping to address the most important problems that confront the nation and the larger world."


B.M.J. Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bryn Mawr Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dance in Review
Keely Garfield  Dia Center for the Arts
If laughter is the best medicine, Keely Garfield ought to bottle herself, her performers and her dances as an over-the-counter cure for innumerable ills.
The two new works she presented with her well-named Sinister Slapstick company on Friday were wicked, witty and full of prickly dance intelligence.


Algerian Forces Free Three French Hostages
Three French diplomats taken hostage in Algeria a week ago were freed by Algerian security forces Saturday night and today in raids that officials said resulted in the death of at least six of their Islamic fundamentalist abductors.
The Government said Jean-laude Thevenot, his wife, Michele Thevenot, and Alain Freisseir had been released.
They were abducted Oct. 24 near their house in downtown Algiers.


Ethnic Politics Fall by Wayside In a Miami Race
In a city where ethnicity and race often count for everything in politics, expectations are being confounded and voting blocs are crumbling as Miami's mayoral contest draws to a close amid a cloud of bilingual invective and mudslinging.
After deciding not to seek another term, Mayor Xavier Suarez has endorsed not a fellow Cuban but one of the last old-time Anglos still active in local politics.


LSB Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


14-Year-Old Killed In Russian Roulette
A 14-year-old youth shot and killed himself in the Bronx yesterday while playing Russian roulette with his stepfather's .357-caliber pistol, the police said.
The teen-ager, Raymond Diaz, took his stepfather's unlicensed gun from a hall closet and unloaded six rounds, said Sgt.
Frances Haimeck, a police spokeswoman.
After reloading one round, he told his 11-year-old brother and three friends about a game called Russian roulette.


Old National Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


People's Savings Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Charter Bancshares (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Top Star Of Sony Says He Wants Out
It was the kind of nightmare that executives at the Sony Corporation might have feared when they plunged into the music industry's volatile mix of talent, ego and money six years ago through their $2 billion acquisition of CBS Records.
There in the witness box last week sat one of Sony's most valuable assets, George Michael, the pop singer, whose first solo album, "Faith," sold 14 million copies after its release in 1988.
He told the High Court in London that Sony may know how to manufacture a Walkman, but that it has no appreciation for the creative process.
Saying he was disillusioned by Sony's unwillingness to allow him to grow as an artist, Mr.
Michael demanded to be released from his long-term contract.


Controversy Anew at Georgia College
A proposal to sell $23 million in tax-exempt bonds and a blizzard of lawsuits and countersuits have once again put a spotlight on a controversial Georgia college that in 15 years of existence has become one of the nation's largest art colleges.
The institution, the Savannah College of Art and Design, asked the Georgia Private Colleges and Universities Authority to approve the bonds so it could refinance loans and renovate four of the historic buildings it owns in downtown Savannah.
The state board, which said most requests are routinely approved, approved the application despite critics' accusations that it included false information.
The application has been sent to Gov.
Zell Miller, whose approval is also necessary.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; And then there were six? Networks are back in style as studios try to insure their products' future.
LIKE makers of mainframes in an era of personal computers, broadcast networks are supposed to be members of a dying breed, anachronistic enterprises destined to be overtaken by younger, leaner competitors.
So why is everyone suddenly trying to start a broadcast network?
Last week, Paramount Communications Inc. took time out from the takeover battle raging around it to announce that it was joining forces with Chris-Craft Industries to form a "fifth network." This week, Time Warner and the Tribune Company are expected to announce that they, too, are forming a network, presumably the sixth.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to the regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills today.
At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.02 percent, and the rate on the six-month issue was 3.16 percent.


Glendale Federal Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NBC uses commercials to tout the benefits of using commercials.
NEXT time Richard Dysart appears on television, it might not be as Leland McKenzie on "L.A. Law" or as a pitchman in commercials for Efidac/24, a new cold and allergy medication.
Instead, it might be in the unusual role of a spokesman for the efficacy of television as an advertising medium.
Mr.
Dysart stars in an innovative, perhaps precedent-setting, campaign called the NBC Brand Equity Project, produced by the network's marketing department and advertising and promotion department.
It begins today on CNBC, the NBC business cable television network.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the killing of an 11-year-old boy in Jamaica, Queens, on Saturday, misstated the child's surname in some editions.
He was Travis Lilley.


Compaq Introducing 46 New PC's
The Compaq Computer Corporation will make public 46 new personal computers today, significantly enlarging its product line.
The new offerings include more sophisticated business-oriented versions of the Presario home and small- office computer, which has been the best-selling product in the company's history; new models of the Prolinea business desktop that have networking capabilities built in or that can be gradually expanded to run multimedia applications, and a low-priced midrange desktop computer that runs on the Intel Corporation's new Pentium microprocessor.


Dina Karmazin, Andrew Elkins
Dina Leslie Karmazin, the daughter of Sharon Karmazin of North Brunswick, N.J., and Mel Karmazin of New York, was married yesterday to Andrew Todd Elkins, a son of Jerald and Carole Elkins of East Brunswick, N.J.
Rabbi Bennett Miller officiated at Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.
Mrs.
Elkins, 21, graduated from the University of Miami, where she was an admissions recruiter until recently.
Her father is the president and chief executive of the New York-based Infinity Broadcasting, an owner of radio stations around the country.
Her mother is the director of the East Brunswick Public Library.


THE 1993 CAMPAIGN: Volunteers; With Contest Close, the Day Of the Vote-Pullers Arrives
In union halls, churches, storefront offices and political clubs across the city, thousands of foot soldiers are preparing for the hand-to-hand political combat that will provide tomorrow's gritty climax to the mayoral race: getting out the vote.
With the race too close to call, strategists for both Mayor David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani know that every vote could be the decisive one, and they have mustered vast field operations designed to find supporters and coax, cajole, shame and shepherd them to the polls.


Mullen Is Winner In Powersoft Review
The Powersoft Corporation, a software company based in Burlington, Mass., has named Mullen Advertising in Wenham, Mass., to handle its estimated $6.5 million account, which has been at Duval Woglom Brueckner &amp; Partners in Boston for the last three and a half years.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Wednesday, about competition in the telecommunications industry, misidentified the small telephone company in which Tele-Communications Inc. holds a stake.
Tele-Communications owns part of Teleport Communications Group, not the MFS Communications Company.


Vote for Constitution in Peru Buttresses Its Leader
Voters in Peru appeared to approve a new Constitution today that would strengthen President Alberto K. Fujimori's authority and allow him to run for re-election, possibly extending his rule to the year 2005.
"Totally happy," Mr.
Fujimori said as two polling organizations predicted a narrow victory of 53 percent of valid votes cast in favor of his Constitution.
"Peru is one of the few countries in Latin America with a Constitution approved in a referendum."


'Twas All Hallow's Eve, the Day the Pumpkins Sailed


When Euphoria Spills Out of Control
The day after a frightful football victory at the University of Wisconsin, pieces of a railing and nearby fence separating the stands from the field at Camp Randall Stadium were lying in its northeast corner, twisted in a grotesque way more often found in the aftermath of a tornado than a celebration.
The condition of the two most seriously injured victims of the post-game crush of an estimated 12,000 fans in the student section was upgraded today from critical to serious, according to university officials.


Broadcast Agencies Have Earned Respect
To the Editor:
Yes, President Clinton's plan to consolidate the Voice of America and Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty would eliminate overlap and save money ("The Broadcast Wars, Continued," editorial, Oct. 23).


Russians Scramble to Fill an Unformed Parliament
Campaign workers sit clustered under the whimsical domes of St.
Basil's with hand-lettered signs reading Russia's Choice, Movement for Democratic Reform and New Russia.
They try to shield their clipboards from the wet snow and patiently explain to a steady stream of people how to fill out petition forms.
"These are the people I trust to build democracy," explains Ivan Mukhanov, a teacher.


CHRONICLE
As she strode onto the stage to host the Ford Theater's annual presidential gala Saturday night, WHOOPI GOLDBERG made it clear in her devilish, winking fashion who was in charge.
"I bet you're nervous, and I don't blame you, because you all know that I am truly politically incorrect," she said with a grin.


THE 1993 CAMPAIGN: Polling Places; 2 Sides Seek More Police to Stymie Intimidation and Fraud at Polls
After bitter sparring between Mayor David N. Dinkins and the Republican-Liberal mayoral candidate, Rudolph W. Giuliani, over how to prevent voter fraud at the polls tomorrow, Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly announced yesterday that a cadre of 52 police captains will be created to supervise polling places.
Mr.
Kelly also said that 3,500 police officers will be assigned to the city's polling places.
The Dinkins campaign expressed concern that off-duty police officers supporting Giuliani might intimidate Democratic voters, while the Giuliani campaign demanded extra police officers to make sure no fraud occurred in polling places where the Mayor's supporters outnumber the challenger's.


A Weary Coslet Gets The Victory He Needed
As Jets Coach Bruce Coslet walked through the dimly lit tunnel of Giants Stadium, heading toward his car, he tried to answer a few final questions about his team's 10-6 victory over the Giants this afternoon.
Finally, he cut the interview off.


Horizon Bank (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Smith Soars Past Eagles
The Philadelphia Eagles have played Halloween games in 1937, '48, '65, '71 and now in '93.
But the number the Eagles will remember most from the game this afternoon with their divisional rival Dallas Cowboys is 62.
That is because, with the game in jeopardy, that is how much ground Cowboys running back Emmitt Smith covered in one windswept, high-strung, high-powered, big-play run in a rainy downpour with 3 minutes 45 seconds left and with the Eagles then trailing by only 6 points.


Neale S. Godfrey, Ralph A. Saviano
Neale S. Godfrey, the chairwoman of the Children's Financial Network, a consulting service on children and money in Mountain Lakes, N.J., was married yesterday to Ralph A. Saviano, a financial broadcaster and columnist in North Brunswick, N.J.
Rabbi Fred Dworkin performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's maternal grandmother, Jewel Rosenberg, in Bayonne, N.J.
Ms.
Godfrey, 42, is keeping her name.
She is a former president of the First Women's Bank and the founder of the First Children's Bank at F.A.O.
Schwarz, both in New York.
She is also the author of "The Kids' Money Book" (Checkerboard Press, 1991) and "Money Doesn't Grow on Trees: A Parent's Guide to Raising Financially Responsible Children," to be published this year by Simon &amp; Schuster.
She graduated from American University.


Falls Financial Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1993 CAMPAIGN: The Brain Trust; Supporting Men Dueling for the Mayor's Office, Two of the Ablest of Political Seconds -- A Campaign Chief Who Has Served In City Hall, Too
The side wall of his office tells legions about what drives Bill Lynch.
It is dominated by a large photograph, haunting in the way period war photos of young soldiers tend to be, of the black fighter pilots who fought for their country in World War II in the segregated Tuskeegee unit.
Next to the airmen is a portrait of the abolitionist Frederick A. Douglass and his exhortation of 1857, "If there is no struggle, there is no progress."


New Business Monthly
Two leading business publishers are teaming up to publish a new monthly magazine for executives of the fastest-growing small businesses around the country.
The magazine, Biz, will be published by Dow Jones &amp; Company, parent of The Wall Street Journal, and American City Business Journals Inc., which publishes 27 local-business newspapers.
Biz will begin publication in early 1994 and will derive its revenues from advertising.
It will be sent without charge to 500,000 chief executives or business owners whose companies have had revenue growth of at least 15 percent a year over the last five years.


Giants Meet Enemy, and It Is They
The scoreboard showed that the Jets beat the Giants today, 10-6.
The truth, as many Giants saw it, was that the Giants beat the Giants, that they wasted one opportunity after another.
After a 10-minute-45-second drive at the start of the game, Lewis Tillman fumbled away the ball on the Jets' 1.


Dividend Meetings


Stern Fights for Order Amid Daily Disorder
Even by the transient standards of the sport he governs, David Stern's itinerary was beginning to get out of hand.
Chicago to Munich to Chicago to London to Chicago to the start of the National Basketball Association regular season Friday night.
"I'm negotiating with Granik to handle London," the N.B.A. commissioner said recently with a sigh.
He was referring to his deputy, Russell Granik, and preseason games at Wembley Arena this past weekend between the Orlando Magic and the Atlanta Hawks.


New Shop Opens With Airline Project
Two marketing and advertising executives have opened an agency in Chicago with a project from American Trans Air, an airline based in Indianapolis, as their first account.


Suffolk Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Search of an Integrated Leadership School
To the Editor:
The organizers of New York City's Latino Leadership Secondary School (news story, Oct. 13; letter, Oct. 25) are claiming that the Federal Office of Civil Rights' investigation has nothing to do with the delay in the school's opening.
At the same time, they acknowledge that one of the reasons the school didn't open on time last month was the failure to attract a diverse student body.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Female Goalie Wins a Professional Game  Erin Whitten of the Toledo Storm became the first female goaltender to win a professional game when the Storm beat the Dayton Bombers, 6-5, Saturday night in an East Coast Hockey League game in Toledo, Ohio.
"It's nice to be in the record books, but it's just another win," Whitten said.
"Hopefully there will be a few more." Whitten, a 22-year-old from Glen Falls, N.Y., is the second female goaltender in the sport.
Manon Rheaume played for the Atlanta Knights of the International Hockey League last season and is with the E.C.H.L.'s Knoxville Cherokees this season. (AP)


FMS Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Federico Fellini, Film Visionary, Is Dead at 73
Federico Fellini, whose deeply personal films were vivid, sometimes bizarre portraits of the human condition, died yesterday at the Umberto I Hospital in Rome.
He was 73.
The cause was cardiac arrest, the Reuters news agency reported, citing Dr.
Maurizio Bufi, the chief of the hospital's intensive care unit.
Mr.
Fellini had suffered a stroke in August and had been in a coma since he had what has been variously described as a heart attack or heart failure on Oct. 17.
Reuters said his condition deteriorated in the last hours before his death, and he developed a high fever and kidney problems.


Beyond a Medical Journal on H.I.V.
Brett Grodeck is a tall, solidly built 27-year-old with a quiet intensity that makes him look like the kind of guy who could hit a home run when your softball team needed it.
There is no outward sign he has carried H.I.V, the virus that causes AIDS, for at least six years; no indication that he is going to develop AIDS any time soon, and, as he sees it, nothing available to read that affirms that he and others like him have plenty of living left to do.
A year ago, Mr.
Grodeck set out to create a free magazine called Plus to fill that void.
His target audience: hundreds of thousands of people like him of all ages, ethnic backgrounds and sexual orientations, not to mention the countless friends, employers and relatives who care about them.
The magazine's goal: to offer not just medical news, but travel, humor and life style items in eye-catching layouts that emphasize the vibrancy and diversity of H.I.V.-positive people.


These Are the Courts That Try Jurors' Souls
To the Editor:
Everyone should applaud the efforts of Norman Goodman, New York County Clerk, to make a juror's experience in the court system more convenient ("Crowded Court Calendar Drives New York County Jury System," letter, Oct. 27), but his actions mean little as long as people perceive our court buildings as inhospitable and dangerous places.


The Candidates on the Issues: In Their Own Words
In the months in which Mayor David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani have crisscrossed the city seeking support for their electoral bids, countless words have been uttered on issues ranging from the safety of the city to the temperament of each other's opponent.
Here are some of the more memorable comments.
DINKINS  Crime We've hired 9,000 cops since I've been Mayor, for a net of 5,700, pretty close to 6,000 and more coming.
And crime is down in the seven major F.B.I. index categories for the first time in 36 years, and for more than two consecutive years.
Down in the major areas.
Giuliani says, well, crime is not really down, they're just not arresting as many people.
Well, you know, you've got less crime, there are fewer things for which people ought to be arrested, that makes sense. nd moreover, among the categories is homicide.
Where do you think they are hiding the bodies?
He says they are not down, so they are hiding the bodies somewhere, I guess.
Nonsense, crime is down.
Speech, Bethel A.M.E.
Church, Harlem, Oct. 10 Race Whether we like it or not, race is the silent visitor.
Race should never be a subject of political debate.
But race relations, if our city is to reign pre-eminent, must be spoken about -- without fear, and without rancor.
Let me say, as clearly as I can, that I believe race relations can be an appropriate issue for a political campaign.
To pretend that people in our city don't discuss it is silly.
But our politicians must discuss it as sensibly as most of our people do -- in their daily lives, and in their daily dealings, in the most diverse city in the world.
If you want to play the race card, then you should deal the whole deck.
Lay out your plan on how to improve race relations in our city.
Race relations can be an appropriate issue ... but only if you want to craft solutions, and not catalogue complaints.
If we use the issue appropriately, we can transform it from the cancer of our society into the cure.
Speech at fund-raising event, Oct. 14 Police Rudolph Giuliani ... opposes laws that would require New York City police officers to live in our city.
But  [ suburban ]  legislators, you see, they like the fact that they and their constituencies are safer, because our cops live around the corner from them with money we pay for, with salaries we pay.
Rudolph Giuliani thinks that's OK.
Bethel A.M.E.
Church, Harlem, Oct. 10 Jobs We have not only the vision, but the plan for new jobs in our city.
And let me tell you: those who say we should give up, or give in, or turn back are talking about one job -- in City Hall....
I'm talking about creating 110,000 jobs all across the city....
It's time for people to decide who has the experience, the vision, and the values to make this $32 billion corporation work for all New Yorkers.
Policy speech, Sept. 21 Schools The Board of Education is responsible to no one.
Not to the Mayor and certainly not to you....
I envision a system in which decisions are made not by a central board which couldn't recognize and asbestos cloud literally hanging over its head, but by parents and teachers and principals in a new set of school councils.
Policy speech, Sept. 13 Neighborhoods Those who bemoan the death of the old neighborhood ... reject the economics of upward mobility for all New Yorkers.
They fail to understand, or refuse to understand, that the old neighborhood is alive and well in our city, that little has changed in our New York neighborhoods except the faces, the names, and the languages spoken.
The same decent values of hard work and accomplishment and service to city and nation still exist....
A Republican candidate who doesn't understand what our neighborhoods were about yesterday or what they are about today has little chance of understanding what they will be about tomorrow.
Policy Speech, Sept. 13 Social Services My friends, this election is much more than a choice among candidates.
It's a test of our values....
He wants to evict the homeless on the 91st day.
We believe that there is no deadline on a city's decency.
He wants to sell off public hospitals to the highest bidder, even if millions of working people have to go without health care.
We believe that no one should go without health care, and that principle is not for sale.
Speech to Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, Oct. 28 About the Other Guy I think it's necessary for you and the rest of the media to realize that Rudolph Giuliani has been under the candidate protection program.
For the past four years, he's done nothing, absolutely nothing!
Rudolph Giuliani says I want to be dictator.
But when you, sir, and others challenge him on questions like that, and his ridiculous responses are put forth, then run your poll and see what the people think!
And Dinkins didn't do it because Dinkins didn't call me a fascist.
Instead he stood there with three or four ministers who had just endorsed him for mayor, who had sat inside City Hall with him... planning the endorsement....
They said that my supporters were fascist.
They then went on to elaborate that I was surrounded with people like Hitler, Mussolini and Franco....
I don't regard associations of my people that support me as fascists as a light matter....
So excuse me if I have the sense that because they can't do the Mafia thing on me because it would be ludicrous, because I put two to three hundred of them in prison, they do the fascist thing on me.
Breakfast meeting with Upper West Side Groups, Oct. 7 Police We will begin the process that I will begin to unfold in the three or four years that I will be Mayor of giving the police a clear understanding of why they are there.
They are there to prevent crime.
When they take reasonable steps, the Mayor of New York will support them and that will create a less brutal, more honest and less corrupt police department.
Because the thing that creates corruption more than anything else is the devastated morale in an organization.
Corruption is the tone you set at the top.
Policy Speech, Sept. 9 JOBS Once, New York City was the undisputed business capital of the nation and the world.
The sound of our commerce circled the globe.
But if you listen closely today, what you hear is an ominous silence.
In the last four years, the city has lost nearly 400,000 jobs....
I'm not listening to anybody who tells me that we have no control over the national economy, and, therefore, no control of the nation economy's impact on the city...
It really comes down to one word, and a powerful word at that.
The word is management.
Policy speech, Aug. 10 SCHOOLS I can't imagine that any parents in the city are resting any easier today knowing that Norman Steisel, the same person who seemed not to know what he was doing in handling Lockheed, is now in charge of asbestos removal in the schools.
And with this cloud hanging over Norman Steisel's head I would imagine the Mayor is going to have to remove him for a time during the asbestos removal and put someone else there until these questions are cleared up.
Curtis and Lisa Sliwa Show, WABC-Radio, Aug. 19 NEIGHBORHOODS New York City is becoming or already is the dirtiest city in America.
I hear it over and over and over again....
How can your city be so dirty.
I don't pretend it isn't true, though the current administration pretends it isn't true.
I say, lets clean up New York City instead of making stupid political excuses.
Let's clean our city up!
Policy speech, Sept. 9 Social Services New York City stands alone in the expansiveness of its homeless policies.
Were these policies effective the city's efforts could be applauded, but essentially they have proved to be useless and self defeating.
In short the policies are bankrupt and are in need of major rethinking and overhaul.
Position paper, Sept. 17 Obout the Other Guy Nobody is suggesting that he is responsible for the asbestos in the schools.
Would we suggest that David Dinkins is responsible for anything?
Nobody is suggesting that he is responsible for it.
Yes, it started under Ed Koch.
But, hey, you've been Mayor for three and a half years, David!
Do you think you could have found out about it?
In less than three and a half years do you think you could have appointed somebody to the School Construction Authority?
Do you think could have found out about the Korean boycott in less than six months?
Or how come you were the only person in this city that didn't know that a riot was going on for four days?
Give us a break!
Town Hall meeting in Washington Heights, Oct. 27


A Splash, and a Special Place, for Shula
Until late in today's game, Miami Dolphin players planned to defer the celebratory dousing of Don Shula until next Sunday against the Jets, when he hopes to break George Halas's National Football League coaching record for career victories, not just tie it.
"But then the guys started saying, 'We have to do something,' " said Dolphins offensive tackle Jeff Dellenbach.
Linebacker Bryan Cox didn't need much prodding.
"It couldn't have been more of a direct hit," Cox said of his watering of Shula.


Halfway-House Use Rises, but for Whom?; Critics Say Wrong Inmates Benefit
In "The Grapes of Wrath," Tom Joad was released from prison with nothing more than a cheap gray suit and a few dollars, and was left to hitchhike his way home.
These days, there is an alternative to the abrupt return to society experienced by John Steinbeck's hero.
Michael R. Milken and Pete Rose got it, Sol Wachtler wants it and Leona Helmsley has it.


After a Killing, Settlers Blame Rabin
By midafternoon today, this Jewish settlement 10 miles north of Jerusalem felt abandoned by almost all but the wind.
In grief and in anger, hundreds of residents had boarded buses for a long ride to a cemetery near Tel Aviv where they buried one of their own.
Their grief was for Haim Mizrachi, 30, a relative newcomer to their community.
On Friday, only a few hundred yards from here, he had been kidnapped and stabbed and his body burned by Palestinian attackers claiming to be from the group of Islamic militants known as Hamas.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Emad A. Salem, the informer helping the Government in New York City terrorism cases, referred to him incorrectly at one point.
It was he who began to help the F.B.I. again after the World Trade Center bombing. (Mohammed A. Salameh is a defendant in the bombing, not an informer.)


Haitian Rightists Seek to Install New Government
A day after a settlement failed to restore Haiti's elected President to power on schedule, small right-wing groups allied to the military threatened today to replace him and install a new government.
An umbrella organization of rightist groups called on the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, and his Prime Minister, Robert Malval, to resign, saying it would be a "patriotic act."


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Construction Spending . . .
September  Purchasing Survey . . .
October  Tuesday  Leading Indicators . . .
September  New-Home Sales . . .
September  Wednesday  Auto Sales . . .
October  Thursday  Weekly Jobless . . .
Claims  Factory Orders . . .
September  Friday  Employment . . .
October  Consumer Borrowing . . .
September


Colleges to Offer Their Ideas In Battle to Overhaul CUNY
In the next two weeks, the presidents of the City University's 17 undergraduate colleges are to deliver to Chancellor W. Ann Reynolds their plans for eliminating or consolidating some programs and expanding others.
The goal, the Chancellor says, is to save millions of dollars and insure CUNY's survival as the nation's largest urban university in a time of economic hardship.
But accomplishing those changes depends in part on the fragile relationship between Ms.
Reynolds and the faculty of these institutions.
Since she announced her proposal to streamline the system last December, she has faced a barrage of criticism from restive faculty members who view her as high-handed and abusive.
She, in turn, appears to regard the faculty as jealously territorial and stubborn.


Newest Clout du Jour: Carbajal, De La Hoya
With ferocious, impressive performances rarely seen in lower weight classes, Michael Carbajal and Oscar De La Hoya have become the stars of a weekend of intriguing boxing.
They are boxing's showcase fighters for the moment, even though they were sandwiched between two weekends of heavyweight title bouts.
A Southwestern championship tripleheader began Friday night in Tulsa, Okla., where Tommy Morrison, rejecting the pleas of his manager, Bill Cayton, defended his World Boxing Organization crown against Michel Bentt, and didn't last through the first round.


Celestial Seasonings Shifts Account Again
Almost as quickly as a teakettle boils, the Celestial Seasonings herbal tea account has moved again.
Celestial Seasonings Inc. unexpectedly disclosed on Friday that the account, with billings of $6 million, had been shifted to Grey Advertising Inc. in New York from Tatham Euro RSCG in Chicago, where it had been for less than two months.


Accounts
*
Amil Gargano &amp; Partners, New York, was awarded two accounts.
One, Audiovox Cellular Communications, Hauppauge, L.I., was previously at Greenstone Roberts Advertising, Melville, L.I.
The other is an assignment to handle the advertising for "Facing Up: How to Rescue the Economy from Crushing Debt and Restore the American Dream," a book from Simon &amp; Schuster by Peter G. Peterson, the chairman of the Blackstone Group.


Suspect Held In Shooting Of Boy, 11
A 26-year-old Queens man was arrested yesterday in the slaying of an 11-year-old boy who was shot to death Saturday after he brought his mother a slice of birthday cake while she worked at his grandmother's beauty salon, police officials said.
The suspect, Clarence Smith, was taken into custody Saturday night, less than six hours after bullets were fired into the New Look Beauty Salon, fatally wounding the boy, Travis Lilley, said Sgt.
Frances Haimeck, a police spokeswoman.
Mr.
Smith was booked on a charge of second-degree murder, and the police were searching last night for at least one other suspect, Sergeant Haimeck said.


California State Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Egg Throwing Ends With 2 Shot in Bronx
Like many Halloween tiffs among rival groups of young men, a fight in the Bronx yesterday began when one group threw raw eggs at the other.
This time, however, one young man wearing a Halloween mask pulled out a gun and shot two boys in the other group, the police said.
The fight started about 3:30 P.M., when one group positioned on the roof of a two-story building on East 187th Street in the Fordham section rained eggs at a second group on the street below, said Sgt.
Frances Haimeck, a police spokeswoman.


Progressive Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dance in Review
Tamburitzans  Fashion Institute of Technology
The political news from many nations is often horrible.
But the folk dances from those same nations are usually glad tidings.
Although there are communal lamentations, most folk dances are celebratory.


Helmsley Palace Succession: Brunei Royalty Buying Hotel
The royal family of Brunei has agreed to buy the New York Palace Hotel on Madison Avenue for $202 million.
The luxurious 54-story hotel's previous name, the Helmsley Palace, became a major liability when Leona Helmsley was sentenced to prison in 1989 for tax evasion and mail fraud.
The wealth of the royal family of Brunei, a tiny oil-rich sultanate on the Southeast Asian island of Borneo, is closely controlled by Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah, 46, whose estimated worth of $33 billion makes him one of the world's richest men.
He and his family also own the 263-room Beverly Hills Hotel in California, bought for $187 million in 1987, and the Dorchester Hotel in London, bought for about $85 million in 1985.


PennFirst Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Streaking Pack Lives by the Sack
Packers 17, Bears 3 LeRoy Butler listened to teammate Johnny Holland's call for help yesterday -- do something, make a play, stop the Chicago Bears' long drive that was threatening to tie the game in the fourth quarter.
So Butler, the Green Bay Packers' safety, became a pass rusher.
And in one play, in one swift blitz, he got a sack, forced a fumble and then recovered it after hitting Jim Harbaugh's arm and knocking the ball loose.


Jefferson Bancorp (Fla.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article yesterday about the New York mayoral campaign misstated the amount of a new Department of Housing and Urban Development grant.
The city is to receive $37 million over the next year, and plans to use $20 million to hire 400 additional Housing Authority police officers.
While the grant is projected to continue at the same level over the next five years, providing a total of $100 million to finance police hiring, that amount is not guaranteed.


No Headline
"It's like Yugoslavia: the horrible things add up until they overwhelm everybody. You can almost smell the fear. The eeriness of it. People don't go out on the streets. They don't move. They don't do anything. They just stay indoors and feel afraid." -- ANN McCANN, administrator of the Peace People in Belfast.  [ A12:1. ]


Two Officers Are Wounded Investigating An Attack
Two Mount Vernon police officers looking for a suspect in an assault on two policemen were shot late Saturday night by a man they had sought to question in the earlier attack, the police said.
One of the wounded officers, Learie Johnston, was shot in the head and was in critical condition today at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.
The other officer, Leroy Palmer, was shot in the right thigh and was listed in stable condition at Mount Vernon Hospital.


A Different Message to Jakarta
The plight of East Timor has nagged at American consciences since 1975, when Indonesia devoured this former Portuguese colony.
The United States has never recognized Jakarta's annexation of its tiny neighbor, but until recently Washington was loath to offend a powerful authoritarian regime that was an important customer for U.S. arms.
Creditably, the Clinton Administration is making amends, spurred by an international outcry over the mass killings of unarmed East Timorese protesters in November 1991.
Earlier this year, the U.S. for the first time joined in favoring a United Nations inquiry into Indonesia's human rights abuses.
Now, with Administration support, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee has unanimously approved an amendment to condition the sale and transfer of U.S. arms to Indonesia on improvement in human rights conditions in East Timor.


THE 1993 CAMPAIGN: Television -- Campaign Watch; On-Air Ads Crucial to Governor's Race
In the split personality world of New Jersey television campaign coverage, the commercial reigns supreme.
At a time when most voters never see candidates in person, let alone sit and question their position on major issues, television offers the primary access to the person who would manage the state.


Stocks Lower in Tokyo
Japanese stock prices ended sharply lower in trading today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues closed down 264.73 points, or 1.34 percent, at 19,438.24.
Last week, the Nikkei fell 561.96 points.


Great Southern Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Voter Information
There will be elections tomorrow, Nov.2, in New York State, New York City, New Jersey and Connecticut.
Polls will be open in New York State from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M, in New Jersey from 7 A.M. to 8 P.M. and in Connecticut from 6 A.M. to 8 P.M.


Beware Term Limits
Even zealous proponents of term limits for public officials should see what's wrong with the limits proposed for New York City.
If the proposal on tomorrow's ballot is approved, practically all City Council members, the mayor, the public advocate and the comptroller could be dumped on the same day -- the good and the bad, whatever their years of experience, all gone, all at once.
Everyone elected to the Council or citywide office tomorrow would be limited to two consecutive terms beginning when they are sworn in next Jan. 1.
Those who then go on to that second term -- as most probably would -- would all hit the limit on Jan. 1, 2002.
On that date, they would be replaced by a whole new crew, wholly inexperienced in governing the City of New York.


Bomb Rips Federal Office in Reno


Patents
THE injuries that sidelined Wendell Davis of the Chicago Bears and Dan Marino of the Miami Dolphins this year could have been prevented, says an inventor who has come up with a new approach to football cleats.
Harry Max Weiss, 60, a patent attorney and sports fan in Scottsdale, Ariz., said he had formulated his invention, patented last week, while watching instant replays of players being injured on "Monday Night Football."


Jordan's Situation Good One, Says Stern
People have commented to David Stern that Michael Jordan's premature retirement feels like a tragedy.
The National Basketball Association commissioner said his reply is: "What happened to Drazen Petrovic and Reggie Lewis were tragedies. What happened to Magic Johnson was very sad. What happened with Michael is good for Michael."
The Nets' Petrovic was killed in an auto crash in Germany last spring.
The Boston Celtics' Lewis died of a heart attack shooting around last summer following conflicting diagnoses regarding the severity of a heart condition.
Johnson retired two years ago after contracting the virus that causes AIDS.


Equity and Convertible Debt Offerings Set for This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Adaptive Solutions Inc., Beaverton, Ore., an initial public offering of 666,667 units, each unit consisting of two shares and one warrant.
Thomas James.


Review/Television; A Victim Haunts His Killers Yet Again
"House of Secrets," tonight's movie on NBC at 9, is based on "Diabolique," the 1955 French film directed by Henri-Georges Clouzot.
As it happens, this is American television's second version of the classic movie, which Clouzot had adapted from a book by Pierre Boileau and Thomas Narcejac, the team that also provided the source for Hitchcock's "Vertigo."
The first television adaptation, "Reflections of Murder," was made in 1974, directed by John Badham and starring Tuesday Weld, Joan Hackett and Sam Waterston.
In the history of television remakes of landmark movies, at best a sorry tale, it was above average.
This evening's effort isn't.
As is true about so much television tinkering, practice makes prosaic.


Review/Music; Tatyana Nikolayeva's New York Debut (at Last)
The 92d Street Y, which performs good service for New York listeners on a regular basis, really outdoes itself on occasion.
In an inspired stroke a couple of years ago, it invited the venerable Swiss musical patron Paul Sacher to conduct the New York Chamber Symphony in masterpieces of his own commissioning.
And on Saturday evening, the Y presented the belated New York debut of the noted Russian pianist Tatyana Nikolayeva, in a monumental work of Shostakovich that she played an intimate role in bringing about.
In 1950, Shostakovich, battered by the Stalin regime and primed for a bout of introspection, traveled to Leipzig to help judge a piano competition commemorating the 200th anniversary of Bach's death.
There he became captivated by the two books of Bach's "Well-Tempered Clavier," especially in performances by Miss Nikolayeva, who won the competition.


Lining Up for the Prudential Pie
Claims from about 8,000 former clients of Prudential Securities were delivered to the firm on Saturday, seeking more than two-thirds of the $330 million fund established to compensate victims of widespread fraud there over more than a decade.
The claims, involving a tiny fraction of the 400,000 investors expected to file for compensation for fraud losses, are the first indication of the demands that could be made on the fund established by Prudential in its settlement of charges with the Securities and Exchange Commission.


National City Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Town Full of Queries on Health Care
The health care issue descended on western Kansas today.
Farmers, doctors and hospital administrators were told that change was coming.
They wondered about how it would work and how it would affect their small businesses, or their hospitals or the chances of getting a doctor to practice in a small town.
The state's two Senators, Bob Dole and Nancy Landon Kassebaum, both Republicans, did not exactly appear as advocates of President Clinton's program though they brought two speakers who did.
Indeed, when one speaker said, "If you assume that the Clinton plan passes," Mr.
Dole grinned and shook his head vigorously.


New York Bancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Opera; The Huge and Theatrical 'Boheme' From Zeffirelli Is Back at the Met
By now, almost every music critic in the United States has had a whack at the Metropolitan Opera's swollen and extravagant production of "La Boheme." Many, including this writer, have had three or four.
Yet audiences speak louder, and this much loved and heavily attended Franco Zeffirelli creation returned to the Met's repertory calendar on Friday night.
It will assuredly set off another round of oohs and ahs from paying customers -- and from critics, the odd if ineffectual ugh.
Repeating in print the dangers inherent in Mr.
Zeffirelli's sensuous blandishments may be overkill, but so striking was their effect on Friday's cast that one cannot resist.
One starts with a firm belief that "La Boheme" is the best of Puccini's operas, and not just for its melodious imagination and grasp of melodrama, but also for the endlessly skillful ways with which a composer causes his characters to deal with one another.


Home Federal Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1993 CAMPAIGN: Long Island; A Melding of Major Parties To Block a Common Enemy
With less than 24 hours before the town election here, there is none of the usual bickering between Republicans and Democrats.
In fact, there is no disagreement at all.
While leaders of both parties speak reverently about the two-party system, they have endorsed the same candidates, and even opened joint headquarters and worked together to raise money.


Days After Oration, the Jets Win One for 'Le-on, Le-on'
LEON HESS has seldom been known as an orator.
As an oil baron who deals with Middle East sheiks, yes.
As a shy gentleman with some $700 million who's among the Forbes 400 wealthiest Americans, yes.
But the Jets' owner has seldom been confused with Knute Rockne or Vince Lombardi as an inspirational football orator.
Until now.


Devils Find the Rangers No Easier on Neutral Ice
It was a strange place for the resumption of a fierce divisional rivalry, the New York Rangers and New Jersey Devils meeting in this eastern Canadian city that is marked, more than anything, by its lack of even a minor league hockey team.
Tonight, before a crowd of about 8,200 in the far-from-full Halifax Metro Center, 700 miles away from their home ice at Madison Square Garden, the Rangers were host to the Devils in the teams' first of eight meetings this season.
And the Devils, who often seem to have trouble when they visit the Rangers, discovered that the change of venue did not change their luck.


Review/Music; Sensory Overloading On the Dance Floor
All over the world, cultures have created rituals of ecstatic communal dancing.
England and the United States have a recent one: the rave, a psychedelic dance party for the video-game generation.
Audiences wearing striped shirts, baggy jeans, stocking caps and backpacks arrive prepared to dance.
The rave is a sojourn in an electronic wilderness of strobe lights, video abstractions, rainbow-striped spotlights and nonstop, computer-driven music with endless variations on a boom-chicka-boom beat.
From Saturday night into Sunday morning, the rave promoters Nocturnal Audio and Sensory Awakening took over the New York Coliseum for Maskarave 2, the New York stop of the See the Light tour, with four live groups and an all-star crew of disk jockeys.
See the Light is the largest rave tour to date, carrying the rave experience beyond its established coastal enclaves.
While its trappings are familiar to a New Yorker, they still have dizzying effects, and may seem more startling elsewhere.


Chernobyl Death Toll Continues Its Climb
To the Editor:
You report that the Ukrainian Parliament has voted to continue nuclear energy production at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant, reversing a decision of two years ago to shut the power station by the end of this year because of safety concerns (news article, Oct. 22).
You state that estimates of the Chernobyl death toll "range from 32, the official figure, to thousands of people who some authorities say may die prematurely."


Big Companies in Japan Trim Research Budgets
Some of Japan's leading electronics companies are trimming their research and development spending, slicing into an area that they consider vital to their long-term competitiveness.
Research and development spending has been virtually immune to the sort of cutbacks that have swept capital spending, entertainment and travel, employment and corporate recruiting.
But with Japanese electronics companies being battered by saturated markets, a weak economy and the strong yen, even research and development can no longer remain a sanctuary.


DS Bancor reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Coleman's Return Helps Nets Triumph
Minutes before the Nets left town for their final preseason game, Coach Chuck Daly was asked if there was anything new he could learn about his rebuilt team.
"You never stop learning about people," Daly said.
"I've had people four, five, six, seven, eight years and still learned about some things they could and couldn't do.


Afraid to Look or Even to Rise
After James Hasty tipped Phil Simms's last pass of the game in the end zone this afternoon, the Jets' cornerback fell to the turf and briefly lay motionless.
"I hit the ball, then Ronnie hit the ball and I was saying, 'Lord, where did the ball go?' " Hasty said, referring to help from safety Ronnie Lott.
"I just didn't want to get up. Then, all of a sudden I felt B. W. coming and other fellows coming. And I said, 'O.K., we won the game.' I just didn't want to get up if we hadn't made that play. I knew it got tipped around some and I was just hoping it wasn't caught."


Chinese Women Are 4 for 4 in World Cup Competition
The China women's distance runners underscored their power and depth again today, taking the top four places in the World Marathon Cup.
Wang Junxia, the world-record holder at 3,000 and 10,000 meters, led the sweep, winning in 2 hours 28 minutes 16 seconds.


THE 1993 CAMPAIGN: The Brain Trust; Supporting Men Dueling for the Mayor's Office, Two of the Ablest of Political Seconds -- For a Media Wizard, One More Big Test Of the Old Magic
It is an understatement to say that David Garth is restless, but in these final days of the mayoral race, Rudolph W. Giuliani's pudgy, protean media adviser and chief strategist has taken almost no rest at all.
"The staff did not go to bed for two nights," Mr.
Garth said Saturday morning, his usually gruff voice sunken to an adenoidal rumble.
"We're obsessive-compulsives. There's a certain sense of anxiety, because our stuff is all in the can, and except for a couple of strategy sessions, there's not that much that we can do."


Bridge
A player who hits on a killing lead sometimes deserves praise for a brilliant diagnosis.
Far more often, however, the lead proves effective for reasons that could not be foretold.
The leader has benefited from happenstance, and the declarer has suffered.
A fine example occurred in the European Pairs Championship, which was played in Germany in March.
Looking at the North-South cards, one might consider a six-spade contract.
That happens to succeed, thanks to the even spade split, but is a poor bet.


First Federal Financial Corp. of Ky. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Continental Air Fined by U.S.
The Department of Transportation said yesterday that it had fined Continental Airlines $20,000 for advertising low fares from Newark to Europe last February but making too few seats available at those fares.
It said it had discovered the shortage of seats through routine calling to check availability of advertised fares.
"We will not tolerate airlines' low-fare no-fair practices," said Transportation Secretary Federico F. Pena.


FirstRock Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Other Races
SENDING A SIGNAL -- The outcome of the New Jersey governor's race is being viewed by politicians as an indicator of national significance.
Page B1.
MELTING POT BOILS -- In Miami, where race and ethnicity define politics, the conventional lines among white, black and Cuban voters have dissolved.
Page B9.


Dance in Review
Paul Taylor Dance Company  City Center 131 West 55th Street Manhattan
The three works that the Paul Taylor Dance Company presented on Friday night challenged the mind while pleasing the eye.


Dinkins and Giuliani Grapple for Voters -- Mayor Aims Efforts at Reinvigorating Vote Coalition
From a lox-and-eggs breakfast on the Lower East Side of Manhattan to rousing stops at Baptist churches in Brooklyn and Queens, Mayor David N. Dinkins swept through New York City yesterday seeking to reassemble and reinvigorate the coalition that brought him victory four years ago.
The Mayor sought to sway the undecided by sharply attacking his Republican-Liberal opponent, Rudolph W. Giuliani, and to encourage his own supporters to turn out in impressive numbers at the polls tomorrow.


Town's Justice Is Swift, but Is It Fair? Arrest Prompts Outcry
Prudent drivers tend to ease off the accelerator and check their seat belts when they cross into this quiet village just north of Buffalo.
They were reminded why earlier this month.
About 2:35 A.M. on Oct. 10, a Kenmore police officer stopped Patricia Kraws and said she had run a red light.
By all accounts, the 28-year-old pediatric nurse was sober and cooperative.
But the officer handcuffed Mrs.
Kraws's arms behind her back and drove her to Police Headquarters.
There, he handcuffed her to a wooden bench until her brother arrived to post the balance of her $50 bail.


Ads on Issues Go Back Decades
To the Editor:
Your article on television campaign ads against the Clinton health plan (front page, Oct. 21) perpetuates a myth.
The idea that only "rarely" and on a "few issues" has industry used advertising to sway public opinion on policy issues is dead wrong.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  MAYOR SEEKS TO BUILD A WINNING COALITION From a breakfast on Delancey Street on the Lower East Side of Manhattan to rousing stops at churches in Brooklyn and Queens, Mayor Dinkins swept through the city seeking to reassemble and reinvigorate the coalition that brought him victory four years ago.
A1.


Second Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Defensible Foreign Policy
Just as the Clinton Administration began to build political momentum with its carefully prepared campaign for health care reform, foreign policy embarrassments in Somalia and Haiti brought unwanted distractions and a new drop in the President's poll ratings.
Mr.
Clinton is right to want to de-emphasize foreign policy now that American is no longer under constant strategic threat.
But the best way to do that may be for the President to talk more, rather than less, about the country's changed international situation and the need for a more selective and restrained use of force.


Haitians Living in New York Are Digesting New Letdown
As the deadline came and went over the weekend for the return of Haiti's first freely elected leader, Haitians in New York City once again felt the gloom of smashed expectations, of hopes for their homeland deflated by violence and broken promises.
Because the President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, remains in the United States, Jean Pierre, a 36-year-old exile who works in Brooklyn as a messenger, has put off plans to rejoin his family in Port-au-Prince, the Haitian capital.
Roger Etienne, 54, a real-estate broker, canceled a celebration on Saturday night, a traditional meal of conch, fried pork shoulder and plantains washed down with Barbancourt, the rich dark rum from Haiti.


Northwest Illinois Banc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CrossLand Federal Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tensions on Eve of Envoy's Arrival in Somalia


Marble Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Theater; A Walk on the Seamy Side In a Screenwriter's Hollywood
If you're going to write a satire about the movie business at this very late date, it had better be very, very funny.
In the case of "Four Dogs and a Bone," a brisk 90-minute, two-act sketch by John Patrick Shanley at the Manhattan Theater Club Stage 2, that criterion is most abundantly met.
Mr.
Shanley, a playwright (of, most recently, "Beggars in the House of Plenty") and an Oscar-winning screenwriter ("Moonstruck"), knows the territory, and that hard-won knowledge has inspired a crackling, malevolent wit new to his writing.
This is a play in which a "gadget geek" of a cinematographer is referred to by his worried employer as "an idiot, I hope, savant," and in which a self-dramatizing starlet uses incest as a verb (as in "I was incested").
Pejorative codes like "straight to video" and "she's not an actress, she's a personality" are the linguistic coin of a most disingenuous realm.


Books of The Times; Two Characters in Search of Nautical Enigmas
The Wine-Dark Sea  By Patrick O'Brian 261 pages. W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $22.
"The wine-dark sea" is of course how Homer famously described the Mediterranean in Book II of "The Odyssey." But the title of Patrick O'Brian's 16th and latest sea adventure starring the oddly matched pair of Jack Aubrey, the impulsive sea captain, and Stephen Maturin, the erudite physician, naturalist and spy, turns out to have an ominous overtone.


THE 1993 CAMPAIGN: The Comptroller's Race; Hevesi and Badillo in Hard Contest for Comptroller's Post
Herman Badillo has made a contest of the comptroller's race, a rare feat in a New York City general election.
The question is: how close a contest?
The Democratic candidate, Alan G. Hevesi, still leads in almost all the polls.
But in sharp contrast to previous Democratic nominees who needed only to win the primary to be assured victory in the general election, Mr.
Hevesi is campaigning hard.


American Lugers Appeal For Upgraded Security
The United States luge federation began seeking increased security measures yesterday after one of its athletes was beaten by skinheads Friday night in an incident with racial and anti-foreigner overtones in eastern Germany.
Federation officials also said the American team may avoid a coming race in the German village of Oberhof unless the safety of its athletes can be assured.


Daily News Is Turning a Gamble Into a Rebirth
The Daily News, bankrupt and battered when Mortimer B. Zuckerman bought it last January, is now a profitable business, its publishers say, reversing multimillion-dollar losses and defying predictions of doom that plagued the New York newspaper for a decade.
About a hundred newly hired writers and editors are settling in.
Advertising revenues are climbing, the publishers say.
And the newspaper's pages are beginning to show some of their old zip.
In effect, the owners are betting millions of dollars that the cheeky but rigorous style of tabloid journalism that The News virtually invented can thrive again in America's biggest city.


World Economies


Market Place; Seventh Generation takes its green approach to Wall Street.
MOST businesses like to flaunt it when they meet their revenue and profit goals.
Seventh Generation Inc., a public spirited mail-order company in Colchester, Vt., keeps score by a different set of yardsticks.


Haven Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The vision of an information superhighway is being threatened by computer intruders who have broken into hundreds of university, government and commercial computers.
The attacks have alarmed experts, who say they expose fundamental weaknesses in the security of Internet, the international computer network.
The intruders have been able to obtain passwords for hundreds, or even thousands, of computers attached to Internet.  [ Page D1. ]


Let's Hear the Rocky Flats Jurors
The Justice Department has finally called off its investigation into who leaked the findings of a Federal grand jury that probed environmental crimes in Colorado last year.
Now the department should point its investigators in another direction -- toward the possibility that corporate and Government officials should be held personally responsible for the crimes the grand jury was evaluating.
The grand jurors may have done a public service by revealing their complaints about the Government's handling of a pollution case involving the Rocky Flats nuclear weapons facility near Denver.
The Justice Department settled the case with what it called a record-setting $18.5 million fine against the Rockwell International Corporation, former operator of the facility.
But the grand jury had voted indictments against corporate officers and Energy Department officials as well, and the grand jurors complained that the Government refused to prosecute the individuals.


Salvador Killings Bring a Warning of New Terror
Four killings in five days last week brought a warning from the Roman Catholic Church today that El Salvador could be facing a new wave of the sort of political violence that terrorized the country throughout the 1980's.
Two of the victims were leaders of the former guerrilla movement, the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front.
The other two were a married couple who church officials say were former guerrilla soldiers.


A Detective Leaves The Crime Scene
In his 36-year career in the York City Police Department, Detective Arnold Roussine has seen death in all its gruesome forms.
He has investigated 14,000 or so crime scenes, at least 7,000 of them homicide scenes in which people have been shot, stabbed, slashed, burned, mutilated or dismembered.
He has taken photographs of every wound.
He has lifted fingerprints from blood-spattered rooms and streets.
And he has used the most advanced laser equipment and his own instincts to track the path, pattern and impact of bullets on human flesh.
At times he has even had to put his fingers into the wounds.


HF Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Computer Insecurity On the Rise
The vision of a national information superhighway is being threatened by a group of anonymous computer intruders who have broken into hundreds of university, government and commercial computers in recent months, bedeviling many of the nation's computer managers.
The attacks, which became public several weeks ago when an on-line service in New York City was forced to shut down for three days, have alarmed security experts, who say this has exposed fundamental weaknesses in the security of Internet, an international computer network that is widely viewed as the forerunner of the nation's data highway.


Shari C. Hyman, Daniel J. Horwitz
Shari Corinne Hyman and Daniel James Horwitz, graduates of Columbia University who are assistant district attorneys in Manhattan, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Judith Lewis officiated at the Water's Edge restaurant in Long Island City, Queens.
Mrs.
Horwitz, the daughter of Steven and Miriam Hyman of New York, received her law degree from Northwestern University.
Her father is a partner in Leavy Rosensweig &amp; Hyman; her mother is a partner in Robinson Silverman Pearce Aronsohn &amp; Berman.
Both are New York law firms.


Seacoast Banking Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Signs of Slower Growth Ease Some Bond Fears
How scared should the bond market be of fourth-quarter growth?
The answer will drive prices and yields as the year draws to a close.
But traders, analysts and money managers cannot wait until the release in January of the fourth-quarter report on the gross domestic product to make their bets.
They must have opinions now, and many of those will hinge on the forecasts of things like business inventories and automobile production, estimates that many got wrong in the third quarter.


Abroad at Home; Politics By Smear
Joe McCarthy is long dead.
But McCarthyism is alive and well in Washington, its evil undiminished.
That is clear from the case of Morton Halperin, President Clinton's nominee to be Assistant Secretary of Defense for Democracy and Peacekeeping.
The extreme right is running a campaign of smears to block his confirmation, even to deny him a hearing.
And the campaign is ruthless enough to succeed -- unless the President speaks up for his nominee.


Tehuacan Journal; Back of the New Mall, Age-Old Ritual of Slaughter
Past the Nissan dealership and Tehuacan Ford, just beyond the pastel-colored tract homes going up on the edge of town, the Slaughter of the Goats has begun again.
As they have at every harvest, the goatherds have brought their animals over the Oaxaca mountains to this market town, and the matanceros, the butchers, have come from the nearby village of San Gabriel Chilac.
Each day for two weeks, or as long as the herd might last, they will fill the courtyard of an old hacienda here with an ancient ritual of blood and death.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12 C.I.A.
PAID HAITI'S MILITARY Members of the military in Haiti were paid by the C.I.A. for information from the mid-1980's at least until the coup that toppled its President in 1991, American officials say.
A1 Rightists groups in Haiti threatened to install a new president.A8


Heritage Bankcorp (Mich.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Even in the Negative, Candidates Rate Poorly
WITH just one day to go before the election, neither David N. Dinkins nor Rudolph W. Giuliani, two candidates often described by their shortcomings, has given wavering New Yorkers what they wanted: some gaffe or similar good excuse to vote for the other guy.
Moreover, no single event beyond the control of either candidate has tipped public opinion.
No murder of Yusuf K. Hawkins, which helped make Mr.
Dinkins's case for racial harmony four years ago.
No stabbing death of Yankel Rosenbaum, which, two years later, became emblematic of Mr.
Dinkins's real or perceived shortcomings in leadership.


First Northern Savings Bank S.A. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dinkins and Giuliani Grapple for Voters -- Republican Repeats Calls for Crossing of Party Lines
Courting swing voters and campaigning among some of his most fervent supporters in Brooklyn, Rudolph W. Giuliani made repeated appeals to Democrats yesterday to have the "courage" to cross party lines and elect him mayor so that Republicans and Democrats can "work together to save our city."
Underlining his drive for Democrats, the Republican-Liberal candidate began one of the final days of the bitterly fought mayoral race at a breakfast with more than 100 Democratic supporters, who laughed as the actor Ron Silver joked, "It's really nice to be at a reception for Rudy where I recognize some of the people." 'Enormously Heartened'
Mr.
Giuliani seemed pleased as well.
"I am enormously heartened by the people in the room," he said, "because to support me I understand the courage that it takes to step away from party loyalties, boundaries and pressure and everything else and to say the city is more important than anything else."


Medicare Patients Needn't Pay Overcharges
To the Editor:
In "Your Bill: $1,575. We Pay: $222. Have a Nice Day" (Op-Ed, Oct. 23), S. S. Neuman describes a Medicare program that fails to provide adequate coverage and forces Medicare patients to spend limited savings or forgo health care.
She also illustrates a serious problem with Medicare's reimbursement system: thousands of patients do not understand their rights to coverage.


THE 1993 CAMPAIGN: New Jersey; New Jersey Governor's Race Is Watched for Political Message
With several polls suggesting that a significant number of voters remained undecided, Gov.
Jim Florio and his Republican rival, Christine Todd Whitman, spent the last weekend before Election Day campaigning at events from a mall tour to a children's Halloween party and enlisting a string of big-name supporters to help make their cases.
Still, the polls showed a clear lead for the Governor, a politician written off as dead less than two years ago.
The good news for Mrs.
Whitman, who if elected would be the first woman to govern New Jersey, was her narrowing of the gap since earlier surveys.


Deficit Falls for Year
The Government announced last week that its budget deficit tumbled to $254.9 billion in the fiscal year that ended on Sept. 30.
The budget gap was $26.1 billion less than the Administration had estimated in August and $67 billion less than the estimate in the April budget.
In the 1992 fiscal year, the budget deficit was a record $290 billion.
The narrower gap in the latest year mainly reflected falling interest rates and the failure of Congress to pass legislation that would have allowed the Resolution Trust Corporation to close its allotment of failed savings institutions.


Knicks' Davis Wins Role As Backup Shooting Guard
Hubert Davis is ready to become the Knicks' backup shooting guard.
And the Knicks are ready to start the season.
Completing their 7-1 preseason with a 93-77 victory over the Los Angeles Lakers on Saturday night, the Knicks will spend this week preparing for Friday's season opener in Boston against the Celtics.
After Saturday's game, Coach Pat Riley said what most people had been thinking: Davis has won the battle with Rolando Blackman to become John Starks's backup.


FFY Financial Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Elway Remains Mile-High Master
Broncos 28, Seahawks 17 John Elway, raising his record at Mile High Stadium to 60-16, threw two touchdown passes yesterday as the Broncos beat the Seahawks, 28-17.
Elway outdueled Rick Mirer, the Seattle rookie who has been drawing comparisons to Elway because of his scrambling and come-from-behind ability.


Eldorado Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Buckeyes and Bruins May Be Ordering Roses
What about Ohio State against U.C.L.A. in the Rose Bowl for the first time since 1976?
The matchup came a step closer on Saturday when the Buckeyes brushed Penn State aside, 24-6, and the Bruins punctured the Arizona defense, college football's best, in a 37-17 victory.
There are several hurdles ahead, and should both teams reach Pasadena on New Year's Day it would be only the second time they will have met in the Rose Bowl.
In '76, twice-beaten U.C.L.A., coached by Dick Vermeil, upset Ohio State, 23-10, and cost Woody Hayes's team an undefeated season and probably the national championship, which went to Oklahoma.


BT Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Voter Registration and Turnout
Voter turnout could be a deciding factor in elections around the region tomorrow.
In the contests for New York mayor and New Jersey governor, voters' dissatisfaction with the quality of the campaigns could depress turnout.
The rematch between Andrew P. O'Rourke, the Republican incumbent, and Richard L. Brodsky, his Democratic challenger, has heightened interest in the race for Westchester County executive.
And on Long Island, Nassau County Executive Thomas S. Gulotta, a Republican, faces a tough re-election fight against a Democrat, Benjamin L. Zwirn.


Year of Woman Falters In 2 Races for Governor
"No one wants a woman to be Governor of Virginia more than I do," says Patricia D. Cornwell, who is better known for her murder mysteries than her politics.
But she has another message in this year's campaign for Virginia governor that seems to have a receptive audience with voters.
Though she made a donation to Mary Sue Terry, the Democratic candidate, Ms.
Cornwell said she changed her mind after discovering that Ms.
Terry was "just another politician." In a television commercial for Ms.
Terry's Republican opponent, George F. Allen, the novelist now declares, "I've decided not this woman, not this year."


Heritage Federal reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Upset With Quality of Schools, Californians Will Vote on Voucher Proposal
Desperate about a decline in the quality of public education, California voters on Tuesday will be faced with a proposal for a dramatic change that would plunge them into the unknown and offer them little chance of retreat.
The proposal is a no-holds-barred version of an idea that has slowly been gaining ground with a mix of constituencies who seek an overhaul of the educational system: state-financed vouchers that parents could use to help pay for private schooling.


First Bancorp Ind. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ameriana Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Business Records Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mansell Released From Hospital
NIGEL MANSELL, the Indy car champion, was released from a London hospital less than 24 hours after sustaining head and hip injuries in a crash during a touring car race that began as his homecoming celebration.
Only 6 of the 33 laps remained in Sunday's race at Donington Park when Mansell, who had moved up from 13th to third place, was struck from behind and crashed into a bridge.
He had to be cut out of his car and lost consciousness.
"It could have been a lot worse,' Mansell said yesterday. (AP)


Vencor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mexico Gains Allies in U.S. on Trade Agreement
Although Mexico has paid Washington lobbyists millions to help win support here for the North American Free Trade Agreement, supporters say the accord's fate hinges on whether American businesses assemble a credible grass-roots campaign.
The agreement, which would gradually eliminate tariffs between the United States, Canada and Mexico, is fiercely contested.
Justice Department records show that few foreign governments have ever spent as much on a single issue.
The Center for Public Integrity, in a study earlier this year, said the Mexican Government and business interests had spent $25 million in Washington since 1989 to promote the pact.


Idaho Power Co.  reports earnings for 12mo to Sept 30


WLR Foods Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Corrections
An obituary on Saturday about Thomas Fortuin, a lawyer and a senior vice president of Paramount Pictures who died in Newport Beach, Calif., misstated the date of his death.
It was Oct. 18, not Oct. 25.


Patterns
The Ms. Hip-Hop Look
The brown Carhardt workman's jacket with "Tommy Boy" embroidery, designed by Shawn Stussy a couple of years ago, was more than a promotional item for Tommy Boy Music.
It became a symbol of the look, and marketability, of hip-hop.
Last night was the night for the record label, whose artists include Naughty by Nature, House of Pain, RuPaul, K7 and Del La Soul, to introduce clothing for the customers that hip-hop fashion forgot: women.


The 1993 CAMPAIGN: Nassau; Rivals Portray Two Counties: One Content, One Aggrieved
As an accordionist played "Hail, Hail, the Gang's All Here," Thomas S. Gulotta, the Nassau County Executive, strode confidently into a senior center in his hometown of North Merrick this afternoon, where he hugged elderly residents and called this suburban county a "warm and caring" place.
It was an appeal to his most loyal voters, the people who voted a generation ago for Mr.
Gulotta's father, a prominent Republican who served as District Attorney, and who have remained devoted to Mr.
Gulotta over his 18-year political career.


Durakon Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jerusalem Journal; This Race Is a Cliffhanger (Watch the Arab Vote)
Far from Broadway and Queens Boulevard, another close election for Mayor is being held on Tuesday in a multi-ethnic, multi-religious city of dreams and dangers, beauty and squalor, visions and revisions.
The battle for Jerusalem has a distinct end-of-an-era flavor.


Corrections
A caption in some editions yesterday with a picture of Herman Badillo, a candidate for New York City Comptroller, misstated his party affiliation.
Although Mr.
Badillo is running on the Republican and Liberal lines, he is a registered Democrat, not a former Democrat.


Advest Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Voyage Into the Abyss: Gloom, Gold and Godzilla
FLASHES of light from luminescent creatures swirled in the darkness past our windows as we descended a mile and a half to a fiery gash on the ocean floor, to what scientists increasingly see as a colossal, hidden engine of creation.
After falling for more than an hour, we switched on the lights of our tiny, three-person submarine.
There, barely illuminated in the gloom, some 250 miles off the Oregon coast, lay endless fields of gnarled lava, frozen in the midst of an eruptive frenzy by the icy sea water.


Raymond James Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


The 1993 CAMPAIGN: Final Flurry of Activity as Campaigns Reach End of the Trail -- New York City; Dinkins and Giuliani Make Closing Appeals For Votes in Rematch
In a final, frantic round of appeals, the New York City mayoral rematch between David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani scraped to a close yesterday nearly four tumultuous years after it began, leaving the verdict to the voters in an election in which turnout and demographic shifts may play a decisive role.
Mr.
Giuliani, smiling and ebullient, invoked the future as he sped from seven senior-citizen centers to evening rallies in each of the five city's boroughs, predicting that his victory would bring a new era of action at City Hall.
Mr.
Dinkins, feisty and upbeat, harkened to history, imploring the core of the interracial coalition that made him the city's first black mayor not to forsake him after a single term.


Editorial Notebook: 'I Am a Storyteller'; An Afternoon With Federico Fellini
Federico Fellini, I wrote in 1981, "is a tall, rather chunky Italian gentleman of 61 who wears black-rimmed glasses and smells, deliciously, of after-shave."
A week or so after the interview appeared in this newspaper, a letter arrived from Rome.
What, Fellini demanded, did I mean by "chunky"?
Possibly the problem was with his English, he continued, but how could a person be part of a chunk?


Bow Valley Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The 1993 CAMPAIGN; In Their Own Words
DAVID N. DINKINS
Mayor David N. Dinkins spoke to reporters yesterday after an endorsement by former Gov.
Hugh L. Carey and Felix G. Rohatyn, former chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation.
" I've been asked in recent days, what will make the difference in these closing hours? What will determine for the undecideds how to go? I say it's a function of their immediate concerns.


Nature's Sunshine Products Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Giants Dwelling Only on Cowboys
There is no time for the Giants to sit back and think about losing to the Jets.
And frankly, as you walked around the Giants' locker room today, the players didn't look too upset.
Of course they hated to lose, but the way they see it there's a much more important opponent waiting just around the corner.
The Dallas Cowboys.
"Starting today, that's when I'm thinking about them," safety Greg Jackson said of the Cowboys.
"I'm not thinking about the Jets anymore; it's time for Dallas. We get to show people around the country that we are for real."


Bairnco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


John G. Winant Jr., 71, Prisoner Of Germans During World War II
John Gilbert Winant Jr., who attracted international attention when he was captured by the Germans during World War II while his father was the United States Ambassador to Britain, died on Sunday at Princeton Hospital.
He was 71 and lived in Princeton.
He had had a long illness, his family said.


North Star Universal reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Digicon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Unknown Operas Put Irish Festival on Map
Now 42 years old, Wexford Festival Opera managed to remain an Anglo-Irish secret until fairly recently.
Yes, this two-and-a-half-week autumn festival was known by the operatic in-crowd as a place where unusual repertory could be savored and fresh young talent caught on the rise.
But audiences remained largely confined to "these islands," the term that the festival's English artistic director, Elaine Padmore, used this week to avoid the sticky business of including Ireland within the "British Isles."


Death of River Phoenix Jolts the Movie Industry
The collapse and death of River Phoenix outside a Sunset Strip club early Sunday has stunned Hollywood, largely because the 23-year-old actor was one of the most gifted of his generation.
Mr.
Phoenix, a star of films like "My Own Private Idaho" and "Running on Empty," was a teen idol often described as so dedicated to healthy living that he would not eat meat or dairy products or wear leather.


Star Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


St. Ives Labs (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Delta Woodside Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Transactions
Basketball  National Basketball Association
GOLDEN STATE WARRIORS -- Signed Gerald Glass, guard-forward, to a one-year contract.
HOUSTON ROCKETS -- Waived Dave Jamerson, guard.


Cleaning Up the Police
To the Editor:
Every 20 years since 1880, the New York City Police Department has been hit by a major corruption scandal.
The Mollen Commission could break the vicious cycle.


Public Service Co. of N.C.  (NMS) reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


Alpha 1 Biomedicals Inc.(NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COLLEGE SOCCER REPORT
Atlantic Coast Conference
Clemson will go into the conference tournament, which will be staged at North Carolina starting on Thursday, on a sour note.
The Tigers, who have a bye in the first round, suffered a 2-1 loss to South Carolina Sunday afternoon at Clemson.


N. T. Helman, 88, New York Justice And State Senator
Nathaniel T. Helman, a former state legislator and State Supreme Court Justice, died on Sunday in Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 88 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


On Scattered Stages, a Last Run-Through
Voters in New York City will choose a mayor today and New Jersey will pick a governor.
In each case, an embattled Democratic incumbent is facing a strong challenge, as Mayor David N. Dinkins confronts Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate, and Gov.
Jim Florio battles Christine Todd Whitman, a Republican.
There are also hotly contested races for county executive in Nassau and Westchester Counties, as well as legislative contests in New Jersey and local races in Connecticut.


New Hiss Case Charges Come From One Demented by Torture
To the Editor:
According to Sam Tanenhaus (Op-Ed, Oct. 15), the Hiss case is wrapped up, except for a few technicalities -- such as Alger Hiss, my father, confessing his guilt.
Mr.
Tanenhaus, who's writing a biography of Whittaker Chambers, thinks "a major breakthrough" has turned up "the smoking gun" -- "unimpeachable" testimony from Budapest.


Benjamin To Miss 2 Weeks From Nets
Benoit Benjamin, the 7-foot center who was penciled into the Nets' lineup for the regular-season opener in Houston on Friday night, was officially erased today for medical reasons and replaced by the 7-4 Dwayne Schintzius, who is recovering from back surgery he had last year.
Benjamin, acquired from the Los Angeles Lakers in exchange for Sam Bowie over the summer, has been bothered by a urinary tract infection that required a medical procedure last Saturday and will keep him out for as much as two weeks, according to Coach Chuck Daly.


Donegal Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Arraignment In Shootings Of 2 Officers
A suspect in the shootings of two police officers here on Saturday night turned himself in to the police late Sunday and was arraigned today on two counts of attempted murder.
The suspect, Daniel James, 20, has been previously convicted on assault charges and is awaiting trial on drug possession charges.
He did not enter a plea today, and was taken to the Westchester County Jail.


Orion Capital reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Doskocil Cos. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Two Candidates, Two Views, One Seat


On My Mind; Lessons of a Campaign
Some of my press friends keep saying that it was a boring mayoralty campaign, that both sides ran on meanness, attack and race, that it told us nothing new about New York.
Funny -- I thought it the most interesting New York campaign I've seen.
I thought it said a great deal about the city, our life in it, and how we would like both to change.


PRO BASKETBALL: Knicks Preview; Knicks Boasting Plenty of Talent, Now Hope It Translates to a Title
Since the first day of training camp, when they opened practice at 12:01 A.M., the Knicks have pictured themselves winning a National Basketball Association championship -- this season.
Some players think about it almost daily.
They can't help it.
"The main thing I think about is: what does it feel like in that first second, that first moment after you've won it all?" said Doc Rivers, the Knicks' point guard.


Install In Haste, Repent At Leisure
IT was past time to learn something about OS/2, the high-level operating system from I.B.M. that will replace DOS, that faithful old clunker, unless Microsoft's Windows NT or a variation of UNIX wins the desktop battle.
A phone call to Micro Warehouse, a mail-order concern whose catalogue happened to be on top of the tallest pile on the desk, brought the 5.25-inch disk edition of OS/2 2.1 a few days later.
The suggested retail price is $278.95; the actual price was $149.95.
In the same catalogue, Windows NT is $279.95, with a suggested retail price of $295.


BOMB PLANT CASE DRAWS MORE FIRE
A Federal agent who investigated environmental crimes at a nuclear bomb plant near Denver told a House committee last year that when prosecutors accepted a plea agreement allowing the contractor to get off with a fine and charging no individuals, "I physically got sick."
In a closed hearing on Oct. 20, 1992, the agent for the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Jon S. Lipsky, told the House Committee on Science, Space and Technology, "It just smacked of bad faith, in my opinion, for a comment to be made that this is a good resolution."


Amnex Inc.(NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Study of Women's Health Criticized by Review Panel
A committee of the Institute of Medicine said today that it was skeptical of the merits of a women's health study planned by the the National Institutes of Health at a cost of $625 million.
The committee said much of the anticipated data could probably be obtained with smaller, better-focused and less costly projects.
The committee, which spent six months examining plans for the Women's Health Initiative at the request of the House Appropriations Committee, said it questioned the value of the nationwide study as designed and recommended changing it.


Shelter Components Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Officer Who Sold Heroin Gets a 7-Year Sentence
One of the corruption cases that have recently plagued the New York City Police Department culminated yesterday in a Federal judge's handing a seven-year sentence to a police officer who sold heroin.
The officer, Robert Robles, a former investigator with the state police, worked on the New York Drug Enforcement Task Force, an elite unit that included Federal, state and local law-enforcement officers.
He and two members of the team from the New York City police, Detective Jeffrey Beck and Sgt.
Joseph Termini, pleaded guilty last June to selling four ounces of heroin that they had seized from a drug dealer and stealing jewelry and $7,000 that investigators had taken from dealers.


For Jets, Talk Turns to Beating Dolphins
If the Jets were expecting a measure of respect from the Giants after their 10-6 victory on Sunday, they were looking in the wrong place.
Most of the talk from the Giants focused on how the Jets were trash talkers and cheap-shot artists.
With another important game against Miami on Sunday, the Jets weren't too concerned about having the Giants' seal of approval.
Still, they were curious today why the Giants preferred not to look at the scoreboard.


Xerox Announces a New Silver-Free Film, Causing a Stir
The Xerox Corporation roiled the silver futures market yesterday and drew skepticism from some technology analysts by announcing a new type of photographic film that Xerox predicted would make silver halide film "obsolete."
Xerox says its film is processed by a dry, electrostatic process that does not require the wet chemicals used in processing conventional silver halide-based film.
Silver halide compounds are made from silver and chemicals like chlorine and bromine.


Gilbert Associates (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


USlico Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Scientific-Atlanta Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


National Fuel Gas Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Three Huskies Charged With Sex Offenses
Two football players and a basketball player from the University of Washington were charged with burglary and sex-abuse offenses yesterday after a University of Oregon student told police the men walked into her dorm room, locked the door and exposed themselves.
The football players DOUG BARNES and JASON PAUL SHELLEY, and the basketball player PRENTISS PERKINS, all of Seattle, were arraigned in Lane County (Ore.) Circuit Court.
They were arrested Sunday in Eugene, Ore., after a 10-mile chase with the police and were being held in jail last night.


Hanover Direct Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Cabot reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Market Place; Warren Buffett wants to unload some Capital Cities/ABC shares.
WARREN E. BUFFETT, who has gained a reputation as an investment guru by buying stocks cheaply and virtually never selling them, says he is willing to sell one of his largest holdings.
But at what price?
And why did the stock he wants to sell go up on the news?
Mr.
Buffett, chairman of Berkshire Hathaway Inc., said yesterday that he would tender a million shares of Capital Cities/ABC when that company begins a self-tender offer for two million shares.
But his tender is conditioned on all of the million shares being taken.
And he is not saying what price he will accept.


NEW YORK TO DROP CLIFFORD CHARGES
Manhattan prosecutors moved yesterday to dismiss the criminal case against Clark M. Clifford, the Washington lawyer and elder statesman of the Democratic Party who became a defendant in the Bank of Credit and Commerce International scandal.
In court papers, Robert M. Morgenthau, the Manhattan District Attorney, cited the the frail health of Mr.
Clifford, 86, as the reason for dropping the charges.
The motion comes after the acquittal last August of Robert A. Altman, Mr.
Clifford's protege and former law partner, on related charges, and signals an apparent end to Mr.
Clifford's two-year struggle against charges that he helped B.C.C.I. deceive government regulators about its ownership of American banks.


Roadmaster Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Grey Creates Shop Just for Mitsubishi
Mitsubishi's ad agency yesterday confirmed a report about a reorganization of the company's account, while Toyota denied speculation in a trade publication that part of its accounts might go into review.
Grey Advertising said it would establish an autonomous, full-service agency in Huntington Beach, Calif., called G2, to serve Mitsubishi Motor Cars of America.
The account, and its estimated $100 million in billings, had been divided between Grey's offices in Huntington Beach and New York.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALLTEL CORP., Little Rock, Ark., and GTE Corp., Stamford, Conn., have completed their previously announced exchange of telephone service areas in several states.
Alltel also paid $440 million as part of the transaction.
CHECKERS DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS INC., Clearwater, Fla., said yesterday that it expected to open 69 restaurants by the end of the year, for a total of 403 restaurants.


Healthcare Compare reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


United Westburne reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Doris Duke Leaves $1 Billion to a New Charitable Foundation
Doris Duke, the tobacco heiress and philanthropist who was one of the world's richest women, left the bulk of her $1.2 billion estate to charity but nothing to a disowned adopted daughter with whom she had been feuding, according to a will filed for probate in a Manhattan court yesterday.
Miss Duke, who died last Thursday at the age of 80 after a life of luxury and generosity that attracted cranks and drove her into partial seclusion in her later years, left most of her estate -- more than $1 billion -- to a new Doris Duke Charitable Foundation that will become one of the nation's best-endowed philanthropies.


Wynn's International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


INSIDE
A New Sign of Growth
The manufacturing sector grew in October for the first time in five months, providing another sign of an expanding economy.
Page D1.
Clinton Warns on Trade
The President said that if the North American trade pact was rejected, Japan and Europe would invade the Mexican market.
Page B9.
Duke's Wealth to Charity
Doris Duke, the tobacco heiress, left the bulk of her $1.2 billion estate to a new charitable foundation.
Page B1.
Rightist General Dies
Maj.
Gen.
Edwin A. Walker, whose right-wing political activities led to a rebuke in 1961, died at 83.
Page B10.
Down to a Rift in the Sea
A voyage to an undersea vent turns up strange creatures and towering chimneys.
Science Times, page C1.


Maverick Tube Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Classical Music in Review
Elyane Laussade  Pianist Merkin Concert Hall
Elyane Laussade took a slight detour around standard recital programming on Saturday evening.
Her Bach, Schubert and Schumann offerings were filtered through the sensibilities of Busoni and Liszt.
Works by Mozart and Chopin were presented without such collaborative second thoughts.
But the centerpieces were two novelties: a concise four-movement Suite (1993) by Logan Skelton, in its New York premiere, and Cecile Chaminade's mid-1880's-vintage Sonata (Op. 21).


Property Trust of America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bridge
Many slam contracts are reached on the assumption that the opposing trumps will split 3-2, which they do about two-thirds of the time.
Sometimes the declarer uncovers a 4-1 break, and searches for a way to overcome that problem.
If he is really unlucky and hits a 5-0 break, he is usually doomed.
One of the few who have emerged unscathed in that situation is David Wachsman of Allentown, Pa., who held the South cards on the diagramed deal at the New York Winter Regional Championships in December 1992.
Playing with his wife, Janice, he reached six diamonds.
He thought he would have an easy task when West led the heart queen and the dummy appeared.
He won with the ace and cashed the diamond ace, wincing when West produced a heart.
But he did not give up hope.


Dawn Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lipman Bers, 79, Mathematician And Champion of Human Rights
Dr.
Lipman Bers, a retired Columbia University mathematician who was a champion of human rights, died on Friday at New Rochelle Hospital in New York.
He was 79 and a resident of New Rochelle.
He had been ill with Parkinson's disease and had had strokes in the last three years, said his son, Victor, of Hamden, Conn.


Salinas Defends His Government and Pledges Civility in Vote in '94
Defending his Government against rising criticism, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari today pledged civility and fairness in national elections next year and promised his opponents "full freedom" to present their cases to the people.
In his annual state-of-the-nation address Mr.
Salinas said he would not go beyond the changes to political statutes that his Institutional Revolutionary Party pushed through the legislature in September.
Those changes have been criticized as grossly inadequate by many critics, although they were eventually endorsed by the conservative opposition in Congress.


Another Mets Need: Financial Wizard
The holes in the Mets, obvious and enormous on the field, extend to their front office.
The club has operated since June without a chief business executive.
"It'll be filled within a month," Fred Wilpon, one of the owners of the Mets, said yesterday.


Classical Music in Review
Christopher O'Riley  Pianist 92d Street Y
In a perfect world, Christopher O'Riley's discriminating taste would be all to his advantage; in day-to-day concert life, taste sometimes becomes a burden.
The pianist's program on Sunday afternoon was almost too particular, too offbeat.
The oddest choice was to play Stravinsky's "Apollo" in a rehearsal transcription.
Mr.
O'Riley pedaled and sustained valiantly, but the result only sketchily approximated the shining string sonorities that are inseparable from this ballet's conception.
In the program notes, the pianist said he was performing the transcription mainly because "it's my favorite piece by Stravinsky"; unless one happens to be Glenn Gould, that's not a sufficient reason.


Dr. George Sheehan, Running Figure, Dies at 74
Dr.
George Sheehan, a cardiologist who became the philosopher of the recreational running movement in the 1970's and 1980's, died yesterday at his home in Ocean Grove, N.J.
He would have been 75 years old on Friday.
His son, George 3d, said the cause of death was prostate cancer, from which his father had suffered since 1986.


Wellman Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Oakwood Homes Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Express Scripts (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Banner Aerospace reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reporter's Notebook; Arms Dealers Hustle Again In Mogadishu
Since the United Nations changed its policy in Somalia last month and said it would no longer pursue an aggressive policy of disarming Somalis, arms dealers have returned to the Bakhara Market, in the heart of the city, and are once more openly selling their wares.
They report that business is good, though prices are slightly higher than they were during the civil war last year because the arms dealers still have to bypass United Nations checkpoints.


Southern Indiana Gas &amp; Electric Co.  reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


Manufactured Home Communities Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Yankees in the Market, but Teams Driving Hard Bargain
The Yankees' pursuit of a No. 1 starting pitcher suffered a setback today, maybe two.
But General Manager Gene Michael remained optimistic about the possibility of making some sort of trade.
Joe McIlvaine, the Mets' general manager, was encouraged, too, about his efforts to find a shortstop.
He said he and his aides had positive meetings with two teams, including the Cleveland Indians, one of three teams McIlvaine has targeted as having a surplus of shortstops.


TNP Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


2 BRITISH BOYS, 11, ON TRIAL IN KILLING
The two 10-year-old boys who killed a Liverpool toddler knew what they were doing when they abducted him from a shopping mall last winter, dragged him across town and then brutally beat him to death on a railroad track with bricks, stones and a heavy piece of metal, a prosecuting attorney told a judge and jury today.
As the murder trial of the two children opened in a courtroom in Preston, about 25 miles northwest of Liverpool, Richard Henriques, a prosecutor for the Crown Courts, offered a horrific chronology of the final hours of 2-year-old James Bulger, whose abduction from his mother's side and subsequent murder in February convulsed Britain.


Nevada Power Co.  reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


National Sanitary reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BEI Holdings Ltd. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Holly Residential Properties Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Election Day Choices
Today voters will choose New York City's next mayor, New Jersey's next governor and other important officials.
Polls are open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M. in New York State, 7 A.M. to 8 P.M. in New Jersey.
Here is a summary of our endorsements: New York City MAYOR  David Dinkins (D) COMPTROLLER  Alan Hevesi (D) PUBLIC ADVOCATE  Mark Green (D) NEW YORK STATE PROPOSALS
1.
Vote Yes.
To amend the State Constitution to permit more flexible terms in borrowing by counties, municipalities and school districts.


New Strategy Backed For Fighting AIDS
WORLDWIDE, outside the United States and Western Europe, the overwhelming majority of H.I.V. infections are transmitted through heterosexual sex.
But although men can protect themselves from infection by using condoms, women who are sexually active have no similar means.
They can encourage their male sex partners to use condoms, but may not succeed.
The female condom, which is just becoming available, is expensive, and scientists have not documented that it prevents transmission of H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
Even maintaining a monogamous sexual relationship is no guarantee of safety, for if a woman's male partner becomes infected, he can pass the virus to her.
And as more women are infected, so are more babies.


Mid-Atlantic Medical Services (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Roto-Rooter Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


For Haitians, Politics Has Affected Even the Dead
Every year on All Saints' Day Bertha Simon would normally wear a white dress and scarf and go to the cemetery to light a candle for the dead.
But this year Miss Simon, a voodoo priestess, said she would stay home.
"I'm staying home and celebrating in my house," she said as she sat in her tiny three-room home in Bel Air, a slum in the capital.
"It's too dangerous now, there's too much problem. It is not safe for a group of people to gather. People will politicize it."


HMG Digital Technologies Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 26


CHRONICLE
In London, ELTON JOHN has sued The Sunday Mirror for libel, contending that he was defamed by suggestions that he was on a bulimic "diet of death," Reuters reported yesterday.
The singer-songwriter, 46, who has acknowledged battling several forms of addictive behavior, including bulimia, contends that the story on the newspaper's front page on Dec. 27 labeled him a "sham and a hypocrite," his attorney, George Carman, told the High Court.


Pizza Hut Looks For a 2d Agency
Pizza Hut said yesterday that it was searching for an additional agency to join BBDO New York on its roster, to handle campaigns aimed at children as well as selected projects.
Though billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at $10 million.
Pizza Hut's review is the latest example of a trend by major marketers like the Coca-Cola Company and Sega of America to divide their accounts and assign portions to agencies that are smaller and perhaps more creatively focused than their mainstay shops.


TPI Enterprises Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Eagles' Evans Has a Fractured Arm
Eagles linebacker BYRON EVANS broke his right arm during Philadelphia's game against Dallas Sunday and will miss next Sunday's game in Phoenix, the team said yesterday.


Circa Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Micro Warehouse (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Man Tied to 175 Robberies Gets 30 Years
A Los Angeles street gangster who prosecutors say robbed more banks than anyone else in the annals of American crime was sentenced to 30 years in Federal prison today.
The gang member, Robert S. Brown, 23, and an accomplice, Donzell L. Thompson, 24, had pleaded guilty to five bank robberies and two carjackings.
Because he pleaded guilty to using a gun in the carjackings, Mr.
Brown cannot be paroled under strict Federal sentencing laws.
Mr.
Thompson pleaded to the same charge, and was sentenced to 25 years.


Landlord Is Slain in Bronx
A 63-year-old landlord was shot and killed in the Bronx yesterday shortly after he collected the monthly rent in cash from several tenants, the police said.
The man, Elliot Pagalaro, was shot on the doorstep of one of four buildings in the Bronx that he owns, said Officer Andres McInnis, a police spokesman.
Officer McInnis said that the police were not sure whether the assailant also robbed Mr.
Pagalaro, who lived in Nanuet, N.Y.


CFCF Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Insteel Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Enerflex Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Authorizes Wisconsin Curb On Aid to Poor
The Clinton Administration today gave Wisconsin permission to impose a two-year limit on welfare benefits for indigent families with children, inaugurating what could become the most radical experiment in the welfare program's history.
Advocates for welfare recipients have denounced the plan, to be tried in two counties, as a Draconian measure, and its constitutionality is certain to be challenged in Federal court.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A hit prime-time TV show without most mainstream advertisers? Dial 'N.Y.P.D. Blue.'
"N.Y.P.D. BLUE" has high ratings.
"N.Y.P.D. Blue" has impressive levels of younger male viewers.
"N.Y.P.D. Blue" has critical accolades.
What doesn't it have? Many blue-chip national advertisers.


Claims in California Fires May Exceed $250 Million
Dozens of representatives of the nation's largest property-casualty insurance companies began gathering claims from owners of fire-damaged homes around Southern California yesterday, after a series of fires caused what is estimated to be more than $250 million in insured losses.
State Farm and Allstate, the two insurance companies expected to receive the largest share of the claims, both said yesterday that it was too early to gauge the final insurance toll of a series of fires that whipped across 152,000 acres and destroyed more than 720 structures.


Death of Soviet Defector and Spy Is Tied to Kidnapping by Moscow
A former Soviet intelligence official says a defector from the Soviet Navy who vanished in Vienna while working as a double agent for the C.I.A. in 1975 died in a kidnapping attempt by Moscow's counterspies.
Oleg D. Kalugin, a former major general who headed the foreign counterintelligence service of the K.G.B., said the double agent, Nicholas Shadrin, had apparently suffered a heart attack and died when Russian agents bundled him into the trunk of a car instead of meeting with him to exchange information.


Senate Assembles, Painfully, Over the Packwood Diaries
In a Senate chamber hushed by collective embarrassment, Senator Bob Packwood and the ethics committee wrestled today for the hearts of their colleagues, who must decide whether to seek enforcement of the committee's subpoena for his personal diaries.
A floor debate attended by nearly all 100 senators, with the career of one of them perhaps hanging in the balance, overwhelmed a day of other Senate business on weighty policy matters like the North American Free Trade Agreement and a proposed constitutional amendment to balance the Federal budget.


Capital Cities Chairman Adds a Title
Capital Cities/ABC Inc. announced yesterday that Thomas S. Murphy, the 68-year-old chairman, would resume holding the position of chief executive in February after the retirement of Daniel B. Burke.
The company also announced its intention to buy back two million shares, or 12 percent, of its stock in a Dutch auction tender offer valued at about $1.26 billion.


Ramsay-HMO Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Racist Attack on Americans Upsets Germany
An attack on a group of American athletes training in eastern Germany has provoked a new storm of criticism by officials and commentators who assert that German authorities have not done enough to curb racist violence.
According to spokesmen for the local government in Oberhof, the town where the attack took place late on Friday night, fighting broke out after a group of about 15 skinheads appeared at a discotheque and began shouting racist insults at an American athlete, Robert Pipkins of Staten Island, who is black.
When a white teammate went to help him, the skinheads beat him.


Holyfield's New Punch From Asia, With Power
A heavier Evander Holyfield employed a mystical punching technique today that he will use Saturday night against Riddick Bowe.
Holyfield and Bowe will meet virtually a year after Bowe, the former sparring partner, showed rare courage and lifted Holyfield's heavyweight title.


In Tears, Schott Returns to the Helm
MARGE SCHOTT, the Cincinnati Reds' crude and crusty owner, showed her employees another side yesterday on her first day back on the job.
She cried.
Schott was treated like a returning hero, not a chastised owner, when she drove up to her office at Riverfront Stadium for the first time in eight months.
She hadn't been allowed inside during her suspension for using racial slurs.


U.S. to Press for Ban on Nuclear Dumping at Sea
After nearly a year of policy wrangling, the United States has decided to press for a legally binding, worldwide ban on the dumping of low-level radioactive waste at sea, a senior Clinton Administration official said today.
The decision, less than three weeks after a Russian tanker touched off a wave of international protest by pumping 900 tons of liquid radioactive waste into the Sea of Japan, is a major step toward adoption of a global ban by the 71 nations that are party to the 1972 treaty known as the London Convention, which regulates ocean dumping.


Tultex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Rothmans Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Century Telephone Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


PRO FOOTBALL: Giants Notebook; Ailing Taylor Is Trying New Route to Recovery
Lawrence Taylor has tried everything possible for his ailing hamstring.
Ultrasound, massage, even stretching.
So now, desperate for an answer, he is going to try acupuncture.
Taylor is scheduled to visit Dr.
Nan-sung Chu on Tuesday to try the treatment in which slender needles are inserted in specific areas of the body to relieve muscular spasms and speed the healing process.
He got the idea from talking to Jets safety Ronnie Lott after Sunday's Giants-Jets game.


Ametek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Manrico Troncelliti; Specialist in Surgery For Obesity Was 77
Dr.
Manrico Troncelliti, an expert on a drastic surgical weight-reducing technique, died on Thursday at Sacred Heart Hospital in Norristown, Pa.
He was 77 and lived in Bryn Mawr, Pa.
His family said he died of a heart attack.


OHM Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The 1993 CAMPAIGN: OUR TOWNS; A Mannerly Campaign To Become Town Clerk
NO question about it. Pamela Bednarik has run a nice campaign.
There have been no attack ads, no smear tactics, no private investigators hired to dig up dirt in the effort to advance Miss Bednarik's long-shot bid to become Islip's town clerk.
The race, in fact, has been the very model of civic decency.


Orange &amp; Rockland Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.N. Atom Agency Says North Korea Resists Treaty
The head of the International Atomic Energy Agency said today that North Korea was widening its resistance to complying with the treaty to stop the spread of nuclear weapons.
But he stopped short of accusing North Korea of abandoning the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty -- a declaration that could lead to American calls for the Security Council to impose sanctions.
The official, Hans Blix, the agency's director general, told the United Nations General Assembly that North Korea was blocking routine inspections of declared nuclear installations and denying access to secret sites that the agency wants to visit to insure that they are not being used for weapons development.


Sizeler Property Inv reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


G. Heileman Brewing to Be Sold for $390 Million
In an usual foray by outsiders into the beer industry, a Dallas investment firm said yesterday that it had agreed to buy the G. Heileman Brewing Company, the nation's fifth-largest brewer, for $390 million.
The buyer, Hicks, Muse &amp; Company, is led by Thomas O. Hicks, who achieved great success in the 1980's by buying A &amp; W, Dr Pepper and Seven-Up and later taking them public again.


If There's Any Doubt, Exterminate the Bugs
THE MICROSOFT CORPORATION's newest DOS, version 6.2, is an unscheduled upgrade intended to reassure customers who may have been alarmed by reports of data-loss problems with DOS 6.0.
DOS 6.2, which became available yesterday, adds new data protection and safety features that Microsoft compares to driver-side airbags and antilock brakes.


Winnebago Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


Dow Rises 12.02 Points to Another Record
Another batch of encouraging economic news pushed blue-chip stocks to a new record yesterday but failed to ignite a broader rally.
Investors seemed to be waiting for more information on the pace of the recovery before deciding whether to blanket the market with buy orders.
The Dow Jones industrial average hit its third record in about a week, rising 12.02 points, to 3,692.61.
The Dow Jones transportation average, which has churned relentlessly through records in recent days, again reached another high, jumping 15.17 points, to 1,742.24.


Observer; Dagwoods as Don Juans
As the capital of the world's greatest Puritan republic, Washington is obliged to flutter and blush whenever sex makes a public appearance on the stage of statesmanship.
Thus the comical spectacle of the Packwood business is anything but comical to the lawyers, lobbyists, poll takers and small-bore philosophers who formulate what passes for the conventional wisdom down there.


What Makes a Parent Put Up With It All?
PARENTHOOD may be the most natural task in the world, but considered objectively the job description matches that of, say, a serf.
There is building a nest, struggling through labor, suckling the newborn or fetching it food, cleaning up its messes, beating back predators and fussing over its every mewl and whinny and whine.
What mad potion would inspire any creature to take on such a job, and to do so with a zest that looks like. . . pleasure?
After long groping about in the dark, scientists at last are gaining clues to the biochemical basis of parental behavior.
They are learning precisely what hormonal signals impel males and females to pair up into cooperative units and assume the demands of rearing and protecting young.


Aetna Life &amp; Casualty reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pacific Telecom Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


West Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Liberty Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Elxsi Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pension Funds Join in Turnaround Venture
The California, New York State and General Motors pension funds have quietly agreed to invest hundreds of millions of dollars in a venture meant to cash in on corporate turnarounds.
Their partnership demonstrates that big investors, having overthrown several of the most prominent corporate chiefs this year, intend to expand their role in managing the companies as well.
The venture, sponsored by Dillon, Read &amp; Company, the investment bank, plans to win pledges from several foundering companies to make cutbacks and changes, then buy at least 10 percent of their stock and install one of the venture's partners on each of their boards.


Wal-Mart Reportedly in Kmart Deal
The Kmart Corporation is negotiating to sell slightly more than half of its 112 PACE Membership Warehouses stores to Wal-Mart Stores Inc., which operates the Sam's Wholesale Club warehouse stores, according to people familiar with both companies.
Kmart, the country's second-largest retailer behind Wal-Mart, is also working to sell its Pay Less Drug Stores to Leonard Green &amp; Partners, a merchant banking firm based in Los Angeles.
The Green group owns Thrifty Drug Stores.


Hillary Clinton Accuses Insurers Of Lying About Health Proposal
Hillary Rodham Clinton today accused the health insurance industry of greed that has driven the nation "to the brink of bankruptcy" and of lying to the public about the President's plan in order to protect its profits.
The First Lady denounced television advertisements run by the Health Insurance Association of America against the Administration's health care plan.
She said that its message that the plan "limits choice," a theme of one of the industry's advertisements, was false.
She said insurance companies "like being able to exclude people from coverage because the more they can exclude, the more money they can make."  'Chaos to the System'
Mrs.
Clinton goes out of her way at almost every stop to emphasize the Administration's willingness to negotiate, and did so again today.
But on rare occasions the First Lady has shown an angrier and less compromising side, making scathing attacks on groups -- like the drug industry and, today, the insurance industry -- that she says block progress.


AMERICAN EXPRESS TO SETTLE WITH FED OVER BANK UNIT
American Express Bank Ltd. agreed yesterday to pay the Federal Reserve Board $950,000 to settle allegations that a subsidiary violated bank laws.
The bank, a unit of the American Express Company, said the settlement involved American Express Bank International of Los Angeles, which it acquired in 1984.
American Express Bank International had been accused of violating Treasury Department regulations by failing to photocopy the reverse side of checks received at its Beverly Hills office, the company said.
The subsidiary had also been accused of breaking Fed rules on lending.
Under the settlement, American Express did not admit to any wrongdoing but agreed to a cease-and-desist consent order.


Review/Fashion; Anne Klein and Bill Blass Vie With Tents for Attention
After a rousing opening on Sunday starring white fairy-tale tents in Bryant Park, the problem New York fashion designers faced was making audiences focus on their new spring clothes.
Two heavy hitters opened the showings on Monday: Anne Klein, which is celebrating its 25th anniversary, and Bill Blass, who has been a fixture of Seventh Avenue even longer.
Still, the conversation centered on the energy felt in the tents when Donna Karan and Calvin Klein opened the week of showings with their secondary collections, starring platoons of models cascading over the stage.


Clinton Steps Up Campaign for Trade Accord
With a little more than two weeks to go before Congress votes on the free trade agreement with Mexico and Canada, President Clinton today stepped up his campaign for it and told business leaders that if it was rejected, Japan and Europe would swarm over the Mexican market like "flies on a June bug."
Speaking here to a conference sponsored by the United States Chamber of Commerce and beamed on television by satellite to forums organized by business leaders at some 1,000 locations around the country, the President reached for every argument he knew in favor of the North American Free Trade Agreement:


Tour of Reopening School Leaves Parents Unimpressed


Chess
It's an important part of a top player's maturing to realize that he cannot get his favorite type of strategy in every game.
A player whose strength lies in positional maneuvering has to adapt when his opponent confronts him with a purely tactical defense that leads into murky complications.
And, of course, the reverse is just as true.
Anatoly Karpov showed he could make the necessary adjustment when Jan Timman opposed him with the aggressive, tactically challenging Vienna Variation of the Queen's Gambit in the International Chess Federation's world championship match in Jakarta, Indonesia.
After Karpov overcame his initial surprise, he and his analysis team found sharp methods of dealing with it.
In Game 14, on Oct. 18, he upheld the line with which he had won Game 6 by introducing a theoretically important innovation.
Timman failed to cope with it.


No Longer a Pariah, Peru Is Being Recast As Business Magnet
Once crippled by guerrilla violence that left more than 25,000 dead and $23 billion in losses and considered by many to be ungovernable, Peru these days is drawing a rash of investors ranging from the United States to South Korea who are looking for big returns.
Foreign executives -- many of whom admit they are taking high risks -- are doing what as recently as mid-1992 was considered unthinkable for the profit-minded -- pouring hundreds of millions of dollars into one of the poorest and most chaotic countries in the third world, buying mines and television stations, fishing companies and airlines.
Business as the Vanguard
Though the investments are still small by world standards, they are enormous by Peruvian standards.
They are also the strongest sign yet that Peru may be on its way back from what many experts had predicted 18 months ago would be virtual collapse from rampant guerrilla violence.


Chief Executive Named At Lucas's Software Unit
The Lucasarts Entertainment Company, the video-game subsidiary of Lucasfilm Ltd., said today that it had named Randy Komisar, a former executive of the Go Corporation, as president and chief executive.
Founded in 1982, Lucasarts produces both entertainment and educational titles.
Go, a developer of a pen-based operating system for personal computers, was acquired by A.T.&amp; T. earlier this year.


United Asset Management reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Critic's Notebook; Mahler by the Berlin: Unsettling Intimations Of an Uncertain Future
Before reaching the close of Mahler's Ninth Symphony in Carnegie Hall on Saturday night, Claudio Abbado gradually let a fortissimo cry from the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra dissipate until the cellos finished a descent into silence.
All motion was suspended.
Then, without allowing the players or the listeners to resume their normal breathing, Mr.
Abbado gradually pivoted toward the second violins, gave a scarcely visible downbeat and began the muted elegy of the final, death-haunted page.
It was a beautifully executed transition, typical of the technical accomplishment displayed in the last two concerts of the Berlin's visit to New York (making up for the slips during the first concert's performance of Mahler's Fifth Symphony).
Throughout these performances, Mr.
Abbado was an eloquent singer of orchestral melody, giving a noble shape to lines, controlling dynamics from quadruple forte to quadruple piano, and making dance rhythms swing with subtle accents.


Equicredit Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Vanguard Cellular Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Inversion In a Gene Is Key to A Disease
A DECADE ago, researchers purified the blood protein that malfunctions in people with hemophilia.
Within a year, they had found the gene responsible for it.
But then they stumbled upon a mystery.
No matter how hard they looked in many patients who had the severe form of the disease, they could not find mutations in the gene.
It was clear that the patients had hemophilia.
They made virtually no functioning factor VIII, the clotting protein that goes awry in the disease.
Their blood failed to clot rapidly, making them prone to crippling pain and life-threatening injuries from internal bleeding.
And their symptoms were alleviated when they injected themselves with purified factor VIII.


F.C.C. Asked to Bar Phone Subsidies
Seeking a chance to compete more directly with local telephone companies, a small fiber-optic carrier asked the Federal Communications Commission today to end the current pricing system that subsidizes phone service for millions of customers.
MFS Communications Inc. of Omaha, which competes against local phone companies for business customers, wants the F.C.C. to overhaul regulations that require regulated telephone companies to provide affordable basic service to virtually everyone.


U.S. Healthcare
Shares of U.S.
Healthcare, which operates health maintenance organizations, jumped yesterday.
The stock has jerked up and down in recent months, buffeted by the debate over the impact of health care reform.
But since the company, based in Blue Bell, Pa., announced strong quarterly profits last week, its shares have risen steadily.


Bombing Defendant Had Been in Egypt, F.B.I. Was Told
The man accused of renting the yellow Ryder van and collecting explosives for bombing the World Trade Center was in Egypt "on a mission" five months before the attack, a Government informer told the F.B.I. shortly after the bombing.
The informer said that the defendant, Mohammed A. Salameh, was detained by Egyptian security forces investigating his links to a radical Islamic preacher.
The account from the informer, Emad A. Salem, could not be confirmed yesterday, although one investigator said he was familiar with the information and regarded it as significant.


Campo Electronics Appliances/Comp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Q&amp;A
Black Eyes
Q.  Why are black eyes black? And why do bruises change color?
A.
Blood released from capillaries and trapped under the skin and breakdown products of hemoglobin in the blood are chiefly responsible for the coloration of black eyes and other bruises, said Elaine W. Gunter, head of the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey laboratory of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta.


Placer Dome Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


AptarGroup Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Frontier Adjusters of America Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Air Express International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Year to July 31


G&amp;K Services reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Action of Gene in Huntington's Is Proving a Tough Puzzle
IF only a gene could be seized by the shoulders and shaken into submission, the one that causes Huntington's disease would qualify as the candidate most deserving of disciplinary action.
First, it took an international team of scientists 10 years of frustration and red herrings to isolate the gene, a discovery that was announced with great fanfare last spring.
Now, scientists concede that understanding how it works -- or why in its mutant form it causes the harrowing symptoms of psychosis, dementia and uncontrollable movements characteristic of Huntington's -- is proving to be as backbreaking a challenge as finding the gene was.


Ban on Harvesting Sea Cucumber Pits Scientists Against Fishermen
PROFFERING a business card embossed with a Galapagos tortoise, Dr.
Chantal Blanton, an American ecologist, recently warned of the latest threat to the unique wildlife here on the Galapagos Islands.
"If sea cucumber fishing resumes, you can say goodbye to the fish, the penguins and the flightless cormorants," warned Dr.
Blanton, director of the Charles Darwin Research Station here, referring to the sea cucumber's essential position in local food chains.


Why High Court Will Review Shipyard Case
To the Editor:
The news account concerning the decision of the Supreme Court to review litigation involving the closing of the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard ("Justices to Review Base-Closing Suit," Oct. 19) omitted the most critical fact: The Navy Department had intentionally concealed evidence, including documents from two admirals, that the Philadelphia shipyard should be kept open.


Gencare Health Sys (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Italian Judiciary Is Split on Tycoon's Arrest Order
The decision by investigators to issue an arrest warrant for the fugitive computer tycoon Carlo De Benedetti has opened up an unseemly public rift in the judiciary that could damage Italy's widespread corruption inquiry.
At the same time, some magistrates are expressing increasing concern that as their inquiries widen, few of the more than 3,000 suspects implicated in the scandal since it began in February 1992 have been brought to trial and that many may escape prosecution.


State Rejects Insurer's Bid For a Rate Increase on L.I.
An insurance company that said Long Island was at far greater risk of being hit by a hurricane than originally thought has lost a bid to raise its homeowner policy rates on the Island by 20 percent.
In rejecting the increase, the State Insurance Commissioner, Salvatore R. Curiale, said today that the higher rates, which would have taken effect on Nov. 15, were "excessive" and an unjustified attempt by the company, Travelers Insurance, "to convince its customers to look elsewhere for coverage."


After 4-Week Crescendo, Blast Suspect Is Mentioned
It was a first, and it took four full weeks of testimony and 60 witnesses before it happened, but yesterday, finally, the name of a defendant was mentioned in testimony in the World Trade Center bombing trial.
Late in the afternoon, an executive of the Ryder Rental Agency, Clark Anderson, was led through his testimony by a prosecutor, Henry DePippo.
Mr.
Clark looked through several folders that contained the history of one of the many thousands of vehicles in the Ryder fleet -- a vehicle that, Mr.
Anderson said, bore Ryder identification number 115141, which corresponded to a Ford Econoline van stamped with a manufacturer's identification number of LHA75633.


K-Swiss Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sports of The Times; Athletes Can Defeat Neo-Nazis
IT began with a loathsome remark Friday night in a disco in Oberhof, in eastern Germany.
And ended, if it has ended, in a bloody beating.
It has become an international incident with racial overtones, deeply troubling historical overtones, and it provokes the question: how can this horror be happening again?
Some goon, who calls himself a skinhead and wearing a T-shirt with Nazi-type symbols, approached five members of the American luge team.
The lugers were in the small resort town training for the coming World Cup circuit and 1994 Olympic Games.
They were celebrating a teammate's birthday.


Aerovox Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


ASA International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


LifeCell Corp.(NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


No Headline
"We are not the Senate Select Committee on Voyeurism. We have no prurient interest in this information. The question is whether the Senate will retreat from our commitment to a serious investigation." -- BARBARA A. MIKULSKI, an ethics committee member, on the investigation of Senator Bob Packwood.  [ A1:2. ]


Student Loan Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pyramid Technology Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Germans Keep Eye On Neo-Nazis
To the Editor:
"Germans Begin to Recognize Danger in Neo-Nazis' Surge" (front page, Oct. 21) mentions a Kurt Mueller, a "retired nurseryman with a brown toupee and distinctive metal-frame glasses," who lives in Gonsenheim near Mainz and is a virulent Nazi.
Every year, you report, neo-Nazis from all over Germany assemble on his walled-off property to celebrate "Hitler's birthday."


The 1993 CAMPAIGN: The Incumbent; Dinkins Focuses on Groups He Sees as Crucial
Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday kept a breathless schedule in three boroughs in the hope of energizing the groups he considers to be central to his re-election prospects.
From one campaign stop to the next, the Mayor emphasized the importance of turnout in today's contest.
He said strong participation among black, Hispanic, Asian and liberal white voters will enable him to win with the same coalition that led him to become New York City's first black mayor four years ago.


Price (T.) Rowe (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Classical Music in Review
Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center  Alice Tully Hall
The Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center had it easy on Sunday afternoon: the Beaux-Arts Trio played the second half of the program.
On the first half, members of the trio collaborated with the society's string players, and at times one almost needed a scorecard to keep the alliances straight.


Key Corporate Tax Case to Be Heard
Accepting a state tax case with important implications for international tax policy, the Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether the Constitution limits the ability of states to tax multinational corporations on a portion of their earnings beyond the state's borders.
The Court's action surprised nearly everyone who has followed the case, and handed the Clinton Administration a political predicament as unwelcome as it was unexpected.


Wackenhut Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


METRO DIGEST
EMPHASIZING THE NEED FOR A STRONG TURNOUT
Mayor Dinkins campaigned in three boroughs in the hope of energizing the groups he considers to be central to his prospects.
He said strong participation among black, Hispanic, Asian and liberal white voters will enable him to win re-election.
B3.
GIULIANI CALLS ON THE ELDERLY
With his Democratic running mates at his side, Rudolph W. Giuliani swept through seven centers for the elderly yesterday, urging them to break the habit of a lifetime and switch to the Republican or the Liberal line on the ballot to vote for him for mayor.
B3.


Avnet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


AM International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Chinese Herb Remedy Curbs Alcohol Desire
FOR more than 1,300 years, an herbal medicine derived from the root of the kudzu vine has been used by traditional Chinese healers to treat alcohol abuse.
Now Western scientists have extracted two active ingredients from the herb and have determined that they reduced alcohol consumption in experiments with hamsters.
Kudzu is perhaps best known in the United States as the vine that is spreading unchecked through the South.
But in China, an extract from the plant was cited as a medication as early as 200 B.C.
And about A.D. 600, a Chinese pharmacopeia listed the herb as having an anti-drunkenness effect.


Review/Rock; Songs of Love and Desire, With a Nod to the Stones
Liz Phair didn't blast through her early set at CBGB on Friday night.
She and her three-man group chugged through songs like a basement band, enjoying the momentum and not trying to bowl anyone over.
But that only made her songs more approachable, and more telling, as she shared scenarios of desire, betrayal, bitter parting and wary connections.
Her set opened with "Divorce Song," about a couple's last squabbles, and ended with "Flower," an explicit come-on.
Ms.
Phair modeled her album, "Exile in Guyville" (Matador), on the Rolling Stones' "Exile on Main Street." She copied the number of songs and their sequence; she also picked up recognizable amounts of the Stones' loose-limbed attack.
Her straightforwardly melodic, not excessively polished tunes are rooted in the Stones and early-1970's rock, though she sometimes lets herself drift away from basic verse-chorus-verse forms.
And she doesn't emulate the Stones' multi-layered irony or their garbled lyrics.
Ms.
Phair is lucid and plain-spoken, and her songs hit home.


U.S. Investigating Clinton's Links to Arkansas S.&amp; L.
Federal investigators are raising questions about ties between President Clinton and an Arkansas businessman, a political patron of Mr.
Clinton in the 1980's whose failed savings and loan is now under investigation.
Government officials and lawyers familiar with the case said the President was neither the subject nor a target of the investigation, which is still in its early stages.


Statoil A/S reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


National Pizza Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Hi-Lo Automotive reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Quebecor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Classical Music in Review
Barbara Hendricks  Soprano Alice Tully Hall
As part of Lincoln Center's Art of the Song series, the soprano Barbara Hendricks offered a tribute to Jennie Tourel on Sunday afternoon.
Tourel, the great mezzo-soprano who died 20 years ago this month, was Miss Hendricks's teacher and, as one can see from the soprano's touching program note, an inspiring role model.


Accounts
*
Cellular One, Columbus, Ohio, to CME KHBB Advertising, Southfield, Mich., to handle the cellular telephone company's account in Michigan and Ohio, previously at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Chicago.
Billings were not disclosed. *
H.
J.
Heinz Co., Pittsburgh, said the review of its Ore-Ida specialty products division account had narrowed further as Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein, San Francisco, and Riney, Angotti, Hedge, New York, withdrew.
That leaves four finalists: Chiat/Day, Venice, Calif.; Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, San Francisco; Ketchum Advertising San Francisco, and Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners, Los Angeles.
A decision is expected later this month.


American Annuity Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Schwitzer Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Review/Fashion; Smiles With Style: Lars and Johnson
Byron Lars makes people smile, and Betsey Johnson makes them laugh.
Their back-to-back fashion shows yesterday afternoon, after a morning of serious clothes, were a lift to the spirits.
None of the usual stone faces were seen on the buyers and journalists in attendance.
Both designers put on entertainments, but the Lars show was more than just fun and games.
It also had some great clothes.


Modine Manufacturing (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Bell Telephone Co. of Pennsylvania, a unit of Bell Atlantic Corp., Philadelphia, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $300 million in debt securities.


Super Food Services Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


Supreme Court Roundup; Child Smut Conviction Vacated After U.S. Shift
The Supreme Court today vacated a child pornography conviction and told a lower court to reconsider the case in light of the Clinton Administration's new position that as long as minors are wearing clothes, depictions of them cannot ordinarily be considered child pornography under a 1984 Federal law.
The Justices' unexpected order was the latest twist in a case that began its journey to the Supreme Court in obscurity but that emerged this fall as a symbol of change at the Justice Department under the new Administration.


Service Corp. International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Algo Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Magma Copper reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


World Series Heroics
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 25 graphic of the seven World Series that ended with a hit shows that getting the come-from-behind hit (preferably a homer) that wins the seventh game -- the fantasy of every boy who ever lived -- is a fantasy that has never been realized.


Viking Office Products Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Girl Fatally Beaten; Father Is Charged
A 22-year-old Bronx man was arrested yesterday and charged with beating his baby daughter to death, the police said.
The girl, Natasha Lozano, 19 months old, died of multiple internal injuries.
She was taken to Lincoln Hospital at 2 A.M. after someone called 911 and reported that the child was unconscious, said a police spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnis.


IN SHIFT, U.S. PLANS TO LIMIT PENALTIES TO RULERS IN HAITI
Ranking Administration officials said today that because a strengthened United Nations embargo on Haiti might do more harm than good, they were framing a narrower plan to impose new penalties on those who have opposed democratic rule there, rather than on Haitians in general.
At some later date, one official said, the United States might well be willing to support the sweeping sanctions urged by France and by the exiled Haitian President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
But first, the official said, "we would like to try a somewhat less blunt instrument."


The 1993 CAMPAIGN: Final Flurry of Activity as Campaigns Reach End of the Trail -- New Jersey; Florio and Whitman Wind Up Their Contest Of Unexpected Tactics
The last day of campaigning in the race for governor took Jim Florio to Camden, where his political career began, while Christine Todd Whitman, his Republican rival, spread her message to tax-sensitive older voters across the state.
After spending much of the day in the Camden County area he represented as a Congressman, Mr.
Florio stopped at North Brunswick High School, attended labor rallies in Newark and Bordentown then ended the day in Cherry Hill.
Mrs.
Whitman visited housing and nutrition centers for the elderly in Ocean County then attended rallies in Toms River and Hamilton Township.


Lac Minerals reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The 1993 CAMPAIGN; The City: Much at Stake in Contests for Council, Comptroller and Advocate
Public Advocate
Susan D. Alter, the Republican-Liberal candidate for Public Advocate, spent the last day of the campaign stumping with the top of her ticket, Rudolph W. Giuliani, at centers for the elderly across New York City while her Democratic opponent, Mark J. Green, met with union supporters, attended to fund-raising duties and campaigned among liberal voters in Park Slope, Brooklyn.
With Mr.
Green well ahead in the polls, interest in the race has focused largely on its impact on the mayoral campaign.
Ms.
Alter, a Democratic Councilwoman, Orthodox Jew and the only woman seeking citywide office, could draw women, Jewish and conservative Democratic voters to Mr.
Giuliani.
Mr.
Green is popular among liberal and Jewish voters, both important swing constituencies that Mr.
Dinkins needs to win.


Wrigley (Wm.) Jr. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Huntway Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Impact Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Basin Exploration (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Blues and Hull Extend Whalers' Misery  Brett Hull scored two goals, including the game-winner, as the St.
Louis Blues defeated the Hartford Whalers, 4-2, last night.
Hull's power-play goal broke a 2-2 tie when he took a centering pass from Craig Janney and beat Hartford goaltender Frank Pietrangelo at 16 minutes 2 seconds of the final period.
The Blues won their third straight.
The Whalers are 0-7-1 this season. (AP)
Stars Tie Maple Leafs: Mike McPhee's goal with 7:30 left in regulation lifted Dallas into a 3-3 tie with visiting Toronto as the Maple Leafs failed to win for the second straight time after a record 10-game winning streak at the start of the season. (AP) TENNIS  Leconte Overcomes Champion in Paris  Henri Leconte, in yet another comeback attempt, outlasted his fellow Frenchman Thierry Champion, 6-7 (7-9), 7-5, 6-1, yesterday in the first round of the Paris Open.
Leconte was 2 points from losing, then won 9 of the last 10 games.
He led France to the Davis Cup over the United States in the 1991 final but since has been plagued by back injuries. (AP) BASEBALL  Yakult Swallows Capture Japanese Title  Katsumi Hirosawa hit a three-run homer in the first inning and added an r.b.i. groundout in the eighth as the Yakult Swallows beat the Seibu Lions, 4-2, in Game 7 of the Japan Series for their first title in 15 years. (AP)


Bird Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Medusa Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The 1993 CAMPAIGN: The Long Shots; Candidates Who March To Different Drummers
There is another choice.
Contrary to what many disgruntled voters believe, the contest in the governor's race Tuesday is not simply between Christine Todd Whitman and Gov.
Jim Florio.
Seventeen independent candidates are also vying for the governorship, making this year's ballot the most crowded in history.


A Vote for Mr. Dinkins
There has been plenty of complaining about the quality of the mayoral campaign, but no one can rightly argue that it has lacked for interest.
The advertising has provided a textbook study of televised warfare.
Nor can anyone accuse the campaign of lacking amusement value.
Consider the totally disingenuous argument over the debate rights of George Marlin, the Conservative candidate who seemed sworn to prove his unelectability in every speech.


Keenan Is Off, But 11 Work
After picking up four points last weekend with victories away from Madison Square Garden over Hartford and the Devils to extend their unbeaten streak to 3-0-1, the Rangers held an optional practice today, and 11 players participated.
"Most of the guys took today off to re-energize, but that's O.K.," said goaltender Glenn Healy.
"Lately, we've really been playing solid hockey. We're being very patient, and taking care of the puck in our end of the ice."


New York Should Follow Colorado With a Juvenile Gun Law
To the Editor:
Gov.
Roy Romer and all Coloradans should be proud of their legislative initiative banning possession of guns by juveniles (Op-Ed, Oct. 21).
The Governor convincingly uses anecdotal evidence to show the mortal danger of guns in the hands of Colorado's children.
The will to control gun violence among young people has been less strong in New York State.


Perkin-Elmer Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  PRESSURE FOR HAITI HOLDOUTS  The United States is planning to revoke visas and freeze assets of Haitian leaders who are preventing the return of the President, rather than to seek stronger sanctions, which would cause general hardship.
A1  Haiti's usually festive All Saints Day is overshadowed by fear.
A6


Insituform Technologies Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kenan Transport reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


MCN Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Two Promotions At DDB Needham
DDB Needham Worldwide said yesterday that it had promoted two top executives to newly created positions, confirming reports this week in Advertising Age and Adweek.
John Bernbach, president at DDB Needham in New York, and the son of Bill Bernbach, a founder of a predecessor agency, Doyle Dane Bernbach, was named to the new position of vice chairman.
Mr.
Bernbach, who is 49, will give up reponsibilities for day-to-day operations and focus on tasks like acquisitions and new technology.


North American Mortgage Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Municipal Bond Issues Set Record
New issues of municipal bonds surged to a record $240.7 billion in the first 10 months of the year, easily exceeding the $232.1 billion for all of 1992, according to the Securities Data Company.
The driving force is the sharp drop in long-term interest rates, which is also what pushed new issues to a record in 1992.
But going into 1993, many forecasters expected the pace of municipal issues to tail off because they did not feel that long-term interest rates would fall much more.


Frank A. Tedesco, 68, Bus Company Founder
Frank A. Tedesco, founder and president of Academy Bus Lines, the second-largest privately owned bus transportation company in the country, died on Saturday in Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He was 68 and lived in Bayonne, N.J.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Infinity Broadcasting Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sungard Data Systems Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Art; Museum Outlines 100 Years In Chicago
It's not often that an art exhibition faces serious competition from the five-minute videotape that is its curtain raiser, but such is the fate of "Chicago's Dream, a World Treasure: The Art Institute of Chicago, 1893-1993." This sketchy show tries to encapsulate the Art Institute's history on the gallery wall, to tell a grand and exciting tale of wealthy, acquisitive patrons, of far-sighted curators and of beautiful objects and to give a sense of how a great museum gets the way it is.
Its impetus is the centennial of the opening of the Art Institute's sprawling Michigan Avenue home, an 1893 Beaux-Arts structure designed by Shepley, Rutan &amp; Coolidge that has since sprouted numerous wings.
Despite a few striking groupings of works and at least one completely startling moment -- Seurat's Pointillist masterpiece "Sunday on the Grande Jatte" isolated in a darkened room like a jewel in a velvet box -- the show tends to resemble a fragmented, elaborately packaged outline.


Paramount-QVC Talks Said to Be Unproductive
After weeks of haggling, lawyers for Paramount Communications and QVC Network Inc. met yesterday morning to discuss QVC's bid for Paramount.
It was the first time representatives for the two sides had met officially since QVC commenced a hostile $9.6 billion bid that was roughly comparable to a friendly merger proposal from Viacom Inc.


Seagull Energy Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Political Battle Over an AIDS Drug
After more than a year of heated argument, Congress is expected to begin debate today on whether to kill financing for expanded human tests of an experimental AIDS vaccine.
The vaccine's manufacturer, Microgenesys, says it could help people infected with H.I.V.
Critics say the manufacturer gained $20 million in Government financing because of an influential lobbyist rather than because the vaccine has therapeutic promise.


Foreigners Find New Ally in U.S. Industry
Grant Bennett leads one of the last American companies that make a tiny but essential ceramic part for computers and advanced weapons systems, and he reluctantly concluded late last year that he needed Government help to survive in the face of Japanese competition.
So Mr.
Bennett and another American company asked the Commerce Department for a bit of trade protection, arguing that America's national security would suffer if the troubled industry were allowed to collapse.


Rapper Charged in Shootings of Off-Duty Officers
Tupac Shakur, whose rap recordings sketch what he calls the "thug life" of inner-city violence, was charged on Sunday with shooting two off-duty suburban policemen.
The Atlanta police said the shooting occurred after two cars carrying Mr.
Shakur and his party almost struck the two men and their wives as they crossed a city street early Sunday morning.


Corrections
The Pulse chart in The Metro Section yesterday, about voter registration and turnout, misstated the percentage of New Jersey voters who were registered as Republicans in 1988.
It was 20 percent, not 32.


Huffing and Puffing, All the Way
MARK ALLEN wants you to know that this year's Ironman Triathlon world championship was the most difficult he has ever run, swum and cycled.
He was so tired and disprited after the 2.4-mile swim and the fast-paced 112-mile bicycle ride that in the early stages of the 26.2-mile run he wasn't even sure he would be able to finish the competition in Kailua-Kona, Hawaii, last Saturday.
So how far back in the pack of the record 1,434 competitors was the huffing and puffing 35-year-old Allen at the end of the grueling three-event competition?
Well, actually, he came in first, and, in winning an unprecedented fifth consecutive championship in a time of 8 hours 7 minutes 46 seconds, he broke his record.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
More signs of an expanding economy were reported.
The manufacturing sector grew in October for the first time in five months and construction spending climbed.  [ Page D1. ]


Cotton States Life &amp; Health Insurance Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Plant Deal Set For Daily News
The Daily News announced yesterday that it had completed an agreement to buy a Jersey City plant that the New York newspaper plans to convert to a color printing plant.
The property has been owned by the Clorox Company.
The companies did not disclose the terms of the agreement.
But the total cost of the new Daily News plant, including the presses and the building, has been estimated at $135 million.
The News's current black-and-white printing plant is outmoded, and newspaper analysts have said the construction of a new color plant is essential if the newspaper is to remain competitive.


Fischer &amp; Porter Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pool Energy Services (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Classical Music in Review
Cho-Liang Lin, Li Jian and Jian Wang  Violinist, Pianist, Cellist Taipei Theater
On Friday night, Cho-Liang Lin offered something halfway between a solo recital and chamber music concert.
He played Nielsen's Violin Sonata No. 2, accompanied by Li Jian, and then made room for Jian Wang in Ravel's Sonata for Violin and Cello and the Brahms Piano Trio No. 1.
The expert, intelligent playing of all three musicians found support in the cozy acoustics of the Taipei Theater.


Del Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
In the world of publishing, sometimes you can go home again, or so ARTHUR H. SAMUELSON has learned.
Mr.
Samuelson has returned to Schocken Books, where he began his editing career 13 years ago, and this time he's in charge.
When Mr.
Samuelson, 42, started at Schocken in 1980, he had no book publishing experience.
"They took a chance on me," he said, "and within six months I found a book that sold millions of copies, 'When Bad Things Happen to Good People,' by Rabbi Harold S. Kushner."


SkyWest Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Western Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gen. Edwin Walker, 83, Is Dead; Promoted Rightist Causes in 60's
Maj.
Gen.
Edwin A. Walker, whose right-wing political activities led to an official rebuke and his resignation from the Army in 1961, died on Sunday at his home in Dallas.
He was 83.
The cause was lung disease, the Dallas County medical examiner's office said in a report yesterday.


Frederick's of Hollywood Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


Employing Broken English for Community Repair
Danny Hoch, a 22-year-old Jewish actor from Queens, was doing his Yemeni immigrant, a grocery owner with a short fuse addressing a customer with whom he has obviously had a running feud:
"You don't call me Arab in my store!" Mr.
Hoch said, his rubbery features contorted angrily.
"My name is Hassan. Hassan!"


Groupe Goyette reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


National Patent Sys reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


As the Dirt Settles, Charles Dusts Off His Image
For the residents of the bleak South London housing project, it might as well have been the man from Mars.
There, marching across their concrete courtyard one morning last month, was the Prince of Wales, smartly dressed in a gray double-breasted suit and dodging the dog refuse as he led a phalanx of pin-striped London business executives on an inner-city tour.
The Prince was on a royal mission, this time a discreet pitch to cajole British businesses to invest their companies' talents and resources in rescuing decaying urban neighborhoods.
While the executives gathered around, Prince Charles walked up to surprised tenants, shaking hands and posing questions in his excruciatingly polite manner: Are there jobs for people?
Do you find the local public transportation adequate?
Is your rubbish collected every week?


IHOP Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Dance; War, Death And Dreams Of 4 Women
Beverly Blossom sits on a battered suitcase, gradually assembles and disassembles a white plastic mannequin and occasionally addresses the audience in verbal and visual asides in her new "Shards," presented on Saturday night at the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater at Columbia University.
She is dressed in a tattered but still elegant black frock coat and top hat.
In themselves, Ms.
Blossom's costume and each of her moves and gestures carry little expressive weight.
But by the end of the solo, an excerpt from "Whither in Winter," an eveninglong new work, Ms.
Blossom has once more opened a door on a vivid little world filled with laughs and piercing sadness.
The solo, set to the Albinoni Adagio, was prompted by Ms.
Blossom's depression following the death this summer of Alwin Nikolais, with whom she performed from 1953 to 1963.
It suggests the camaraderie of a dance company, the visual imagery for which Nikolais was known, and the finality of death.


Hyundai Founder Sentenced For Violating Election Laws
The founder and honorary chairman of one of South Korea's largest industrial groups, Hyundai, was sentenced to three years in prison today for violating election laws last year.
The sentence ended a brief but much-publicized political career for South Korea's most famous business leader, Chung Ju Yung, who formed his own opposition party in early 1992.


Nova Corp. of Alberta reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
COLETTE AVITAL has been Israel's consul general in New York for two years, but she only recently gained firsthand experience in a basic lesson about life in the city.
She was seated in Caffe Rafaella in Greenwich Village last week with Yehuda Amichai, an Israeli poet, perusing his latest book, "Poems of Jerusalem and Love Poems," published in this country by Sheep Meadow Press.


Vitronics Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


The 1993 CAMPAIGN; The Region: Tough Races for L.I. District Attorneys and Connecticut Mayors
Nassau District Attorney
Denis Dillon, Nassau County District Attorney, is seeking an unprecedented sixth term, running against a former member of his own staff, Timothy Calonita, who served as an assistant district attorney until his resignation in May in a dispute with the county over budget cuts.
Mr.
Dillon is a former Democrat who, because of his support of the anti-abortion movement in the mid-1980's, switched to the Republican Party.
He also is running on the Conservative and Right-to-Life lines.


Salzberg Beware: Imus Is Near
Is RUSS SALZBERG fretting that DON IMUS will make his life miserable?
After his first day following Imus, in WFAN-AM's 10 A.M.-1 P.M. time slot, the besweatered WWOR-TV--Channel 9 sports broadcaster sounds happy to take the insults that will come his way as part of life with Imus at the sports-talk station.
"Going into this job, you have to know what you're getting into," he said.
"I'd look like a fool if I couldn't take criticism from Imus. MIKE FRANCESA and CHRIS RUSSO took it, and they're fine."


Ulf Bjorlin, Composer And a Conductor, 60
Ulf Bjorlin, a Swedish composer and conductor, died on Oct. 23 at the Good Samaritan Hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 60 years old and lived in Palm Beach.
The cause was leukemia, said Herb Schapiro, who wrote the drama on which Mr.
Bjorlin based his "Musical Portrait of Raoul Wallenberg."


Robinson Nugent Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The 1993 CAMPAIGN: Westchester; Last Rounds in Races for Executive and District Attorney
Searching for votes through chilly sidewalk gusts and warming shows of ethnic solidarity, Westchester candidates pulled down the curtain today on an acrimonious campaign and waited to see whether voters want to shift the direction of this comparatively comfortable county.
County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke, reassured by an 11 percentage-point lead in the polls, has spent the last few days taking advantage of 11 years in office.
After unveiling a budget that he said would not raise property taxes, he opened a social-services center in Yonkers, a city that has 25 percent of the county's votes, and announced a speed-up in restitutions to crime victims.


Parade of Stars Now Parade of Injured
Half of the Golden State Warriors are wrapped in gauze; the other half are afraid to leave the locker room.
Whoever is puncturing their voodoo doll might want to take a week off.
This team already had no knees, but now it has no leading scorer.
Chris Mullin, who was using basketball as an escape from his mother's recent death, is out for six weeks after two fingers on his non-shooting hand were yanked like a wishbone during Saturday's game against Seattle.
He has a torn finger ligament, but on the bright side he does not need to wear a hospital bracelet.


PRO FOOTBALL: Notebook; Montana Shows the Wear and Tear
When an athlete's body ages, it rebels.
Muscles tighten and dry and shrink.
They get hurt easier.
They take longer to heal.
Case in point: Joe Montana, 37 years old, perhaps the best quarterback ever to play pro football.
A bad elbow wiped out all but 30 minutes of his last two years with the San Francisco 49ers.
Now, in his first season as the designated savior of the Kansas City Chiefs, he has missed half of his potential playing time.


Canadian Manoir reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Cigna Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Value Health Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jordan Must Make Retirement Official With Letter to N.B.A.
Michael Jordan, who made his distaste for sports journalism obvious when he retired from the Chicago Bulls last month, has some writing of his own to complete by the end of the week.
He has to report his official retirement to the National Basketball Association.
The league is waiting for two letters, one from Jordan and the other from the Bulls, declaring Jordan's exit from the game.
There is no actual deadline, but since the Bulls must set their 12-man roster for the start of the regular season Friday, the N.B.A. is assuming the postman will deliver the bad news by then.


By Design; Short Gets Shorter
Some of the skirts designers are showing for spring are so short they barely cover the torso.
The wearer wouldn't dare to bend, dance or even climb a stairway if anyone was following.
And then there are those jackets shown with no skirt, only a shirt.
Many women are bound to be outraged at such flagrant impracticality.
To take these styles seriously would be cause for panic.
Those microskirts will be several inches longer when they finally reach the stores, and those jackets will have matching skirts or pants.
The designers are putting on a show, after all, to get the world's attention.
And they're also seeking to assure women that short skirts are really back in fashion.
They want you to forget that they showed ankle-grazing hemlines for fall.


Belden Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Southdown Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Books of The Times; Young America's Many Songs of Itself
American Poetry  The 19th Century  Selected and with notes by John Hollander.
Volume I: Philip Freneau to Walt Whitman, 1,099 pages.
Volume II: Herman Melville to Trumbull Stickney, 1,050 pages.
Library of America. $35 apiece.
In the lines as well as between the lines of much of the poetry written by Americans in the 19th century, it's clear that love of country -- its roots, ideals and dreams -- was one of the inspirations behind the creative process.
Many of the poets envisioned the United States as a divine city upon a hill.
This didn't always lead to art; when pens were guided purely by patriotism, the result could be genuinely dreadful verse.
Yet the 19th century produced a handful of brilliant poets who continue to be cherished for their contemporary impressions and memorable language.


Warnaco Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


BC Telecom reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1993 CAMPAIGN: The Challenger; In Hectic Day, Giuliani Courts the Elderly
With his Democratic running mates at his side, Rudolph W. Giuliani swept through seven centers for the elderly yesterday, telling the most stalwart of New York City voters to break the habit of a lifetime and switch to the Republican or the Liberal line on the ballot to vote for him.
The stops, along Brooklyn's heavily Jewish shore communities and then across Queens, came in a grueling campaign day that began at 7:45 A.M. at a subway station in Manhattan's silk-stocking district.
There Mr.
Giuliani shook voters' hands accompanied by Andrew S. Eristoff, a Republican City Councilman who still had a black eye from an encounter with a bicyclist as he campaigned on Saturday.
Mr.
Giuliani planned to stump into the night until a final get-out-the vote rally on Staten Island.


Homestake Mining reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Belated 'Trick or Treat' From Mother Nature


France Hasn't Slipped Off Charts
To the Editor:
As a student of international relations, I have spent considerable time studying France and the European Community.
I am greatly impressed by "Has France Gone Bonkers?" (Op-Ed, Oct. 18) by Flora Lewis.
I take issue, however, with how she points to the supposed end of France as a "great power" by making vague reference to the strength of a reunified Germany.


Kimco Realty Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


McDonnell Posts Profit For Quarter
Despite declining military and commercial aircraft orders, the McDonnell Douglas Corporation reported yesterday that it had $142 million in third-quarter profits.
Net income, which came to $3.62 a share, compared with a loss of $42 million in the comparable 1992 period.
Revenue fell to $3.44 billion from $3.89 billion.


Unico American (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Data Show Factories Picking Up
The economy's manufacturing sector expanded in October for the first time in five months, with 15 of 20 industries surpassing their September performance, the National Association of Purchasing Management reported today.
The sharp increase in the association's monthly index of manufacturing activity, to 53.8 percent from 49.7 percent, was bigger than expected and confirmed the views of various analysts that the economy's general acceleration was spreading to factories.


Coors (Adolph) Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


John G. Winant Jr., 71, Prisoner Of Germans During World War II
John Gilbert Winant Jr., who attracted international attention when he was captured by the Germans during World War II while his father was the United States Ambassador to Britain, died on Sunday at Princeton Hospital.
He was 71 and lived in Princeton.
He had had a long illness, his family said.


New-Home Sales Jump By 20.8%
Inspired by mortgage rates under 7 percent, buyers snapped up new homes in September at the fastest pace since 1986, a performance that far surpassed expectations, Government figures showed today.
All regions boomed except the Northeast, where sales eased slightly.
In a separate report, the Commerce Department index designed to forecast the economy climbed five-tenths of 1 percent for September, the first time this year there have been sizable back-to-back gains.


Corrections
A picture caption on Monday about a debate between candidates for Nassau County Executive misidentified two of the men shown.
The mustached man at the center was Benjamin Zwirn; at the right, facing the camera, was Charles E. Holster 3d.
The moderator, Matthew Crosson, was not shown.
The caption also misidentified the site of the debate.
It was Westbury, L.I., not Southold.


O'Reilly Automotive Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


White House Is Adamant on Balkan War Crimes
The Clinton Administration has ruled out granting amnesty to those accused of war crimes in the former Yugoslavia and will press for sanctions against countries that refuse to hand over suspects for trial by the new United Nations war crimes tribunal, a senior Administration official said today.
Madeleine K. Albright, America's chief representative at the United Nations, said she had "no illusions about the obstacles the tribunal will face." It will be hard, she said, "to gain access to evidence, including mass grave sites, especially in areas under Serb control" and "often impossible to gain custody over the accused."


Severo Ochoa, Biochemist, A Nobel Winner, 88, Dies
Severo Ochoa, the biochemist who won the Nobel Prize for his discovery of an enzyme that can synthesize RNA, a nucleic acid that is a vital part of the genetic machinery of living cells, died on Monday in Madrid.
He was 88.
The cause was pneumonia, hospital officials in Madrid said.


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Man in the News; A Road of Many Turns, an End Triumphant: Rudolph William Giuliani
Taking his place as New York City's 107th mayor, Rudolph W. Giuliani gains a position of influence and prestige for which he fought feverishly and at times awkwardly since his slender defeat by David N. Dinkins four years ago.
His election marks the culmination of an unlikely personal and political journey for a man who grew up as a Democrat in Brooklyn, who became a Republican in the mid-70's and now will govern a predominantly Democratic city.
The son of a tavern owner, he became a lawyer and an intense and successful prosecutor in a career defined by rules and law, before shifting to the more intuitive arena of municipal politics.
A Natural Progression
Campaigning for mayor, Mr.
Giuliani always said his quest was a natural progression in a career that took him from the Federal prosecutor's office in Manhattan to the No. 3 official in the Reagan Justice Department and finally United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York.


Ex-Linebacker Loses Again in Giants Case
A year after being hoist with his own petard in a lawsuit against the Giants, the former linebacker LANCE HAMILTON is getting the bill for pursuing what a judge called a frivolous claim that the team had reneged on a promise to hire him as an assistant coach.
During the trial of the case in New Jersey Superior Court in Bergen County last year, a tape recording that Hamilton, himself, had secretly made of a 1986 conversation with BILL PARCELLS, then the coach, was accepted by the jury as proof that Parcells had not promised Hamilton a job, as Hamilton had contended in the suit charging breach of contract and racial discrimination.


Book Notes
Tale of a Dynasty
The story is lurid but true, full of love, divorce, betrayal, lots of money and even big hair.
But although the very rich and very litigious Haft family of Washington might appear to be an obvious subject for a book, several authors who have lately been shopping around proposals report that publishers just aren't biting.
In fact, one such proposal, from Kara Swisher, a Washington Post business reporter, has been rejected by editors at 18 publishing houses.
On the record, they have explained that the story is too local, that no one will be interested by the time the book is finished, and that the Hafts have been so thoroughly covered by various media that there is nothing left to reveal.
In part, that's true.


WPIX Yank Quest Goes On
In the drama to keep the Yankees on free television, WPIX has asked the MSG Network to clarify an offer the cable television network made last week to split production costs and profits or losses for 50 games.
WPIX's concern is that the break-even point envisioned by MSG would equal what MSG pays the Yankees for television rights, which will amount to about $305,000 per game in 1994.
If the break-even point is that high, WPIX would most likely reject the proposal.


Supreme Court Eases Restrictions On Use of Tapes of Its Arguments
Released from restrictions imposed by the Supreme Court on public access to audiotapes of the Court's arguments, the National Archives said today that beginning immediately members of the public could obtain copies of the tapes for any purpose, including broadcast and commercial reproduction.
For people who bring their own recording equipment to the Archives, there will be no charge for copying the tapes, said Susan Cooper, an Archives spokeswoman.
Otherwise, the Archives will make copies on request for $12.75 for each one-hour tape, she said.
Access to the Motion Picture, Sound, and Video Research Room, where the tapes are kept at the Archives building at Eighth Street and Pennsylvania Avenue N.W., requires a research card, which the Archives grants essentially on request to people who present some form of photo identification.


Logistics Steps Onto Retail Battlefield
The latest buzz in the retail industry isn't about hemlines or projections of holiday sales.
Instead, retail executives are talking about logistics, the science of moving goods from a manufacturer into a customer's hands in the most timely, efficient and cost-effective way.
The clearest signal that logistics has moved onto center stage came last month when the retail division of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company hired Lieut.
Gen.
William G. Pagonis, who managed the tangled military supply chain during the Persian Gulf war, as senior vice president in charge of logistics.


New Rival Attacks Bell Atlantic as Obstructionist
From the moment the Bell Atlantic Corporation announced its $33 billion pact to buy the nation's biggest cable television company, Bell Atlantic officials have argued that the combined entity will bring new competition to local telephone and cable companies around the country.
But an aspiring rival in the local telephone business that has competed against a number of Baby Bells charges that Bell Atlantic has been the most obstructionist in blocking competition.
The charges were first raised in the summer, and the accuser, the MFS Communications Company, is continuing to press its case.


Butler International Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Molson Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Shiloh Industries
Shares of Shiloh Industries, a steel processor based in Mansfield, Ohio, slumped yesterday after the company announced that fourth-quarter earnings would be lower than what some analysts had predicted, largely as a result of one-time charges.
The stock had climbed last month after falling sharply in late September.


Comeback For Wines Of Austria
EIGHT years after a ruinous poisoned-wine scandal, Austrian wines have regained a toehold in America.
Importers and retailers say that sales are still spotty, but slowly growing.
The renewed confidence is symbolized by an Austrian wine and food menu to be offered at the Cafe Pierre in the Pierre Hotel for a week, beginning Friday.
"The quality of the wines has increased since 1985," said Dominique Godat, the hotel's food and beverage director.
"The Austrians have remarkable standards now."


Review/Music; Two Ways for Composers to Sound New
The American Composers Orchestra concert at Carnegie Hall on Sunday afternoon was interesting for, among other reasons, the tensions between its two newest pieces.
Michael Daugherty's "Oh Lois!" was one.
Mr.
Daugherty has followed one of the more inviting paths in recent American composing: a kind of high-tech, hyperactive approach to pop culture and urban noise.
As its title suggests, "Oh Lois!" is a comic book in sound.
Brightly drawn, vividly orchestrated, with little teases of electronic sound, this is a high-speed, high-altitude race that works very hard not to be ignored.
The timbres are shrill to piercing, the tempos breathless.
Mr.
Daugherty takes aim at the casual listener's attention span and fires with considerable accuracy.


WKCR's Annual Music Fair
New and used records, compact disks, cassettes, videos and books on music are to be sold on Saturday at the annual fair sponsored by WKCR, the Columbia University radio station.
The fair is to be held from 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M. in Wollman Auditorium of the university's Ferris Booth Hall, at 115th Street and Broadway, Morningside Heights.
Admission is $3; proceeds will go to the station.


Zebra Technologies (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Turning the Clock Back for the Silver Screen


Packwood Case Steps Onto New Ground
The struggle over Senator Bob Packwood's diaries involves disputes over Congressional powers and civil liberties that date to the nation's birth.
But it is also a venture onto uncharted ground, since no Senator in modern times has contested a Senate subpoena for his private papers.
By tonight's overwhelming vote, the full Senate has given its Select Committee on Ethics the right to what the panel has been seeking: thousands of pages of Mr.
Packwood's personal diaries.
The panel's aim is not only to clear up accusations of sexual harassment against the Oregon Republican, but also to investigate possible criminal activities, which it thus far refuses to specify.


XOMA Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


National Car Rental Narrows Its Review
National Car Rental in Minneapolis said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on its estimated $25 million account to five agencies from a dozen.
The account was previously at Chiat/Day in New York, which was dismissed in September.


Box Turtle Versus Lawn Mower
Moe, an Eastern box turtle, made his home among the flowers, shrubs and grass of a large Long Island yard.
But, like so many Eastern box turtles in New York and its suburbs, he was living on borrowed time amid urban sprawl and the human-generated hazards that come with it.
Last June, an unsuspecting gardener sliced his shell nearly in half with a lawn mower.


Amtran (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


On Campus; Baby-Boomer Books Faulted in S.A.T. Drop
A Cornell professor contends that the nationwide decline in verbal Scholastic Assessment Test (S.A.T.) scores since 1963 is a result of simplified schoolbooks introduced after World War II.
Scores started falling in 1963, when the baby-boomer began taking the test.
The scores continued to drop for 16 years and have remained low ever since.
The top 30 percent of students in the country take the S.A.T., and their average score on the verbal was 422 out of a possible 800 last year, compared with 478 in 1963.
The drop of 56 points does not take into account the declining difficulty of the test, said the professor, Donald Hayes.


California Fire Strikes Malibu; Thousands Flee
A fierce and fast-moving wall of fire roared down from the Santa Monica Mountains northwest of here to the Pacific coast today, incinerating canyon ranches, hillside mansions and some of the multimillion-dollar estates of the exclusive oceanside town of Malibu.
Late this evening, the fire engulfed a gas station and jumped the Pacific Coast Highway, threatening Malibu Colony, where celebrities like Johnny Carson, Larry Hagman and Bob Newhart have houses on the beach.
Thousands of fleeing residents clogged the highway, the only reliable way out of the area.
At nightfall, abandoned cars on the highway shoulder were exploding into flames.


Rogers Cantel Mobile Commun. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


For New Lobbyists, It's Now What They Know
After years of watching prestigious institutions like Stanford and Harvard snap up billions in Federal research grants, the less glamorous university systems in 18 states came to Washington not long ago to seek their fair share of the pie.
After all, they reasoned, if the top educators from a third of the nation couldn't turn bureaucratic heads, then who could?
But what the university leaders found they could not do was master the anthill of acting deputy assistant secretaries, grant officers, science advisers and Capitol Hill clerks who keep a collective hand on the Federal grant spigot.
New Breed of Lobbyist
For that, they turned to a man who spent 16 years handling spending issues for a top lawmaker on the House Appropriations Committee, and then became a lobbyist when his boss, the Louisiana Democrat Lindy Boggs, left the House in 1990.
When the colleges asked, he showed them where the levers of power were.
On his instruction, the universities pushed them, while he, by and large, sat back and watched.
And Federal research grants tripled in three years.


Thousands of Italian Mourners File in Homage Past Fellini Bier
In the studio where he made his movies and his name, Federico Fellini lay in cinematographic state today, the lights soft, the music no more than a whisper, the tenderness of the thousands who filed by his burnished coffin mingling with the ghosts of his creations.
For many Italians, Fellini, who died on Sunday at the age of 73, was far more than the man who gave the world "La Strada," "La Dolce Vita" and "8 1/2." What he gave Italy, people said today, was the sum of their dreams and fantasies and sins, encased in an artistry that helped define the nation's self-image, at home and abroad.


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Mayoral Races; New Faces Moving Into City Halls Around Nation
This most Irish of American cities today elected Thomas M. Menino, the grandson of Italian immigrants, its first non-Irish mayor in 63 years, a sign that the pitch of ethnic politics has been muted.
Mr.
Menino, who rose from City Council President to Acting Mayor in July when Raymond L. Flynn resigned to become Ambassador to the Vatican, won overwhelmingly against James T. Brett, a veteran state representative who was the Irish-American candidate.


New York and Fashion Industry Fit Each Other
To the Editor:
You say New York City's new industrial proposals "promise too much" by channeling public investment into industries "that often seem to have no more claim on taxpayer dollars than the fact that they hire lots of voters" ("Fixing New York's Sick Economy," editorial, Oct. 18).
You ask, "Why does a mature industry like fashion need incubation?"


Review/Fashion; Bringing New Life (and Bamboo Bra Tops) to the Party
NEW YORK'S lineup of young fashion designers is starting to reflect that gorgeous mosaic that is supposed to makes up the general population.
And in very recent years the audiences at shows have begun to represent the cross-section of customers who buy clothes.
Three young designers -- Han Feng and Vivienne Tam, who were born in China, and Lola Faturoti, who was born in Nigeria -- showed on runways in the last week for the first time, and they all had cleared some big hurdles to get there.


General Nutrition Cos. (NMS) reports earnings for 12wks to Oct 16


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: The Incumbent; Dinkins Ends the Campaign on Note of Gratitude
Mayor David N. Dinkins took his defeat for re-election with a warm expression of gratitude for his own place in city history and emphatic pleas to his supporters -- in the face of their own booing to the contrary -- that "we will help Rudy."
"Our city is in his hands," Mr.
Dinkins declared with finality in urging citywide support for Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani in a concession speech of grace and consolation before a crushed throng of his supporters.


Japanese Offer Highest Rate of Low-Skill U.S. Jobs
A new Government study of foreign-owned manufacturing companies in the United States has found that they generally provide the same quality jobs as American companies, with one exception: the Japanese employ a higher percentage of low-skilled workers than other companies do.
The study released last week by the Labor Department's Bureau of Labor Statistics found that among the 233,000 people who work for Japanese-owned manufacturing companies in this country, nearly 74 percent hold relatively low-skilled production jobs.
That compares with 64 percent of the 1.7 million workers at all foreign-owned manufacturing concerns and 65 percent for manufacturing companies over all.


Wal-Mart Stores to Buy PACE Warehouse Clubs
The Kmart Corporation said yesterday that it was abandoning the brutally competitive warehouse club business, selling 91 of its PACE Membership Warehouses stores, all PACE inventory and its membership list to its rival, Wal-Mart Stores Inc.
Kmart said it would close or sell the rest of its PACE stores or convert them to other uses.


Wine Talk
At a news conference in Canada last year, Nelson Mandela, whom many expect to become South Africa's President in 1994, was asked if any land-distribution programs his Government might undertake would extend to vineyards.
Wine farms, Mr.
Mandela said, were no different than any other farms.
And yet, as the country confronts the immense political and social upheaval of the years ahead, land redistribution is the least of the problems here on the Western Cape, the center of South Africa's wine industry.


Dolphins' Mitchell Paid His Dues, and It Pays Dividends
Two days after Scott Mitchell guided the Miami Dolphins to a 24-14 comeback victory over the Cleveland Browns in his National Football League unveiling in early October, he and his wife, Kim, went on a day trip to Orlando, Fla., with their 9-month-old son, Joshua.
On the return, they pulled into a rest stop on the turnpike.
While Kim went for a drink, Scott stood in the near-dark holding their son.
Two men walked by, got into their car and began backing up slowly until they were directly behind the Mitchell vehicle.


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Woman in the News; An Outsider Wins Office: Christine Todd Whitman
Today Christine Todd Whitman both fulfilled the political promise she showed three years ago and realized the obligation of public service that was virtually her familial inheritance.
In becoming the first woman to be elected governor of New Jersey, Mrs.
Whitman traveled from little-known but well-connected outsider to the candidate who upset a surprisingly resilient Jim Florio.


Simplicity reigns: C14.


Food Notes
Gourmet Kosher
Cachet Gourmet, a new large, well-stocked fancy-food shop, is unusual on two counts: it's the only shop of its kind in Brooklyn, and it's kosher.
But unlike most kosher shops that sell prepared and packaged foods, Cachet Gourmet, 815 Kings Highway (near East 9th Street) in the Midwood section of Brooklyn, offers foods that are likely to satisfy any demanding palate, kosher or not.
It has everything from excellent Scotch salmon and gravlax to packages of pizza bread and Japanese soba noodles, bottles of balsamic vinegar and basil oil, fresh mesclun and oyster mushrooms, and delicious prepared black bean salad with cumin.


Coventry Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kaneb Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Public Advocate; Green Breezes in Rematch From Primary
Mark J. Green, the once-defeated Senate candidate who became a popular consumer affairs commissioner, was an easy winner yesterday against Susan D. Alter in the race for Public Advocate, the city's second-highest office.
With 91 percent of the precincts having reported by 12:45 this morning, Mr.
Green had 61 percent of the vote to 36 percent for Ms.
Alter in the race for the post formerly known as City Council President.
Mr.
Green had 842,898 votes and Ms.
Alter 498,889.


Piper Jaffray Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Vote Counting Will Take at Least 10 Days
The voting ended in the mayoral race at 9 o'clock last night, but the counting will go on until at least Nov. 12, because of state election laws governing the tallying of outstanding absentee and paper ballots.
Jon R. Del Giorno, administrative manager of the New York City Board of Elections, said last night that 28,500 absentee ballots were in hand as of yesterday morning.


Pittway Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pactel Wins Approval To Sell Wireless Unit
The Pacific Telesis Group cleared a major regulatory hurdle today when California regulators approved a much-awaited plan for the regional Bell company to spin off its wireless communications operations from its core local telephone business.
The decision by the California Public Utilities Commission is a victory for Pacific Telesis because it will allow the company to pursue an initial public offering for the new wireless company in December.


DOCTORS ASSAILED IN ANTITRUST MOVE
The Federal Trade Commission used antitrust law today for the first time to challenge two joint ventures formed by doctors who sent patients to medical equipment companies in which the doctors had invested.
The commission, the two companies and 28 doctors agreed to settlements intended to reduce the doctors' financial interest in the two businesses, which supply oxygen and oxygen equipment for use by patients with heart and lung diseases.


McDowell Of White Sox Is Clear-Cut Young Pick
After Jack McDowell lost both of his starts to Toronto in the American League pennant playoff, speculation that the Chicago White Sox would trade their No. 1 pitcher grew.
Today, the White Sox general manager quashed that idea, and that was before he knew that McDowell had won the Cy Young award.
McDowell, not surprisingly, won the voting easily, drawing 21 of the 28 first-place votes and a total of 124 points, to 75 for Randy Johnson of the Seattle Mariners.
Johnson, who led the league in strikeouts with 308 and had a 19-8 record, received six votes for first.


Schultz Sav-O Stores Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 9


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Mayor; GIULIANI OUSTS DINKINS BY A THIN MARGIN; WHITMAN IS AN UPSET WINNER OVER FLORIO
Rudolph William Giuliani, a tavern owner's son who challenged Wall Street, political corruption and the mob as one of the nation's fiercest prosecutors, edged out David N. Dinkins last night for the right to take on municipal government and become the 107th Mayor of New York City -- the first Republican to lead it in a generation.


Mixed Fortunes For Impressionists At First Fall Auction
Yes, there's still passion in the art market, but only for objects that deserve it.
Christie's sale of Impressionist and modern paintings, drawings and sculptures last night showed not only that the slow but steady climb out of the last two years' doldrums continues, but also that if a work of art is special enough, collectors from all over the world will fight for it.
The evening's big surprise came early when Degas's "Dancers Taking a Bow (The Ballerinas)," from 1885, sold for a staggering $7 million.
The work, which shows two dancers taking a curtain call, doubled its low estimate of $3.5 million.
The action for the painting wasn't in the salesroom, but on the telephones.
Several bidders vied for the work which was finally sold to an unidentified European collector.


Moscow Outlines 'Doctrine' for Its Future Military
President Boris N. Yeltsin's Security Council approved new guiding principles today for the Russian Army in a long-awaited "military doctrine," which declares that the main source of military danger is no longer any nation or alliance, but small local conflicts.
The 24-page document was not immediately published, but much of it has already been publicly discussed, and the Interfax news agency offered additional details supplied by Valery Manilov, the Security Council official who prepared the final draft.


Kollek Ousted, Resoundingly, In Israeli Vote
One of the world's longest and most acclaimed political careers came thunderously crashing down early today when Teddy Kollek was swept from office after 28 years as the indomitable Mayor of Jerusalem.
Early results, which seem certain to hold up as ballot-counting continues, showed Mr.
Kollek, 82, to have been soundly defeated by Ehud Olmert, 47, a Member of Parliament from the Likud Party whose campaign had focused strongly on the incumbent's age and shaky health.


Whole Foods Market Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Sept 26


Review/Pop; 3 Ages of Rod Stewart, Defined by Ages of Women
When Rod Stewart was in his 20's, he wrote rueful, self-mocking songs about affairs with older women.
In his 30's, he praised a woman who would be his friend when "I grow old." At Madison Square Garden On Monday night, the second night of a sold-out three-night stand, the 48-year-old singer urged his audience to stay "Forever Young" and showed home videos of his 24-year-old wife, Rachel Hunter, and their child.
He was a trim, high-kicking advertisement for a baby-boomer vision of extended youth, a little nostalgic (for "old Motown records") but still keeping mortality at bay.
Mr.
Stewart has matured into a trouper, running through his hits and coming up with new ones just often enough to avoid becoming an oldies act.
"We're here for two hours tonight," he said, straightforwardly announcing his intentions.
His current touring show places the stage at the center of the arena, with video screens serving the half of the audience to whom his back is inevitably turned.
Along with the band (which includes Ian McLagan, the keyboardist from Mr. Stewart's late-1960's band, the Faces) and three backup vocalists, there's a luxurious accessory: a 17-member mini-orchestra.
But on Monday night, the elaborate production was better to see than to hear; the sound mix was slapdash.


Zaring Homes Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Executive Changes
APPLE BANCORP INC., New York, said Edward J. Brown would retire as president, chief operating officer and director of the company and its Apple Bank for Savings unit on Dec. 1.
Alan Shamoon, chief financial officer, will succeed Mr.
Brown, who will continue as a consultant.
ATLANTIC RECORDING CORP., New York, named Bob Shaw senior vice president for management information systems for Atlantic Records.


Market Place; Raising some red flags over those stalwart utility stocks.
AS interest rates have fallen, increasing numbers of small investors have shifted their money into utility stocks or mutual funds heavily invested in utilities.
"A retired person used to getting 8 percent on his or her $100,000 who has watched that go down to 4 percent in their C.D. account now puts the money in a utility mutual fund," said Tracey L. Tuttle, a utility analyst at Prudential Securities, which runs one of the oldest and largest utility mutual funds.
"They are happy to get 5 percent."


Emerson Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Scouts See Nothing Very Spectacular by Islanders
Perhaps there are more big trades brewing among the clubs of the National Hockey League.
Hours after the Rangers, Hartford and Chicago engineered a multi-player shuffle, there were nine scouts in the Coliseum press box to watch Vancouver's 2-1 victory over the Islanders tonight, enough scouts to start a campfire by rubbing two hockey sticks together.
The result dropped the Islanders to 3-8-1 in this young season, good for sixth place in the Atlantic Division, and it drew grumbling from the 10,164 fans who expected a better start after last spring's fast finish.


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Voters; In New Jersey, Concern Over Taxes and Trust
It was the voters' turn to be heard in New Jersey's governor's race yesterday, and as they left their polling booths in elementary schools and fire houses, in centers for the elderly and libraries, they described their anger about higher taxes and their worries about a poor economy.
Above all, they talked of the question that came to dominate the race: whether Gov.
Jim Florio deserved another term.
A survey of people leaving the polls and conversations with voters on a cool but sunny election day made it clear that the tax issue remained Topic A with a large number of voters.
It was clearly the strongest appeal of the Republican challenger, Christine Todd Whitman, followed closely by concerns about the condition of the state's economy, honesty in government and the candidates' understanding of the public's concerns.


Review/Music; From When Jazz Was Young
Hardly any words are spoken in "Eddie, Bix and Bing," a low-key musical revue at Michael's Pub that re-creates pop-jazz sounds from the decade that immediately preceded the swing era.
But the show, which features the jazz guitarist Frank Vignola, the cornetist Peter Ecklund and Eddie Byrd, a polished pop baritone, offers appealing musical sketches of a time when American jazz was young, fresh and uncomplicated.
The musicians named in the show's title are the seminal guitarist Eddie Lang, the cornetist Bix Beiderbecke and Bing Crosby, who were born within two years of one another in the early 1900's and were associated with Paul Whiteman's band in the late 1920's.
Beiderbecke died in 1931 and Lang in 1933, but Crosby became a national symbol of hope and reassurance in hard times and lived to 73.


MDU Resources Group Inc.  reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


Capital Re reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lincoln National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


TURNING UP HEAT IN TRADE CAMPAIGN
President Clinton placed the reputation of his 10-month-old Administration on the line today, declaring that rejection of the North American Free Trade Agreement would be a "profound setback" to United States foreign policy.
Emphasizing the bipartisan support for the trade agreement, Mr.
Clinton brought to the White House several former secretaries of state and the Treasury and a group of Nobel prize laureates who have endorsed the pact.


A Borough Gives Notice (Or Hadn't You Noticed?)
WITH the residents of Staten Island voting on whether to start down the road to secession, what is the rest of New York thinking?
Just because we live in the other boroughs doesn't mean we have no feelings.
What are we, chopped liver?
For 97 years we have been locked in a metropolitan compact with our neighbors over the big water, and some of us have even been out there or at least passed through on our way to New Jersey.
And even if we have only been planning to visit some day, we must feel something -- hurt, rejection, guilt -- when some of our fellow taxpayers seek to break away from this bellybutton of universal consciousness to become Yonkers South.


Ho Chi Minh City Journal; The Boat People Fly Back, With Riches to Invest
After fleeing Vietnam seven years ago with nothing but the desperate hope to make a better life anywhere else, Minh Le returned this fall with a bottle of perfume, a bottle of champagne and $2,000 in cash.
They were gifts for his aging parents, who remained behind when Mr.
Le, now 30, slipped across the border into Cambodia in 1986 and found a rickety boat to take him to Thailand.
He eventually made contact with relatives in the United States, and today he is a budding computer entrepreneur in Falls Church, Va.


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Long Island; Gulotta Slips Past Opponent To Remain Nassau Chief
Thomas S. Gulotta, the incumbent Nassau County Executive who ran on a platform calling for change, squeaked by his Democratic challenger, Benjamin L. Zwirn, Tuesday night in a contest that was widely seen as a referendum on decades of Republican rule.
With about half the vote counted, Mr.
Gulotta had 51.9 percent of the vote to 48.1 percent for Mr.
Zwirn, the Supervisor of North Hempstead.


Corrections
A picture yesterday with an obituary of John G. Winant Jr., who was captured by the Germans in World War II while his father was the American Ambassador to Britain, was published in error.
It showed Mr.
Winant's father, John G. Winant, who died in 1947.


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Comptroller; Hevesi Wins Easy Victory In Battle Against Badillo
Alan G. Hevesi, the Democrat who was all but dismissed as a serious contender by opponents and pundits alike when he announced his candidacy, defeated Herman Badillo yesterday in the race for New York City comptroller.
At 2 A.M. today, with 99 percent of the electoral precincts reporting, Mr.
Hevesi, a state Assemblyman from Queens, led with 56 percent of the vote to Mr.
Badillo's 41 percent.


Performance Food Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Noble Drilling Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


White House Is Adamant on Balkan War Crimes
The Clinton Administration has ruled out granting amnesty to those accused of war crimes in the former Yugoslavia and will press for sanctions against countries that refuse to hand over suspects for trial by the new United Nations war crimes tribunal, a senior Administration official said today.
Madeleine K. Albright, America's chief representative at the United Nations, said she had "no illusions about the obstacles the tribunal will face." It will be hard, she said, "to gain access to evidence, including mass grave sites, especially in areas under Serb control" and "often impossible to gain custody over the accused."


French Tricolor Owes a Lot to the Dutch
To the Editor:
In "The War of Flags" (Editorial Notebook, Oct. 21), Karl E. Meyer traces the plethora of nationalist tricolor flags to the French Revolutionary model.
True.
But the French revolutionaries took the model and colors for their "flag without feudal gewgaws" from the Netherlands flag, shifting the Dutch horizontal stripes into vertical bands.
Netherlands freedom fighters of the 16th century began using flags of orange and blue (separated by a white stripe for long-distance visibility) on their ships.
Orange and blue were the colors of the house of Orange-Nassau, whose Prince William was their leader.


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Deciding; Excerpts of Speeches, In Victory and Defeat
Rudolph W. Giuliani
I'm standing before you as the next Mayor of New York City.
It happened because I asked you to believe in me and you did.
And I'm very grateful to you.
You gave me your vote, and I accept the responsibility that goes with it.
You have my pledge that I will work to fulfill your expectations, and hopefully even begin to exceed them.
From the very start, and tonight is that start, I want New York to know and understand my stated goals, My administration will be universal in its concerns, sensitive to our diversity and evenhanded in every way possible.
Nobody, no ethnic, religious or racial group, will escape my care, my concern and my attention.
Neither will any of the fundamental problems that I have addressed during this campaign.
Those problems need to be addressed without delay.
The agenda during the next four years is full.
There is much to do and I can only do with your continued support and with your help.


Ban on Pregnant Cheerleaders Lifted
Facing the threat of a lawsuit by the National Organization for Women, school officials in a small Texas town where four of 15 cheerleaders became pregnant this year said today that they had reversed a decision to bar any pregnant girl from the cheerleader squad.
But officials in Hempstead, a ranch town of 3,600 people 45 miles northwest of Houston, made it clear in a resolution adopted late Monday night that they were acting reluctantly to reverse the earlier order.
They said they had done so only because they feared a NOW lawsuit could result in the withholding of Federal funds to the school district.


Jordan Visits Bulls Practice, Oprah and Larry
"Don't make it out to be anything," Jerry Krause was saying yesterday on the telephone from the general manager's office at the Chicago Bulls' training center in Deerfield, Ill., a northwest Chicago suburb.
"Michael's not coming back. He was just here to have some fun, screw around, laugh with the guys, give them a little boost.
"He came over and asked if he could work out. We said, 'Fine.' He came in talking, needling everyone, like he always did. You know how Michael likes to talk at practice.


In America; The Verdict
The verdict yesterday was thumbs down on David Dinkins's stewardship over the last four years.
The voters expressed their dissatisfaction, which was certainly their right, but they cannot claim they were the victims of false advertising.
Our memories are short.
David Dinkins, as Mayor, has acted very much as we might have expected him to act.
What the city initially saw in Mr.
Dinkins is what it got.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
New home sales rose in September at the fastest pace since 1986.
The 20.8 percent increase, inspired by mortgage rates under 7 percent, far surpassed expectations.
And the index of leading indicators climbed five-tenths of 1 percent in September, the first sizable back-to-back gain this year.  [ Page D1. ]


Reviews/Film; 'The War Room': Behind the Scenes of Clinton's Campaign
"The War Room" was shown during the recent New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 13.
The film opens today at Film Forum 1, 209 West Houston Street, South Village, and is to run until Nov. 16.
Is any stone left unturned in a modern Presidential campaign?
When every last whistle-stop and handshake is thoroughly documented, can there be anything more for a film maker to find?
When D. A. Pennebaker and Chris Hegedus set out to chronicle the Clinton campaign, they were taking on a seemingly redundant task.
And yet "The War Room," their glimpse of maneuvers by Clinton strategists, finds new facets of the story and manages to coax cliffhanging suspense out of a fait accompli.


A Little Bag of (Spice) Tricks
THE use of pickling spices is a handy way to add many flavors to a dish.
The spices can give tomato sauce a lift quite different from the usual choices, like oregano and basil in an Italian recipe, tarragon in a French dish or ginger and soy sauce in a Chinese version.
When I began cooking this chicken recipe, I realized I had no cheesecloth for wrapping the pickling spices.
A friend suggested opening a tea bag and replacing the contents with the pickling spices.
It turned out to be a brilliant idea; in place of the staple in the original tea bag, a plastic-bag tie kept the little package together.


O'Rourke Squeezes Ahead of Brodsky for County Executive Spot
Leading a Republican sweep of Westchester County's top elected offices, Andrew P. O'Rourke staved off a fierce challenge by a six-term Assemblyman, Richard L. Brodsky, and declared victory Tuesday night in his bid to gain four more years as County Executive.
The 60-year-old Mr.
O'Rourke, a silver-haired pragmatist who projects an unshakable affability, narrowly proved that voters have grown comfortable with his leadership after 11 years and are wary of any change in what they regard as a congenial county.
Although Mr.
Brodsky repeatedly questioned Mr.
O'Rourke's ethical judgment, many voters seemed to be more anxious about the possibility that Mr.
Brodsky might initiate expensive programs and raise taxes.
With 96.5 percent of the votes counted, these were the results:
O'Rourke 104,970 49.3%
Brodsky 101,608 47.7%


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Bergen; Sunday-Closing Law Retained in New Jersey County
Efforts to repeal the 34-year-old ban on Sunday retailing in Bergen County, one of the country's richest shopping areas, were turned back easily today.
With more than a third of the ballots tallied at 11 P.M., the vote was almost two to one in favor of maintaining the Sunday closings.
The last attempt to overturn the blue laws, in 1980, was defeated 192,394 to 157,648.


Marquee Name on Undercard as Hearns Tries Comeback
Like a refreshing desert breeze, Thomas Hearns has blown away the hot air generated by the warring heavyweight camps.
Yes, the Hit Man, a six-time world champion in five weight classes, is fighting again at the age of 35.


Laidlaw Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.15
3.09
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.11
3.01
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.27
3.25
3.22
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.21
5.15
6.41
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.05
6.02
7.65
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.19
7.17
8.62
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.55
5.49
6.64
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Borg-Warner Security Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


GAF Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Big-Spending Tigers Sign Fryman for $25 Million
On a day when the Detroit Tigers reached agreement with one of their good young players, Travis Fryman, on a five-year, $25 million contract, the Yankees continued to hold on to their good young prospects.
As a result, the Yankees today dropped out of the running for Bryan Harvey, the relief pitcher who saved 70 percent of the Florida Marlins' first-year victories.
Fryman, who would have needed three more seasons to be eligible for free agency, is the 24th player to get a contract worth $5 million or more per year.
His agreement calls for a $2 million signing bonus and salaries of $2 million, $3.75 million, $4.75 million, $6 million and $6.5 million.
He earned $675,000 in 1993.


Clinton and Brady Renew Push for Handgun Bill


J. Brenner, 63, Lawyer Who Lobbied for Koch
James Brenner, who served as a bureaucrat and a lobbyist when Edward I. Koch was Mayor of New York, died on Saturday at his home in Little River, S.C.
He was 63.
The cause was prostate cancer, said his son William M. Brenner.


Sanfilippo (John B.) &amp; Son (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-18  GORBACHEV NOT COUNTED OUT  Although his popularity rating is low, Mikhail Gorbachev, in an interview, would not count himself out of politics and was evasive about whether he would run for President.
A3  DEFEAT FOR JERUSALEM MAYOR  Early returns showed Teddy Kollek swept from office after 28 years as Mayor of Jerusalem.
The results were a blow to Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin as well, because he had called the election a test of his agreement with the P.L.O.
A18


Some of These Scenes Shouldn't Be on the Air
To the Editor:
I turned on my television recently in prime time and witnessed a very graphic rape scene at 9:40 P.M. on CBS in a movie called "Double Jeopardy." Fortunately, I was the only one of our family present at the time, since I would have been not only shocked but also embarrassed before my daughters.


SENATE, BY 94 TO 6, VOTES TO SUBPOENA PACKWOOD DIARIES
The Senate voted overwhelmingly tonight to compel Senator Bob Packwood to turn over 3,000 pages of private diaries for an ethics investigation, ending with ill-concealed disgust an extraordinary political debate over the privacy rights of elected leaders.
The 94-to-6 vote was to approve the committee's request to authorize legal moves to force Mr.
Packwood to comply with a subpoena.
It followed a denunciation by Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, the chamber's senior Democrat, who said Mr.
Packwood had blackened the chamber's reputation and should resign.


Let's Get Profit and Loss Out of Health Care; Denial of Service
To the Editor:
In "H.M.O.'s Satisfy the Vast Majority" (letter, Oct. 23), Anne E. Bossi of the Prudential Insurance Company fails to mention the most salient feature of the "capitated gatekeeper" type of health maintenance organization that she describes.
These plans allot a fixed dollar amount (capitation) for the total care of the patient, which is then placed in the "account" of the gatekeeper physician.
Any and all covered medical expense, including drugs, hospitalization, consultations and surgery, are paid for out of this account.
At the end of each year, any unused portion of the fixed payment that the primary care physician has received from the insurance company is split between the physician and the company.
This policy offers a creative form of fee splitting and an overt financial incentive to withhold service.


Defendant in Beating Case Loses Bid to Lower Bail
Calling him "a danger to the community," a judge refused today to lower bail for Damian M. Williams, a black man who was convicted of mayhem in the beating of a white truck driver, Reginald O. Denny, during last year's riots but was acquitted of more serious charges.
At the same hearing, Mr.
Williams's co-defendant, Henry K. Watson, pleaded guilty to the trial's one deadlocked charge, assault with a deadly weapon.
Defense lawyers had asked the judge, John W. Ouderkirk of State Superior Court, to lower Mr.
Williams's $580,000 bail to $35,000.
This would have allowed Mr.
Williams to make bail and go free until his sentencing Dec. 7.
Mr.
Williams, who is 20, faces 2 to 10 years in prison.


Dressage Will Take the Stage at This Year's National
These are the sort of horses unconnected to mankind by way of the trifecta or Pony Express: they don't run, they dance, and their human partners are so charmed by this pas de deux that they routinely ignore $500,000 offers for their mounts.
Prima ballerinas, particularly those with four hooves, are hard to come by, but they will be out in full force this year at the National Horse Show.


Theodore Barash, 79, Advertising Executive
Theodore Barash, a former senior vice president with the advertising firm of Wells Rich Greene BDDP Inc., who created advertising campaigns for Trans World Airlines and Pan American World Airways, died on Oct. 22 at the Medical Center Hospital of Vermont in Burlington.
He was 79 and lived in Monkton, Vt.
The cause was cancer, said his daughter, Phoebe Barash.


Dolco Packaging reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


DuPont Merck Repackaging Costly
Members of Congress and Congressional aides said yesterday that a change in packaging of four drugs that will result in sharply higher prices showed the need for the mandatory drug price restraints in President Clinton's health care program.
The Du Pont Merck Pharmaceutical Company, which is based in Wilmington, Del., notified hospital pharmacies on Oct. 25 that four drugs will be sold in bottles starting on Jan. 1.
That will effectively raise the prices to a range of $40 to $50 for 100 pills, from $2.50 to $5 for 100 now.


Mantra for the Mayor: Deficit, Deficit, Deficit, Deficit
Congratulations, Mr.
Mayor-elect!
But now it's time to unseal that envelope labeled "Do Not Open Until After Election Day." In it is this year's revised budget, with a deficit of about half a billion dollars.
In other words, you're already in deep fiscal trouble.
It is not unusual for the victor to be rewarded with immediate fiscal woes.
In 1974, Abe Beame found that John Lindsay had left him a sizable deficit.
In 1978, Ed Koch inherited a billion-dollar deficit and a four-year plan designed largely by others to eliminate it.
In 1990, he left City Hall with a $300 million hole to fill.


The Vote For Mayor and Comptroller by Assembly District
MAYOR
Bronx
Rptng
Dinkins
Giuliani
Marlin
Bockmn
Breman
74 Mott Haven, Hunts Point
100%
20,881
4,364
178
13
23
75 Clasons Pt. W Farms, E Trmnt
100%
17,436
4,316
145
10
15
76 Union Port, Parkchtr
100%
16,111
7,529
215
20
12
77 High Bridge, Morris Hghts
100%
18,050
2,080
80
33
14
78 Univ Heights, Fordham
100%
12,716
3,480
127
29
9
79 Tremont, Morrisania
100%
24,184
4,464
132
10
28
80 Morris Park
100%
9,137
19,797
309
35
28
81 Riverdale
100%
11,613
21,460
395
68
44
82 Thrgs Nk, Eastchtr, Baychtr
100%
13,840
24,603
345
25
43
83 Williamsbridge, Wakefield
100%
22,192
5,658
254
74
60
Total
100%
166,160
97,751
2,180
317
276
62.3%
36.7%
0.8%
0.1%
0.1%
Brooklyn
Rptng
Dinkins
Giuliani
Marlin
Bockmn
Brennan
39 Fltlnd, Canarsie, Mill Basin
100%
5,934
30,320
483
64
31
40 East New York, Brownsville
100%
22,350
1,377
81
11
8
41 Canarsie, Gravesend
100%
11,863
20,926
337
27
38
42 Midwood
100%
13,431
3,129
80
9
13
43 Crown Heights, Flatbush
100%
18,459
2,421
51
3
6
44 Flatbush, Park Slope
100%
13,925
17,002
296
99
82
45 Midwood, Manhattan Beach
100%
4,296
26,654
280
55
36
46 Coney Isl, Brighton Beach
100%
9,283
19,318
321
26
29
47 Gravesend, Bensonhurst
100%
2,922
23,361
363
115
33
48 Borough Park
100%
3,079
23,201
320
19
13
49 Bath Beach
100%
2,603
24,181
219
14
19
50 Greenpoint, Williamsburg
100%
11,261
13,369
243
15
20
51 Sunset Park
100%
11,307
7,583
235
37
27
52 By Rdg, Red Hk, Bklyn Hgts
100%
13,971
22,995
506
71
92
53 Bushwich
100%
11,158
5,755
152
35
25
54 Cypress Hills
100%
11,983
4,146
164
19
16
55 Crown Heights
100%
22,239
585
196
6
3
56 Bedford-Stuyvesant
100%
26,714
700
72
7
3
57 Fort Greene, Prospect Hgts
100%
25,822
1,961
108
29
21
58 Canarsie, Flatbush
100%
19,589
2,063
158
9
9
Total
100%
262,189
251,047
4,665
670
524
50.5%
48.4%
0.9%
0.1%
0.1%
Manhattan
Rptng
Dinkins
Giuliani
Marlin
Bockmn
Brennan
62 Low Man, City Hall, Chntwn
100%
10,711
12,279
182
77
61
63 Lower East Side
100%
19,094
17,353
328
89
111
64 Chelsea, Flatiron District
100%
18,256
16,468
295
96
116
65 Yorkville, Gracie Mansion
100%
13,388
24,055
361
58
80
66 W Village, SoHo, TribeCa
100%
24,290
15,754
201
143
153
67 W Vill, Chls, Clnt, U.W.S.
100%
22,108
19,180
196
223
96
68 East Harlem
100%
24,774
5,532
135
17
20
69 Upper W Side
100%
25,916
10,350
172
95
70
70 Central Harlem
100%
29,464
1,110
68
14
6
71 Manhattansville, Mrngsd Hgts
100%
21,634
7,065
156
43
23
72 Inwood, Washington Hgts
100%
10,337
4,772
449
58
19
73 Upper E Side
100%
13,386
26,455
285
32
77
Total
100%
233,358
160,373
2,828
945
832
58.6%
40.3%
0.7%
0.2%
0.2%
Queens
Rptng
Dinkins
Giuliani
Marlin
Bockmn
Brennan
23 Rkaways, How Bch, Ozone Pk
100%
5,793
30,079
447
28
28
24 Oakland Gardens, Douglaston
100%
8,472
32,839
472
57
45
25 Flushing
100%
6,275
14,630
294
23
27
26 Whitestone
100%
6,926
34,193
553
79
72
27 Utopia, Hillcrest
100%
8,917
24,285
365
26
48
28 Forest Hills, Rego Park
100%
7,322
29,288
331
38
50
29 St. Albans, Cambria Hgts
100%
23,795
5,011
131
12
4
30 Woodside
100%
5,326
22,557
463
40
53
31 S Ozone Pk, Locust Manor
100%
20,252
4,779
153
12
16
32 Jamaica, S Jamaica
100%
22,876
4,724
144
19
10
33 Qns Vill, Hollis, St Albans
100%
26,238
8,167
303
15
28
34 Elmhurst
100%
4,893
9,525
212
36
24
35 Corona
100%
11,478
6,625
138
32
19
36 Jackson Heights
100%
5,716
19,853
327
Y39
43
37 Sunnyside, Lg Isl City
100%
8,471
11,837
274
29
28
38 Lng Isl Cty, Woodsd, Elmhst
100%
3,868
26,186
567
68
36
Total
100%
176,618
284,578
5,174
553
531
37.8
60.9%
1.1%
0.1%
0.1%
Staten Isl
Rptng
Dinkins
Giuliani
Marlin
Bockmn
Brennan
59 North Shore
100%
11,595
26,136
702
48
69
60 Mid-Island
100%
5,230
37,801
713
45
146
61 South Shore
100%
3,718
45,428
659
30
47
Total
100%
20,543
109,365
2,074
123
262
15.5%
82.6%
1.6%
0.1%
0.1%
Citywide Totals
100%
858,868
903,114
16,921
2,608
2,425
48.1%
50.6%
0.9%
0.1%
0.1%
COMPTROLLER
Bronx
Rptng
Hevesi
Badillo
Lim
Bollrt
Harris
Kirklnd
74 Mott Haven, Hunts Point
100%
13,152
6,556
96
279
119
98
75 Clas Pt, W Frms, E Trmnt
100%
15,278
7,663
99
323
136
80
76 Union Port, Parkchester
100%
12,656
8,014
125
188
118
48
77 High Bridge, Morris Hgts
100%
13,813
2,973
81
191
130
68
78 Univ Heights, Fordham
100%
9,262
4,199
78
180
77
40
79 Tremont, Morrisania
100%
18,159
6,316
123
296
206
76
80 Morris Park
100%
10,098
16,136
194
292
126
71
81 Riverdale
100%
14,142
16,613
277
350
98
87
82 Thrg Nk, Etchr, Bychr
100%
14,927
19,796
385
337
141
77
83 Williamsbrdg, Wakefield
100%
19,451
5,424
92
209
101
48
Total
100%
140,938
93,690
1,550
2,645
1,252
692
58.5%
38.9%
0.6%
1.1%
0.5%
0.3%
Brooklyn
Rptng
Hevesi
Badillo
Lim
Bollrt
Harris
Kirklnd
39 Ftlnds, Cnrse, Mill Bsn
100%
11,593
21,767
349
281
61
42
40 East New York, Brnsvil
100%
17,096
1,812
68
162
105
55
41 Canarsie, Gravesend
100%
14,720
14,783
275
188
74
48
42 Midwood
100%
11,532
2,626
51
81
67
22
43 Crown Heights, Flatbh
100%
15,777
2,683
41
90
1,071
32
44 Flatbush, Park Slope
100%
15,692
12,553
203
180
189
88
45 Midwood, Manhtan Beach
100%
9,466
18,477
234
176
97
57
46 Coney Isl, Brghtn Beach
100%
10,811
14,380
234
238
96
53
47 Gravesend, Bensonhurst
100%
6,357
17,005
242
199
71
57
48 Borough Park
100%
5,707
17,710
350
186
279
98
49 Bath Beach
100%
5,440
18,303
234
204
51
44
50 Greenpnt, Williamsburg
100%
13,948
7,104
136
143
105
64
51 Sunset Park
100%
9,035
8,288
134
223
144
52
52 By Rg, Rd Hk, Bkln Hgts
100%
17,208
16,833
376
316
174
143
53 Bushwich
100%
6,827
6,843
89
166
97
58
54 Cypress Hills
100%
7,969
5,295
83
180
78
42
55 Crown Heights
100%
17,219
1,107
53
183
73
46
56 Bedford-Stuyvesant
100%
20,713
1,095
76
171
117
54
57 Fort Grne, Prspect Hgts
100%
22,099
1,917
75
113
171
59
58 Canarsie, Flatbush
100%
16,546
1,738
129
114
67
23
Total
100%
255,755
192,319
3,432
3,594
3,187
1,137
55.7%
41.9%
0.7%
0.8%
0.7%
0.2%
Manhattan
Rptng
Hevesi
Badillo
Lim
Bollrt
Harris
Kirklnd
62 Lr Man, Cty Hl, Chnatwn
100%
10,426
9,312
316
114
137
89
63 Lower East Side
100%
20,037
13,005
274
216
210
160
64 Chelsea, Fltiron Dist
100%
20,660
11,670
264
163
182
153
65 Yorkvle, Gracie Mans
100%
20,142
15,026
310
181
109
148
66 W Vill, SoHo, TribeCa
100%
26,123
10,744
225
122
332
217
67 W Vil, Chls, Clnt, UWS
100%
26,898
12,088
222
129
218
164
68 East Harlem
100%
17,638
6,425
148
171
157
179
69 Upper W Side
100%
25,541
7,640
149
143
234
117
70 Central Harlem
100%
23,600
1,663
62
129
126
36
71 Manhtnsvle, Mrngsd Hgts
100%
18,179
5,607
107
123
146
336
72 Inwood, Washington Hgts
100%
7,912
4,668
115
296
125
199
73 Upper E Side
100%
20,415
16,814
345
199
56
90
Total
100%
237,571
114,662
2,537
1,986
2,032
1,888
65.9%
31.8%
0.7%
0.6%
0.6%
0.5%
Queens
Rptng
Hevesi
Badillo
Lim
Bollrt
Harris
Kirklnd
23 Rkawys, How Bch, Ozne Pk
100%
12,428
19,989
362
345
69
53
24 Oklnd Gardens, Doglastn
100%
18,289
20,228
487
296
70
263
25 Flushing
100%
8,618
10,208
398
170
112
41
26 Whitestone
100%
15,896
22,275
461
385
93
66
27 Utopia, Hillcrest
100%
16,062
14,673
354
286
90
71
28 Frst Hills, Rego Park
100%
18,971
15,875
308
178
60
53
29 St. Albans, Cmbria Hgts
100%
21,244
4,066
112
153
118
33
30 Woodside
100%
9,828
15,346
393
268
73
62
31 S Ozne Pk, Locust Mnr
100%
17,004
4,000
207
200
109
48
32 Jamaica, S Jamaica
100%
20,280
3,744
107
173
108
45
33 Qns Vill, Holl, St Albns
100%
24,237
6,619
224
280
112
44
34 Elmhurst
100%
5,686
7,315
165
137
45
35
35 Corona
100%
11,224
5,065
157
111
65
29
36 Jackson Heights
100%
9,028
13,327
461
300
126
80
37 Snyside, Lg Isl City
100%
8,882
8,501
209
224
123
321
38 Lg Is Cy, Wdsd, Elmhrst
100%
9,087
17,896
511
342
73
71
Total
100%
226,764
189,127
4,916
3,848
1,446
1,315
53.1%
44.2%
1.2%
0.9%
0.3%
0.3%
Stn Isl
Rptng
Hevesi
Badillo
Lim
Bollrt
Harris
Kirklnd
59 North Shore
100%
14,475
17,880
545
714
178
134
60 Mid-Island
100%
11,398
25,737
545
668
140
124
61 South Shore
100%
10,417
31,984
723
776
101
93
Total
100%
36,290
75,607
1,813
2,158
419
351
31.1%
64.8%
1.6%
1.9%
0.4%
0.3%
Ctywd Totals
100%
897,318
665,399
14,248
14,231
8,336
5,383
55.9%
41.4%
0.9%
0.9%
0.5%
0.3%


Bridge
If both partnerships have close to 20 high-card points and there is no fit to be found, one can expect a small part-score contract producing a small score.
But occasionally there is an aberration, as in the diagramed deal played late in February at the Long Island Regional Swiss Team Championship in Smithtown, L.I.
At one table West opened the bidding with one diamond and his partner eventually struggled in two no-trump, failing by a trick.
In the replay, as shown, West chose to open one spade, for lead-directing reasons, and North made a normal, but disastrous, take-out double.


Scali Agency Loses Castrol Account
Castrol Inc. of Wayne, N.J., said yesterday that it had left Scali, McCabe, Sloves in New York, its agency since 1976, and moved its national advertising account without a review to Houston, Effler, Hampel &amp; Stefanides Inc. in New York, which is headed by several former Scali employees.
Billings were estimated at $20 million.
Scott Messinger, executive vice president and managing director of Scali, said there were disagreements "as far back as May and June" between the agency and Castrol on matters "in part philosophical, in part tactical, in part financial." Castrol has been one of Scali's largest and oldest clients.


Walter L. Palmer, 97, an Internist And Expert on Gastrointestinal Ills
Dr.
Walter L. Palmer, an authority on gastrointestinal cancer, died on Thursday at the Bernard Mitchell Hospital in Chicago.
He was 97 and lived in Hyde Park near the campus of the University of Chicago.
The cause was complications after a fall, said a spokesman at the University of Chicago Medical Center, where Dr.
Palmer was the Richard T. Crane Professor Emeritus.


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Legislature; Republicans Keep Their Control of the Senate and Assembly for Life Under Whitman
Republicans lost a handful of seats in both houses of the Legislature today but preserved strong working majorities for their party's new Governor, Christine Todd Whitman.
As late as last weekend, Democratic leaders were talking about picking up eight Senate seats, enough to regain control of the Senate.
But as Jim Florio narrowly lost the Governor's office, his party managed to defeat Republican incumbents in only three districts.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMOCO CORP., Chicago, said its Dutch subsidiary had begun production at an offshore North Sea gas complex.
BANCO ESPANOL DE CREDITO S.A., Madrid, signed a $60 million joint venture with Israeli and Arab companies to develop business projects in the Gaza and Jericho areas.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; The down-home Hardee's restaurant chain makes a big-city move to Deutsch/Dworin.
IT'S not quite as odd a couple as Felix and Oscar.
It's not as incongruous a pairing as Julia and Lyle.
But when Hardee's Food Systems Inc. said yesterday that Deutsch/ Dworin Inc. would become the national advertising agency on its estimated $75 million Hardee's account, the chain created one of Madison Avenue's most disparate couplings.
Hardee's, the nation's fourth-largest chain in revenue as measured by Nation's Restaurant News, is situated in bucolic Rocky Mount, N.C.
For several years, advertising by its previous agency, Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, portrayed Hardee's as a just-folks, down-home purveyor of burgers and biscuits, attuned to its stronghold markets in the Midwest and Southeast.


KinderCare Learnings Centers (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 17


Keenan Gets His Men; Patrick and Turcotte Gone
Mike Keenan's brand of hockey became further imprinted on the Rangers yesterday when the organization announced that as part of a three-team trade it had swapped defenseman James Patrick and center Darren Turcotte for veteran right wing Steve Larmer and tough-guy Nick Kypreos.
The Rangers also acquired a minor league defenseman and a conditional middle-round draft pick.
The deal, made with the Hartford Whalers, came almost immediately after the Whalers had traded left wing Patrick Poulin and defenseman Eric Weinrich to Chicago for Larmer and Bryan Marchment.
The Whalers then traded Larmer, Kypreos, defenseman Barry Richter -- a member of the United States Olympic hockey team -- and the draft pick to the Rangers for Patrick and Turcotte.


60-Minute Gourmet
COMBINING fruits and seafood is a potentially dangerous undertaking for any cook, for the flavor of the fruit can easily overwhelm the seafood.
Fructose, the fruit sugar, is another culprit, capable of ruining seafood if it is allowed to become dominant.
Such a combination is not common in most of French cooking, except perhaps in Provence, where melons and fruits might be used gingerly as garnish.
The idea of combining shrimp with mangos came to me on a recent trip to the Caribbean, where I tasted some very appealing casseroles and roasts that carried fruit.
I decided to use shrimp because of its relatively assertive flavor and firm texture.
Shrimp blends with all sorts of ingredients -- hot, as in Cajun fare, or sweet, as in curries.


Bobsledders Stick Together in Germany
When some members of the United States bobsled team visited the bank in Altenberg, Germany yesterday, the entire team visited the bank.
When one of the sledders went for a run, the entire team went for a run.
Meals are eaten in the hotel.
If anyone goes out, everyone goes out.
After the attack by skinheads on the American luger Duncan Kennedy last weekend, bobsledders training in eastern Germany have begun taking safety precautions that prohibit anyone from traveling or socializing alone.


Hevesi Wins Race for New York City Comptroller


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  He's No. 2 and Will Have to Try Harder  Jim Courier, ranked second in the world and seeded second in the Paris Open to Pete Sampras, bowed out in the second round yesterday when Magnus Gustafsson of Sweden beat him 6-4, 6-3 in 81 minutes.
For Courier, who had a bye in the first round, it was only the third time in 22 tournaments that he lost in his opening match.
Three-time champion Boris Becker survived a third-set tie breaker to beat Andrei Olhovsky of Russia, 6-7 (6-8), 6-2, 7-6 (7-5).
In another second round match and Ivan Lendl was eliminated by David Wheaton, 6-3, 7-5, in a first-round match, marking the 10th time in 25 tournaments this year that Lendl was beaten in his opening round. (AP)


Hudson Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


WHITMAN IS AN UPSET WINNER OVER FLORIO; New Jersey Anger Over Taxes Propels Challenger
Christine Todd Whitman harnessed lingering anger over taxes and scored an upset victory over Gov.
Jim Florio last night to become the first woman to be Governor of New Jersey.
"The people of New Jersey have spoken more eloquently than I can," Mrs.
Whitman told a cheering crowd at her campaign headquarters near Princeton about 12:25 this morning, only moments after she received a telephone call from Mr.
Florio in which he conceded defeat.


OTHER HIGHLIGHTS
TERM LIMITS -- Approved, in a Wave of Anti-Incumbency
New Yorkers approved limiting elected city officials to two consecutive terms.
Ronald S. Lauder, who spent $1 million campaigning for the referendum, said, "Government here will never be the same." Page B1.
COMPTROLLER -- Hevesi Defeats Badillo
Alan G. Hevesi, a Democrat who was largely dismissed as a serious contender when he announced his candidacy, fended off Herman Badillo's comeback attempt.
Page B5.
STATEN ISLAND -- Floating on Its Own
Staten Islanders took a step toward breaking away from New York City, approving a new charter that lays the foundation for what would be the state's second largest city.
Page B4.
PUBLIC ADVOCATE -- Green Rolls to Victory Over Alter
Mark J. Green, the former consumer affairs commissioner, defeated Susan D. Alter to become New York City's first Public Advocate, winning the No. 2 job in city government.
Page B5.
WESTCHESTER -- O'Rourke Declares Victory
Andrew P. O'Rourke, the Republican incumbent, claimed victory over Richard L. Brodsky in a tight race for County Executive.
Page B1.
NASSAU -- Gulotta Claims Another Term
"The Republican Party in this county is alive and well," Thomas S. Gulotta, the Nassau County Executive, said after declaring victory over Benjamin L. Zwirn, a fiscally conservative Democrat.
Page B9.
VIRGINIA -- Allen Is Elected Governor
Ending 12 years of Democratic rule, George F. Allen, a conservative Republican who once trailed by 29 points in polls, defeated former Attorney General Mary Sue Terry, a moderate Democrat.
Page A24.


Accused Olivetti Chief Surrenders and Is Freed Under House Arrest
In the latest convolution of Italy's huge bribery scandal, the computer tycoon Carlo De Benedetti, one of the country's richest men, surrendered today to magistrates who had ordered his detention on corruption charges but was freed from jail under house arrest after hours of interrogation.
Mr.
De Benedetti's brief incarceration at Regina Coeli jail in Rome made him the highest-ranking private business figure to enter prison in the 20-month-old scandal.


Review/Fashion; An Easy Grace By de la Renta
OSCAR DE LA RENTA brought a rare quality to the design of his spring collection: moderation.
He started his career as flamboyant as the next designer, with prints-too-bold and ruffles-too-many.
Now, he is exercising restraint and bringing a glow to the eyes of retailers.
Many of the prominent women who wear his clothes braved the crowds yesterday to turn out for his show in a tent in Bryant Park.
They were glad they did.
There was some transparency, one of the excesses of the season, but only for evening.
There were no sneakers: the models wore high heels, even for evening.
The ideas didn't skitter all over the lot, canceling each other out and breeding confusion.
He concentrated on clothes women could wear to work, to lunch and on vacation.


Review/Television; Two New Police Shows, Midwest and Southeast
Television detectives, in uniform and out, are getting ensnared in conflicting evidence this season.
Gritty urban realism (ABC's "N.Y.P.D. Blue") appears to be connecting with viewers, while offbeat comedy-drama (CBS's "South on Sunset," canceled after just one episode) seems to search desperately for a sympathetic smile.
On the other hand, ABC's "Missing Persons," in which the urban realism is pointedly non-gritty, is treading ratings waters nicely, and the same network's comedy-drama "Moon Over Miami" is holding on, albeit tenuously.
Thursdays at 8 P.M. is hardly the most promising slot for a police show, but the cops on "Missing Persons" are not your standard action-adventure types.
They are the carefully trained sleuths of the Chicago Police Department's missing-persons section.
Guns and car chases are frowned upon.
The show's title may suggest still another "reality" show, but the producers of "Missing Persons" emphasize that their stories are strictly fictional.


Reno Dusts Cobwebs Out of Justice Dept.
To the Editor:
As one whose Congressional responsibilities require working daily with the Department of Justice, I must disagree with the views expressed in your Oct. 26 front-page report of doubts about Attorney General Janet Reno in that department.
You state that the key question is whether or not Attorney General Reno "will revive what Democrats said was a demoralized agency by reversing 12 years of Republican conservatism." My response is that is precisely what she is doing.


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Virginia; Conservative Republican Wins Easily
George F. Allen, a conservative former Republican Representative who once was down in the polls by 29 points, won the Virginia Governor's race today, besting former Attorney General Mary Sue Terry, a moderate Democrat.
With 75 percent of the 2,136 precincts counted, Mr.
Allen had 752,527 votes, or 58 percent, while Ms.
Terry had 532,341, or 41 percent.
His margin of victory was one of the largest in Virginia in recent years.


INSIDE
Jerusalem's Mayor Defeated
Teddy Kollek, Jerusalem's longtime Mayor, was soundly defeated by an opposition member of Parliament in a vote with repercussions for Israel's pact with the P.L.O.
Page A18.
A New Breed of Lobbyist
Those who move from Government jobs into the world of lobbying are operating under a new maxim: It's what they know, not whom they know, that gets things done.
Page B14.


A Simple Test Screens Men for a Sexual Disease
IN a study that holds promise for the fight against sexually transmitted disease, researchers have found that simple, relatively inexpensive urine tests make possible the accurate screening off large numbers of young men for the most commonly transmitted urethral infection.
A microorganism called chlamydia trachomatis is a major cause of the disease, nonspecific urethritis, which can cause pain during urination, swelling of the testes and even infertility.
The disease is epidemic among sexually active young adult and adolescent men, said Dr.
Mary-Ann Shafer, a professor at the University of California at San Francisco and the lead author of the study.
The results are reported today in The Journal of the American Medical Association.


Give Bhutto Due Credit in Pakistan
To the Editor:
Your report on Benazir Bhutto's return to power in Pakistan (news article, Oct. 20) fails to give her due credit.
The epic struggle against military dictatorship by a young Muslim woman in a male-dominated and religiously intolerant society assures her a place of honor in history.
The source of Ms.
Bhutto's power, unlike that of her predecessors, is not Pakistan's corrupt Establishment, but the support she has from Pakistan's teeming masses, who look up to her for a better tomorrow.
She is a seasoned politician and mature stateswoman who has learned the hard way.


Eating Well
ANYONE who has experienced the symptoms of pregnancy that are commonly referred to as "morning sickness" is unlikely ever to forget it.
Unrelenting nausea casts a pall over every waking hour.
Vomiting occurs with little or no warning, and the accompanying gastrointestinal distress can range from constipation to diarrhea.
Though morning sickness is usually thought of as a benign symptom of pregnancy and is said by some doctors to be all in the sufferer's head, the National Center for Health Statistics says that 55,000 pregnant women were hospitalized because of dehydration and other complications caused by vomiting in 1989, the most recent statistic available.


HAITI IS SUFFERING UNDER OIL EMBARGO
Two weeks after an oil embargo was imposed on Haiti, the streets of the capital are increasingly piled with garbage, factories are shut down, power blackouts are occurring more freqently and armed gangs are operating more freely as they rob stores and extort money.
Olivier Nadal, a co-owner of his family's import and export business, one of the largest in Haiti, said his volume had decreased so much that unless gasoline was available soon, he would have to close his doors, throwing more than 600 employes out of work.
As a result of the embargo, foreign pharmaceutical companies have refused to sell him goods for fear that they may not be able to get paid.
Furthermore, Mr.
Nadal said, his agricultural products are rotting in the countryside because of a lack of gasoline to transport them to Port-au-Prince, the capital.  'Heading Toward Anarchy'
"We've been taken hostage between the extreme left and extreme right," he said.
"If the situation continues as it is now, we're heading toward anarchy."


Video Lottery Tech. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Servico Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. and China Agree to Expand Defense Links
The first high-level military-to-military contact in more than four years has ended here after two days of talks between a Pentagon official and China's top military leaders.
They agreed to a "modest" agenda of future dialogue and professional exchanges on topics like international peacekeeping operations and on the problems of converting defense industries to civilian use.


Real Estate; Philip Johnson, the renowned architect, joins the Trump team on the huge Riverside South project.
HE is the best-known developer in New York City.
The site for his current project has perhaps the greatest potential of any unbuilt parcel in Manhattan.
Who else, then, to give form to the project but America's most celebrated living architect?
Philip Johnson has joined the team working on Donald J. Trump's Riverside South project, a $3 billion residential and commercial development that is eventually to stretch 13 blocks along the Hudson River on an abandoned rail yard bordering the Upper West Side.


Jets' Jones Takes Calls, But There's No Answer
Marvin Jones gets calls from friends each week.
They all have the same questions.
"Why aren't you playing more? Why aren't you starting?"
After each week Jones has had more trouble coming up with answers and his explanations have become more convoluted.


CHRONICLE
Is it politically correct to call yourself politically incorrect?
In fact, is it legally correct?
The people who run the Comedy Central cable television channel say no, and yesterday they went to court trying to keep JACKIE MASON from calling his new show, what else, "Jackie Mason, Politically Incorrect."
Lawyers for the Comedy Channel filed a suit in Federal District Court in Manhattan seeking to bar him from using the title for a show he is touring around the country.
"We have a regular weekly series entitled "Politically Incorrect" starring Bill Maher and a panel of four so-called politically incorrect celebrities who answer questions as if they were the McLaughlin Group on acid," said STEVEN PAUL MARK, the senior vice president of legal and business affairs for Comedy Central Programming Service.
"We feel that because of his notoriety and because of the possibility that his show could be publicized on television, people could get confused. It tends to dilute the rights to the name that we've built up and spent a lot of money on."


BEARD BAN RULED UNFAIR TO BLACKS
In the latest upset to an employer's prohibition against beards, a Federal appeals court in St.
Louis has ruled that Domino's Pizza must waive its ban for black employees who have a common and sometimes painful skin ailment.
Many employers, particularly law-enforcement agencies, have unbending rules against beards, and those rules have been a sporadic subject of civil rights litigation for almost 20 years.
Black men, who are by far the most frequent sufferers of the skin ailment, pseudofolliculitis barbae, or PFB, say the ban unfairly restricts their employment opportunities.


Review/Theater: The Treatment; A City So Relentlessly Abusive Its Residents Decide Not to See
Being blinded by a fork-wielding assailant isn't necessarily the worst thing that could befall a character in the lurid world of "The Treatment," a pitch-black comic portrait of New York City by the English writer Martin Crimp that opened at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, with nasty appropriateness, on Election Day.
As Mr.
Crimp has envisioned the city, it presents such a relentless and vicious assault on the senses that its inhabitants have had to will themselves into metaphoric blindness.
To see clearly is to be scalded.
Small wonder that one character is moved to say that people are "allergic to the times we are living in."


Former New York Hospitals Chief Facing Ethics Inquiry
A New York City ethics review agency is investigating whether the former head of New York City's hospital system obtained loans from subordinates in violation of the City Charter, city officials said yesterday.
The former president of the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation, Dr.
J.
Emilio Carrillo, was notified late last week of the inquiry, about the same time that he endorsed Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate for mayor.


For CBX, Figure Skating Is Olympics
In the Winter Olympics city of 1994, where Garrison Keillor would find that the men are strong, the women are good-looking and the children are cross-country skiers by age 3, the pressure is building on CBS to equal its highly rated performance in Albertville, France, in 1992.
"Expectations were fairly low for us the last time, but the viewers never left us," Mark Harrington, vice president of Olympics for CBS Sports, said of the 18.7 prime-time Nielsen rating Albertville received, exceeding the 17.0 expected and blunting industrywide skepticism.
"Now the bar is higher."


The Politicization of Tasseled Loafers
To say "tasseled loafer" in Washington is not just to describe a simple shoe, but to utter a political phrase, often part of an epithet.
It is frequently connected to the word "lawyers," as in those tasseled-loafered lawyers!, although no law degree is required to wear them.
And despite its earlier image as the shoe of the postgraduate preppy, it is today a kind of everyman's shoe, available in all price ranges.


Prosecutors Pick Up Pace In Trial of Blast Suspects
Two more defendants were linked for the first time yesterday to evidence in the World Trade Center bombing trial, as the Government sought to tie one man to chemicals used in the blast and another to a motive of anger over American aid to Israel.
Coming as prosecutors ended a four-week-long windup on the devastation of the Feb. 26 explosion and the investigative trail leading to a yellow Ryder rental van that has been implicated as the bomb-delivery vehicle, the testimony signaled a speedup in the pace, something long sought by Judge Kevin T. Duffy.


United Airlines and Unions Are Said to Be at Impasse
United Airlines is at an impasse in talks with leaders of its pilots' and machinists' unions over the labor groups' effort to buy a majority stake in the carrier, according to people familiar with the negotiations.
The two sides were unable to agree on the price of the unions' buyout offer, these people said.
The unions -- The Air Line Pilots Association and the International Association of Machinists -- have been discussing trading roughly $4 billion in concessions for a 60 percent stake in the carrier.
However, many industry analysts have expressed skepticism that the unions' offer would contain enough value to entice current shareholders.


No Loans to Boost Arms Sales
As the Pentagon's demand for new weapons declines, America's arms makers, hard pressed to make a buck, or a billion, are trying harder to market their wares abroad.
But the global arms market is contracting.
Now the arms makers have come up with a new scheme to stimulate foreign demand at taxpayers' expense: get Congress to put up $1 billion in Government loan guarantees, a subsidy to foreigners who buy on credit.
The Pentagon itself rejects the idea, but that hasn't stopped the Senate from backing it.
House-Senate conferees now considering the 1994 defense authorization bill should heed the Pentagon and kill the loan guarantee program.


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Westchester; Pirro Defeats An Outsider In a Contest Of Squabbles
Jeanine Pirro, a tough-talking former county judge, was elected Westchester's first new district attorney in a quarter century tonight, soundly beating back a challenge from Michael Cherkasky, a former Manhattan prosecutor running in his first political race.
Mrs.
Pirro, a Republican-Conservative who had served as a county prosecutor for 15 years under Carl A. Vergari, whom she will succeed, is the first woman to be elected to Westchester's top law-enforcement post.
Her victory over Mr.
Cherkasky, a Democrat who had never worked in the county, suggested that voters were comfortable with her "home-grown" appeal and had generally shrugged off her opponent's attempts to link her and her husband Albert, a real-estate lawyer, to figures with organized-crime ties.
Assailing an Outsider
With 94 percent of the votes counted, the results were:


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Penn-Princeton
Princeton (7-0) will rely on Keith Elias, the most dominant running back in Ivy League history, who combines combines power and breakout acceleration, in Saturday's meeting between unbeaten teams at Philadelphia's Franklin Field.


Smith Gets the Cowboys Out of a Hole
Most Super Bowl champions featured a signature offensive play that defied logic.
Each opponent knew it was coming.
Few could consistently stop it.
The Green Bay Packers in the first two Super Bowls unleashed the power sweep.
The Washington Redskins in their championship years offered the counter trey running play.


Warner Bros. Enters Race For Network
Joining the race to establish the nation's fifth broadcast television network, Warner Brothers announced yesterday that it was creating WB, to be headed by Jamie Kellner, the former president of the Fox Broadcasting Company.
The network will be built around six independent stations owned by the Tribune Company, including WPIX, Channel 11 in New York, and KTLA in Los Angeles.


Letter: On Trade Surveillance; U.S. Monitors High-Tech Exports to Iran
To the Editor:
In "Caveat Venditor," an Op-Ed article on Oct. 25, Kenneth Timmerman alleges that United States companies are selling technology and equipment with potential military applications to Iran despite trade restrictions on such high-tech sales.
The article contains a number of misleading statements about the export control programs administered by the Department of Commerce.
First, the Commerce Department is fully complying with the National Defense Authorization Act of 1992 and has issued no export licenses contrary to this law.
Congress, in enacting the law, required the denial of all license applications to Iran, but permitted the continued export of low-level items that do not pose a threat to U.S. national interests, such as medical equipment and unsophisticated data-processing machines.


COLOMBIA OFFERS CARROT TO CARTEL
Colombia's Congress approved legislation today that increases the benefits for drug traffickers and other organized criminals who surrender to the authorities, confess to their crimes and give information that leads to the capture of other criminals.
Many of the provisions were decreed in an executive order by President Cesar Gaviria in November 1992.


Rivers Is Prepared to Confront Aches and Pains Anew
The National Basketball Association season is about to begin.
And with it will come the aches and pains, bumps and bruises and nagging injuries that are part of playing a game meant for young, resilient bodies.
Doc Rivers is 32 years old.
Now in his 11th year in the league, he has established himself as one of the most tenacious point guards around.
Rivers knows how grueling an 82-game season can be, how draining the playoffs are, how much strength will be sapped from his body in the next eight months as he chases his first championship.


Gorbachev, Energetic, Chatty, but Not Yet Political
If he did sense an unquenchable desire to return to active politics, Mikhail S. Gorbachev insists, "I would find a way."
What that way might be is hard to figure, given his consistently dismal rankings in Russian public-opinion polls.
But at 62, he is still radiating energy and boundless self-confidence, still riveted by the profound process of change that he kicked off in 1985.


Competition Draws Banks Into a Price War on Loans
Competitive pressures are pushing bankers to reduce interest rates on business loans and abandon some of the more stringent requirements imposed on borrowers a few years ago.
Although the prime lending rate has stayed at 6 percent for more than a year, that stability conceals widespread price cutting on business loans, most of which carry interest rates pegged to the banks' cost of funds -- not the prime rate.


Oxford Health Plans Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chief Resigning From Convention Bureau
Marshall E. Murdaugh, president and chief executive of the New York Convention and Visitors Bureau for the last five years, resigned unexpectedly yesterday, effective Jan. 1.
The 52-year-old Mr.
Murdaugh has a year remaining on his contract.
The search for a successor to run the highly visible $7.8 million office will begin soon, said the bureau chairman, Arthur A. Surin, who is a senior vice president of the Hilton Hotels Corporation.


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Propositions; Voters in California Reject Proposal on School Vouchers
In an off year for electoral politics, propositions dominated the ballot in many places, and people used them to send strong messages.
In California, voters soundly rejected a plan yesterday to give parents cash vouchers to send their children to any school they want.


Itel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Handout on the Range
To the Editor:
Re " 'Wingtip' Cowboys in Last Stand to Hold On to Low Grazing Fees" (front page, Oct. 29): Senator Alan Simpson of Wyoming, an ardent exponent of free enterprise and cynical critic of Government spending, can stop wringing his hands because cattlemen are asked to pay increased grazing fees for public land leases.


Let's Get Profit and Loss Out of Health Care; Pharmacy Squeeze
To the Editor:
Anne E. Bossi, in her Oct 23 letter, states that within PruCare's network of doctors and pharmacies, many are situated within local neighborhoods.
What she leaves unstated is that there is a campaign by PruCare with respect to pharmacies to bypass the small individually owned pharmacy and make member prescriptions reimbursable only when filled at chain pharmacies.
This effectively puts individually owned pharmacies at peril and is similar to the campaign by health maintenance organizations to buy up practitioner groups, thus positioning themselves to own conglomerates favored by the Clinton health plan.
In short, the individual practitioner and the individual pharmacy can go the way of the dinosaur.


Workers at Getty Museum Scramble to Save Artworks
With a wall of fire just three miles away and bearing down on the J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu, Calif., fire engines ringed the institution yesterday and staff members were prepared to chop down trees surrounding the building to save it.
Much of the museum's multimillion-dollar collection of paintings and artifacts was moved to the basement, and the security staff soaked the grounds of the building.


No Headline
"It's just like when everybody flocks to a beach on a Sunday. Guess what happens. You sit in the car and wait and wait and wait." DAVID FARBER, University of Pennsylvania computer scientist, on the information highway's traffic jam.  [ D1:4. ]


U.S. PRESSES JAPAN ON MISSILE PROJECT
On the first stop of an Asia trip intended to address the North Korean nuclear threat, Secretary of Defense Les Aspin urged Japanese officials on Tuesday to take part in a new, American-led missile defense program.
But he said the Japanese would not necessarily have to offer commercial technology in return.
Mr.
Aspin discussed the program, called a "theater missile defense," as he sought to build support for the Clinton Administration's strategy for dealing with North Korea's continued refusal to allow full inspection of its nuclear sites.
That strategy, as described by Defense Department officials traveling with Mr.
Aspin, calls for yet more talks, again delaying any move to seek economic sanctions against the Communist Government in Pyongyang.


Books of The Times; When Embroidery Was a Lesson in Femininity
Girlhood Embroidery
American Samplers and Pictorial Needlework, 1650-1850
By Betty Ring
Illustrated. Two volumes. 584 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $125.
Girlhood embroidery: no sooner do you read the words than you feel yourself entangled in archaic feminine manners and accomplishments, overtaken by a vision of skill unencumbered by ambition and virtue undefiled by thought.
Current dictionaries begin by defining embroidery as decorative needlework and end by calling it excessive, trivial and fictitious elaboration.


Sports of The Times; Sending A Better Message
I'LL be curious to hear what the Knicks have to say this morning.
Fourteen players and front office personnel are scheduled to address student assemblies at five middle schools and high schools in Manhattan and the Bronx as part of the National Basketball Association's first Stay in School Day.


Aon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Wines For Oysters
Which white wines complement the briny, metallic flavor of oysters?
This perennial debate was put to the test in the Pacific Northwest last week in a rigorous series of tastings that arrived at 10 winners from a field of 134 regional wines.
The third annual Pacific Northwest Oyster Wine Competition was limited to white wines from Washington and Oregon.
In three rounds of blind wine tastings with oysters, judges slurped and sipped their way to 19 semifinalists, which were then narrowed to 10 winners.
Among the judges were Northwest wine and food writers, restaurateurs and chefs.
The annual competition is sponsored by the Pacific Coast Oyster Growers Association, the Oregon Wine Advisory Board and the Washington Wine Commission.


More Than 1,000 Mourners at Funeral for Former Yonkers Mayor
Dozens of Westchester County politicians began this Election Day alongside more than 1,000 other mourners at the funeral of Nicholas C. Wasicsko, the former Yonkers mayor who died on Friday from a self-inflicted gunshot wound.
Crowded beneath the barrel-vault ceiling of St.
Casimir's Church, those who had worked closest with Mr.
Wasicsko joined those who had admired him from afar to reflect on a productive life in public service that came to an abrupt end at age 34.


Personal Health
MOST of what children learn about the world they learn through their eyes.
Yet the eyes are often sadly neglected, and for lack of proper and well-timed eye exams, correctable visual difficulties present in infants, toddlers or preschoolers are missed until they are well into the elementary grades or beyond.
One child in four has a vision problem that would show up readily in a professional eye exam, and one child in five needs eyeglasses.
Parents are often lulled into a false sense of security after their children "pass" the school eye chart exam, which is required by law in most states.
In fact, as many as 70 to 80 percent of problems are undetected by this useful but limited test.


All Those Problems For Beleaguered Team Just Don't Go Away
It has been a busy, mostly unfortunate year of newsmaking for the Nets, and as they prepare to open the new season Friday in Houston they are still dealing with the consequences.
First, in March, Kenny Anderson broke his wrist.
Cleveland eliminated the Nets in five games in the first round of the playoffs.
In the saddest development for the team, Drazen Petrovic was killed in an auto accident in Germany.


Jury Finds Deloitte Was Negligent
Deloitte &amp; Touche, the big accounting firm, has been found grossly negligent in a tax case involving a limited partnership that could cost the firm more than $100 million.
H.
Lee Godfrey, a lawyer for approximately 10,000 investors who lost money in a partnership called Granada 4, said that a predecessor firm of Deloitte did not properly investigate whether deductions taken by the partnership in 1986 were appropriate when it prepared important tax documents for the partnership.


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: City Council; Incumbents Score Well In Contests For Council
The vast majority of Democratic incumbents on the City Council appeared headed toward easy victories last night, assuring that Speaker Peter F. Vallone would retain control of the 51-member Council.
There were a few tough races for the Democrats, who entered the election holding a 45-to-6 edge.
Riding the momentum of Rudolph W. Giuliani's mayoral campaign, the Republicans were leading in a contest in the Rockaways, where Alphonso C. Stabile appeared to be on the verge of defeating the Council's most senior Democrat, Walter Ward, who has served for 25 years.
Mr.
Stabile led Mr.
Ward 53 percent to 47 percent with 70 percent of the vote counted.
On the East Side of Manhattan, the outcome of another hotly contested race remained uncertain, with the Republican incumbent, Andrew S. Eristoff, and the Democratic challenger, Jane R. Crotty, separated by only a little more than a hundred votes.
Mr.
Eristoff beat Ms.
Crotty by a hairbreadth in a special election nine months ago, but only after absentee votes and paper ballots were counted.  'An Exact Repeat'
"It's an exact repeat of February," said George Arzt, a spokesman for Ms.
Crotty, who held the narrow lead.


Let's Get Profit and Loss Out of Health Care
To the Editor:
An Oct. 26 front-page article declares the American health care system an economic outlaw and states that the rules of the marketplace do not apply to it.
This is flatly wrong.
You tacitly concede the point early on in noting that "good health is priceless" and that "people place no limit on what they will pay."
The law of supply and demand tells me, if not you, that the proper match for a buyer willing to pay anything is a seller willing to charge anything.
When you strip away its intrinsic technicalities and marketing complexities, that is exactly what goes on in our health system.


METRO DIGEST
THE 1993 ELECTIONS: WHITMAN WINS NEW JERSEY RACE
Christine Todd Whitman, who won the right to challenge Gov.
Jim Florio at a time when he seemed hopelessly wounded, then saw Mr.
Florio surge to a double-digit lead in some polls, eked out a victory over him.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  GIULIANI NARROWLY DEFEATS DINKINS
David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani repeated their contest of four years ago, but this this time, Giuliani won.
A1.
As New York City's 107th mayor, Giuliani gains a position of influence and prestige.
B3.
AN AUTUMN APPEAL
Mayor Dinkins seemed caught in the autumnal mood of the city as, weary but resolved, he went to the voters one final time.
A1.
Mark Green is elected public advocate. B5.
Alan Hevesi is elected comptroller. B5.
Democrats retain Council majority. B5. DINKINS LOSS BRINGS ANGUISH
The defeat of New York's first black mayor brought cries of anguish from black residents who said the verdict was based largely on race.
"We are an extremely hurt people on this night," said Percy Sutton.
B2.
The undecided voters had to stop wavering. B3.
There were many voter-fraud charges. B3.
Staten Island voters approved secession. B4.
Federal prosecutors link two defendants to the World Trade Center bombing. B10.
An ethics review agency is investigating Dr. J. Emilio Carrillo. B10.
A defendant reflects on a death. B10.
A mother is charged in her baby's death. B10.
A Bronx man killed two in Baychester. B10. REGION  FOR WHITMAN, HER HERITAGE
Christine Todd Whitman both fulfilled the political promise she showed three years ago and realized the obligation of public service that was virtually her familial inheritance.
Mrs.
Whitman traveled from little-known but well-connected outsider to the candidate who upset a surprisingly resilient Jim Florio.
B6.
Taxes remained the issue in New Jersey. B7.
A New Jersey recall measure is approved. B7.
Republicans maintained their control of both houses of the New Jersey Legislature. B8.
Voters retained Bergen County's blue laws. B8.
Nassau County Executive Thomas S. Gulotta is re-elected. B9.
The Mayor of Hartford lost a re-election bid. B9.
Jeanine Pirro is elected Westchester prosecutor. B9.
Dozens gather at the funeral of a former Yonkers mayor. B12.
A new life for an injured turtle. B12.
The Supreme Court has decided not to hear an appeal over hospital bills in New Jersey.
B12.
New Jersey fishing officials are proposing a limit on commercial blue crab fishermen.
B12.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman B4
Chronicle B12


Metropolitan Diary
DR.
LAWRENCE FEINMAN of the Bronx, who has a 22-year-old son and a 26-year-old daughter, writes that he has formulated the following answering-machine message to respond to calls from "grown" offspring:
"If you require financial assistance, PRESS ONE.


Conrail Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ramsay Health Care (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jams Already on Data Highway
Call it a cautionary tale for the information age: The nation's increasingly popular data highway is beginning to groan under the load of rush-hour traffic.
The problem, computer and telecommunications experts say, is that the computer network called the Internet, once a cozy community of a few thousand computer scientists, engineers and programmers who quietly and freely shared their on-line data, has suddenly been besieged by millions of newcomers.
Anyone with a personal computer and a modem can easily and cheaply gain access to the Internet, a global web of thousands of computer networks.


Court Weighs Jury-Selection by Sex
After all but eliminating race as a factor in jury selection over the last seven years, the Supreme Court today turned to the question of whether lawyers can remove potential jurors on the basis of their sex.
With the support of the Clinton Administration, a lawyer for a man who lost a paternity case before an Alabama jury of 12 women argued that the same constitutional principle of equal protection applied to considerations of sex as well as race in jury selection.


Charles Shagass, 73, A Psychiatric Expert On Brain Function
Dr.
Charles Shagass, a Philadelphia psychiatrist known for his research on brain function and mental disorder, died on Oct. 27 at Temple University Hospital.
He was 73 and lived in Wyncote, Pa.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Norton Hangs In for Now And Cowboys Go Into Shift
When the Dallas Cowboys face the Giants on Sunday, their four-man defensive line will have left end Tony Tolbert over Doug Riesenberg, left tackle Tony Casillas over Bob Kratch, right tackle Russell Maryland over William Roberts and right end Charles Haley over Jumbo Elliott.
But when the Cowboys change that standard set, they may line up Brown over Tom.
Brown over Tom?
The only Brown on the Cowboys is Larry, a starting cornerback.
The last Tom on the Giants was Thomas (Pepper) Johnson, the departed linebacker.


Stocks Sluggish Despite Economic Reports
Investors yanked stocks through a bumpy session yesterday that illustrated how, these days, good economic news is not always good for the market.
The Dow Jones industrial average edged up 5.03 points, to 3,697.64, the fourth record in a little more than a week.
The Dow briefly crossed the psychological barrier of 3,700 shortly before the close of trading before falling back.


A Misleading Health Estimate
The Administration's estimate that 40 percent of insured families would pay higher premiums under its health care bill jarred everyone on Capitol Hill last week.
When Donna Shalala, Secretary of Health and Human Services, presented the estimate, she gave ammunition to opponents of the President's bill and dismayed supporters.
But the 40 percent estimate was so misleading it was almost meaningless.
The estimate exaggerates the number of families the Administration believes would suffer financially under its bill.
The Secretary's politically clumsy presentation of the figures without fully explaining them did not serve either the President's, or the public's, interest very well.


Long Bond's Yield Rises in Selloff
The yield on the 30-year Treasury bond jumped to 6.05 percent yesterday from 6.02 percent on Monday on selling in response to more news that the economy is looking stronger than it did in the first half of the year.
The catalyst for the selloff was the Commerce Department's report that sales of new single-family homes surged 20.8 percent in September.
The reported indicated that the drop in long-term mortgage rates may be beginning to have a noticeable impact on the economy.
In a separate report, the Government's chief economic forecasting gauge rose five-tenths of 1 percent in September.


AT WORK WITH: Sean Driscoll; Selling Perfection in an Imperfect World
GOD is in the details at Glorious Food, but with Sean Driscoll around He has to fight for space.
As a co-owner of New York's most prestigious catering company, Mr.
Driscoll knows everything about everybody (who counts, that is).
He fetes them, marries them and buries them.
But if you expect him to tell his secrets, you are mistaken.


Israel-P.L.O. Talks Hit Snag Over Repositioning Troops
Negotiations between Israel and the P.L.O. ran into their first big obstacle today when the Palestinians suddenly broke off the talks to show their displeasure with Israeli plans for a repositioning of troops in the occupied territories.
Israeli officials, however, insisted that the talks had not reached a crisis, saying they expected them to start again next week.
The suspension did not come as a surprise, they said, and if they are correct about the resumption, only a day of real negotiations will have been lost.


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: The Supporters; Viewing a Verdict as Based on Race
The defeat of New York's first black Mayor brought cries of anguish from black supporters, who said the verdict was based largely on race.
"We are an extremely hurt people on this night and we have to make an adjustment," said Percy Sutton, the former Manhattan borough president, one of Mayor David N. Dinkins's closest friends and political confidantes.


CHRONICLE
His name may not be legendary in the annals of charity, but ALBERT HERZSTEIN of Houston has been selected by a panel that includes Jonas Salk, Marian Wright Edelman and Bill Moyers, as the winner of the 1993 American Philanthropy Award of the Columbus Foundation.
The foundation is a trust that gives grants in the Columbus, Ohio, area.
Mr.
Herzstein, who exemplifies rags-to-riches success, was a delivery boy and truck driver for a welding-supply company in Texas during the Depression.
In 1930, he sold his wife's car and borrowed some money to buy, for $2,300, a one-third interest in the Smithweld Company.
He later became president of the company, before merging it with another firm.
He has been retired from the welding business since 1965, but hardly idle.
At the age of 86, he remains active as a real estate developer.


Mother Is Charged in Abandoned Baby's Death
A 24-year-old woman has been charged with murder in the death of her 2-year-old daughter, who the police said was left alone for almost five days while the mother was in the hospital.
The mother, Anna Hosein McDougal, was arrested late Monday night after returning to Jamaica Hospital Center and telling a security guard there her child had died, said Lieut.
John Shatinksy, commanding officer of the 113th Precinct Detective Squad.
She apparently never told hospital officials that she had left her child at home unattended.


New Yorkers Approve Limit of 2 Terms for City Officials
Joining a national tide of anti-incumbency, New Yorkers voted decisively yesterday to approve a referendum limiting the city's elected officials to two consecutive terms, or eight years in office.
With 95 percent of the precincts reporting, the referendum, Proposal 4, which would limit the terms of the mayor, comptroller, public advocate, borough presidents and City Council members, was winning handily, with 59 percent of the vote.


Corrections
A table in Business Day on Friday, with the continuation of a front-page article about third-quarter gross domestic product, carried outdated figures.
Readers wishing corrected copies of the table may write the Business Editor, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


White House Is Adamant on Balkan War Crimes
The Clinton Administration has ruled out granting amnesty to those accused of war crimes in the former Yugoslavia and will press for sanctions against countries that refuse to hand over suspects for trial by the new United Nations war crimes tribunal, a senior Administration official said today.
Madeleine K. Albright, America's chief representative at the United Nations, said she had "no illusions about the obstacles the tribunal will face." It will be hard, she said, "to gain access to evidence, including mass grave sites, especially in areas under Serb control" and "often impossible to gain custody over the accused."


New Doubts On Merger of Auto Makers
Even before the nuptials are completed, the proposed marriage of Renault S.A. of France and Volvo A.B. of Sweden to create the world's sixth-largest automotive group is showing signs of unraveling.
Surprised by a storm of shareholder protests over the agreement, Volvo postponed this week a special shareholders meeting scheduled for next Tuesday that was called to approve the merger.
Instead, the meeting will be on Dec. 7, to give Volvo time to try to convince defiant shareholders of the merits of the accord.


The Young Prove Mortal Again
Every generation faces moments when the myth of its own immortality is shattered.
Somebody young and beautiful dies, somebody who, like them, was going to live forever.
In the 50's it was James Dean.
In the acid-mad 60's it was Jimi Hendrix, and Jim Morrison, and Janis Joplin.
For today's teen-agers death claimed its first victim this week, an intense young actor named River Phoenix, who collapsed and died outside a Hollywood nightclub.


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Staten Island; Secession Is Approved; Next Move Is Albany's
Residents of Staten Island yesterday took a step toward severing their ties to New York City by approving a new City Charter that is both a declaration of independence and the political foundation for what could become the state's second largest city.
With one-third of the precincts reporting at 11:15 P.M., residents were voting for secession by a 2-to-1 margin.


Masco Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Fashion; Not for a Shrinking Violet
STEP right up and take your pick: sexy clothes for the club crawlers, innocent baby-doll dresses for the ingenue, or elegant beaded silks for the sophisticate.
Next spring's evening offerings from the younger generation of designers is a study in contrasts.
Nicole Miller's show Monday night in Bryant Park focused on the audience she's been wooing for several years, young women whose idea of fun is dancing up a storm at the hottest clubs.
She provided them with skimpy little nothings in matte jersey, georgette, embroidered stretch net or beaded black net over shiny gold and did up the models with spiky hair and high-heeled sandals that tied around the ankles.
Nothing there for shrinking violets.


Gold Spring to Miss Sprint
The Breeders' Cup Sprint lost one of its top contenders today when Gold Spring was injured while training in Kentucky.
Gold Spring won the A Phenomenon Stakes at Saratoga this summer.
Gold Spring was not an original nominee to the Breeders' Cup.
The initial supplemental fee of $67,000 paid last week by the horse's owner, Ross Harris, to make Gold Spring eligible is nonrefundable.
Mike Smith, the nation's top money-winning rider this year, has never ridden at Santa Anita.
In hopes of getting familiar with the track, the jockey agent Steve Adica came here early in the week to try to get Smith mounts on days before the Breeders' Cup.
But unless there is a late change, Smith is without a mount in races here Wednesday, Thursday and Friday.
"I can't get him anything," Adica said.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Oct. 29
Oct. 22
Oct. 30
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.4
6.9
Distillate production, daily
3.5
3.6
3.3
Gasoline stocks
210.5
208.7
206.3
Distillate stocks
138.5
134.6
135.0
Crude imports, daily
6.9
6.7
6.9
Product imports, daily
2.0
2.0
1.7
Crude stocks
332.8
332.4
332.3
Crude production, daily
6.8
6.8
7.1
Refinery utilization (%)
92.4
91.7
89.4
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Threats End in Two Killings and a Kidnapping
After harassing his ex-girlfriend for months, a Bronx man went on a rampage yesterday, killing the woman's mother and sister and then kidnapping her and four small children, the police said.
He held his captives for almost 20 hours before the police stormed his home at 4 A.M. yesterday and released them, the police said.
At some point, officers said, the man, Oliver Morgan, 29, took his former girlfriend to the courthouse in the Bronx, hoping to obtain a marriage license and force her to marry him.
Mother and Sister Killed
The hostages, Darlene Boyd, 29, and four children -- three of them Ms.
Boyd's and one of them her sister's -- were not physically harmed, the police said.
One of the children was Mr.
Morgan's and Ms.
Boyd's 20-month-old son.


Esco Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


For Tiny British Suspects, Fidgets and Tears
They are children, two pudgy 11-year-old boys in neat haircuts, ties and starchy white shirts, the sort of outfits grown-ups think will make a good impression on strangers.
Were they not all dressed up to stand trial for murder, they would have been in school today in Liverpool.
Instead, boy A and boy B -- the only identification the court will permit to describe the young defendants publicly -- were fidgeting in the dock inside this ornate Edwardian courtroom, as a prosecutor in black robe and gray wig meticuluously spent a second day describing how the pair in February abducted and savagely beat to death James Bulger, a 2-year-old toddler, and then tried to lie and blame each other when confronted with the crime by the police.


Syratech Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tech-Sym Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Pop Life
Rollins's Tribute
Sonny Rollins, whom many critics have called the greatest saxophonist alive, says he's always striving to play better.
Not so much for himself, the applause or the critics but for the bright constellation of his contemporaries who have died, including John Coltrane, Lester Young, Coleman Hawkins and Charlie Parker.
"I'm always trying to do my best, but I feel an obligation to represent some of my friends," he said.
"And in a way, I think I should because a lot of people might come to see me because they say 'Sonny Rollins is the last of this group.' "


Reviews/Film; East Germany Revisited by the Non-Thriller Route
Movies and spy novels have so relentlessly portrayed life under Communism as a paranoid adventure fantasy that a drab little film like Roland Graf's "Tango Player," which is set in East Germany in 1968, stands as revealing corrective to the action-adventure cliche.
Set mostly in Leipzig, the movie follows the desultory post-prison odyssey of Dallow (Michael Gwisdek), an assistant professor and part-time pianist who has spent time in jail for being in the wrong place at the wrong time.
One night in a Leipzig cabaret, Dallow was the substitute pianist in a revue whose songs ridiculed Marxism.
Even though he had been unaware of the lyrical content of the show's material, he was convicted of crimes against the state.
The film begins on the day of his release after 21 months of incarceration.
The political climate has relaxed enough so that if Dallow were to repeat what he did, he would not get into trouble.


Cities Innovate in Hunt for Minority Male Teachers
In the hardened neighborhoods of North Philadelphia, Leonard Hill is a rarity: a teacher who is black and male.
"Who's got heart?" Mr.
Hill, 23, asked a room of 17 seventh graders at Fitzsimons Middle School recently as he wrote a long-division problem on the blackboard.
When no one raised a hand, he looked Robert Plowden in the eye and said, "Thank you for volunteering."


The Talk of Hollywood; A Studio Tiptoes on Literary Ground
It's unusual for a big Hollywood studio like Columbia Pictures to release, in a fairly brief span, two such serious, high-minded movies as "The Age of Innocence" and "The Remains of the Day."
Not that Hollywood is against high-minded films.
But most studio executives, while insisting that they are always on the prowl for the next "Citizen Kane," would probably reject that movie now as too downbeat.
No violence, no sex, no silliness.
And forget that ending!


END MISSILE ALERT, BIG POWERS URGED
An unusual coalition of Russian military experts and conservative former Pentagon officials is urging Moscow and Washington to take most of their nuclear missiles off alert.
The proposal is part of a broad package of measures to reduce the threat of nuclear miscalculation.
It also comes as Defense Secretary Les Aspin has started a broad review of United States nuclear forces and strategy.


Telling of Hurled Bucket, Man Reflects on Tragedy
Inside the visiting room of a New York City jail, Pedro Gil reflected on how he ruined his own life by ending another's during a night of violence in Washington Heights.
Then he broke down and cried.
Not even Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly has disputed Mr.
Gil's contention that he did not mean to kill anyone when he hurled a 30-pound bucket of spackling compound from the roof of his apartment building at 501 West 175th Street.


Sallie Mae Notes
The Student Loan Marketing Association, known as Sallie Mae, yesterday priced for sale to the public $700 million of floating-rate notes due in 1998 through Lehman Brothers.
Underwriters said they priced the issue at 100 to float 19 basis points more than the three-month Treasury bill, with the interest rate adjusted after each weekly bill auction.
A basis point is a hundredth of a percentage point.
The notes are callable in a year.


Sports of The Times; Shula's Backup QB Success
AS soon as Don Shula saw Dan Marino hobbling toward him on the sideline, the Dolphin coach turned to Scott Mitchell.
"Get warmed up," Shula barked.
"You're going in."
Over his three previous seasons, Mitchell, a 6-foot-6-inch left-handed quarterback out of Utah, had thrown only 8 passes and completed 2 for 32 yards.
Now, his first pass in Cleveland on Oct. 10 would be intercepted by cornerback Najee Mustafaa, who returned it 97 yards for a touchdown and a 14-7 lead just before halftime.


Capitol Hill Memo; Ascendancy of Scandal To High Political Drama
Of the many extraordinary aspects of Senator Bob Packwood's two-day, nationally broadcast struggle to limit a humiliating investigation of his conduct in office, this one stands out: In the modern Congress, such spectacular bloodlettings are no longer extraordinary.
Some people who watch national politics, and some who participate in it, are beginning to wonder if the penchant for public bloodlettings -- or the system that lately encourages them -- has not got out of hand.


Datapoint Names a Returnee Its President
The Datapoint Corporation today named Doris D. Bencsik, a 35-year veteran of the computer industry, its president and chief operating officer.
Mrs.
Bencsik, 62, rejoined Datapoint, a computer networking company based in San Antonio, in February as executive vice president and chief operating officer after five years as a consultant.
She previously held senior management positions at the company and shared the president's post before leaving in 1987.


A Model of Consistency, Maddux Gets His 2d Young
Greg Maddux changed teams this year, but not much else changed.
Maddux, in fact, displayed remarkable consistency.
He was a 20-game winner for the second successive season, he led the National League in innings pitched for the third straight year and today he won the league's Cy Young award for the second straight time.
Winning in a romp over Bill Swift of San Francisco and his teammate Tom Glavine, the 1991 winner, Maddux became the first pitcher to win consecutive awards with two teams.
He pitched for the Chicago Cubs last year, then defected to the Atlanta Braves as a free agent.


Gibson Greetings Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Virginia; A G.O.P. Stride Could Pick Up Speed
George F. Allen did more than win the Virginia governor's race on Tuesday.
In sweeping past his moderate Democratic opponent, former Attorney General Mary Sue Terry, the conservative former Representative led an electoral onslaught that left Republicans in a better position than at any other time in this century to set the agenda in the Old Dominion.


MEM Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pancho's Mexican Buffet Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Grand Casinos (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Northern Telecom Joins Data Network Plan
Northern Telecom Inc. has joined an alliance of I.B.M., MCI Communications and nine universities in developing technology to improve the performance of the national data highway.
The move, announced today, is another in a series of recent strategic alliances by companies in different industries trying to position themselves for the convergence of computing and communications technologies.


Panel Examining Death of Officer Faces Delays
A grand jury decision was delayed again yesterday in the case of the man who threw a bucket off a Washington Heights roof and killed a police officer, as a judge dismissed a defense complaint about a court interpreter.
The latest postponement in the increasingly complex prosecution of Pedro Jose Gil, 22, came after defense lawyers argued earlier this week that the interpreter had so imprecisely translated Mr.
Gil's testimony before the grand jury that the proceeding was slanted against him.


WHERE TO FIND IT
NEARLY everyone has a favorite neighborhood shoe-repair shop for simple tasks like getting lifts replaced or shoes resoled.
But occasionally, nearly everyone needs more elaborate work, like having pumps dyed to match bridesmaids' dresses or loafers altered to make the wearer taller.
Much of Carlos Mesquita's work at Top Service, the 10-year-old Manhattan branch of a Paris shoe-repair company, consists of adjustments to make old shoes stylish again.


Cabbies, Alone and Vulnerable, Have to Protect Themselves
To the Editor:
In regard to your Oct. 27 report on a massive New York City cabdriver protest over cabby killings, it is ludicrous for any driver, yellow or livery, to expect protection from the Taxi and Limousine Commission.
The commission's allegiance is not to drivers, but to those who complain about drivers.
Like the Parking Violations Bureau, the taxi commission's primary purpose is to regulate and punish violators, thereby generating millions of dollars yearly.


Portsmouth Bank Shares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Race, Reform and Urban Voters
With startling rapidity, four of Am erica's five biggest cities have replaced black mayors with whites: first, Chicago, four years ago, then Philadelphia, then Los Angeles and this week New York.
It's irresistibly tempting to see a big trend here, and indeed pronouncements of the end of an era are filling the air.
The era that has supposedly ended is that of "old" black politics -- stressing civil rights, welfare and other traditional liberal policies.
Now, the argument goes, the cities have deteriorated to the point where voters want pragmatic, effective government and are willing to vote for whoever can provide it -- "new" (meaning centrist) black politicians, or, as in our biggest cities, white politicians.
David Dinkins lost because, by presenting himself as a race-relations expert rather than as a tough manager, he epitomized the old black politics.


IEC Electronics Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


SPI Pharmaceuticals Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Canam Manac reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Focus Systems Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Designs for a Life-Affirming Celebration in Mexico
In this sensual saffron landscape tucked in the shadows of the volcano Popocatepetl, the newly dead have begun their annual pilgrimage home.
At this time of year in Mexico, death is honored in the midst of life in an artistic spiritual celebration known as the Dia de los Muertos, the Day of the Dead.


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Suburbs; Narrow Victory in Nassau
In Nassau County, both Democrats and Republicans claimed victory after Thomas S. Gulotta was returned to office with the narrowest victory of his 18-year political career.
In an election in which Mr.
Gulotta faced a formidable challenger in Benjamin L. Zwirn, the Republicans pointed to Mr.
Gulotta's 51 percent showing as a sign of their continued hold over this county.
And they saw further evidence of their strength in their winning back the county clerk's office, a position that they had lost for the first time in two decades in a special election last year.


California Micro Devices Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Strongsville Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Fiery 'Day in Hell' in a California Paradise
The outlines of paradise can be read in its ruins, on the steep, spectacular curves of Carbon Mesa Road overlooking the Pacific Ocean, where the lavish homes of the wealthy and famous lie in cinders.
On the morning after towers of flame roared down the hillside, the airy parlors, broad patios, artworks, antiques and elegant gardens of many homes are gone, their ashes still smoking.
All that remains is the view, and it is breathtaking.


Mets and the Indians: Talks but No Trade
Joe McIlvaine, the Mets' general manager, wasn't getting anywhere in hotel rooms, so he figured he would try the golf course.
McIlvaine and his assistant, Ed Lynch, played 18 holes today with John Hart, the Cleveland Indians' general manager, but the best they could do was keep their scores in the 80's.
"We didn't get anything done, but we're still talking," McIlvaine said after returning to the hotel where the major league general managers have been meeting this week.
"But that's not the only team we're talking to. We're focused on infield. That's our top priority."


Stocks Tumble in Selloff On Fear of Higher Rates
Apparently spooked by the prospect of rising interest rates, investors pummeled stocks yesterday, dragging down a broad swath of the market in very heavy volume.
The Dow Jones industrial average, which had hit four record highs in the last 10 days, plunged more than 50 points by late afternoon before the New York Stock Exchange activated its restrictions on computer-program trading to prevent the index from falling further.
The Dow ended the day down 35.77 points at 3,661.87.


Healthcare Services Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pepsico Liquor Units Narrow Review to 4
Pepsico Wines and Spirits International and Monsieur Henri Wines said yesterday that they had narrowed the review on four major liquor brands to four agencies from eight semifinalists, eliminating Calet, Hirsch &amp; Ferrell of New York, which had handled the account for more than a decade.


Review/Music; Albanians Find Unity in Diversity
The third annual Albanian Festival, which took place on Sunday at Lehman College in the Bronx, was a three-hour variety show, with about 30 acts: dancers, singers, instrumental virtuosos, even a comedian and a poet.
It veered between traditional and modern styles and from professional to amateur performances.
And it portrayed an extremely diverse musical culture, even as singers drew fervent applause when they invoked Albanian unity.
There are Albanian communities in the former Yugoslavia, in Greece and even in Italy; one dance from the Arberesh community in Italy suggested a Balkan tarantella.
Musically, Albania is where Eastern Europe meets the Middle East.
Singers crooned, quavered or used the tight microtonal ornaments of Middle Eastern music; one singer, Besim Muriqi, put his hand to his ear and sang over his bent elbow in strong, trumpetlike tones, a style once used to project messages from mountain to mountain.
The local two-stringed lute, the cifteli, was sometimes used like an Arabic oud, in unison with a voice, and sometimes in fiercely strummed rhythms with drones, which is closer to other Balkan music.


Lancaster Colony (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


FFP Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


ShoLodge Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: New York City Roundup; Vallone Says Term Limits Issue Is 'Not Dead'
A day after New Yorkers voted to impose term limits on the city's elected officials, the Speaker of the City Council said the issue was "not dead," suggesting that he and other opponents of the limits might press for another referendum or challenge the limits in court.
The term limits, which voters approved by an overwhelming margin in the election on Tuesday, take effect on Jan. 1.
They restrict the mayor, comptroller, public advocate, borough presidents and City Council members to two consecutive terms, or eight consecutive years in office, starting then.


Relatively Few Taxpayers Are Jolted by the Nanny Scandal
THE Zoe Baird nanny scandal was expected to teach American taxpayers, be they rich or middle class, a lesson: you can't get away with employing illegal immigrants or failing to pay Social Security and Medicare taxes for legal domestic workers.
Come clean or pay the price.
But it appears that many Americans didn't take to heart the predicament of Ms.
Baird, who withdrew as a candidate for Attorney General in January partly because she had not paid the proper taxes for her household help.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about an elderly woman being helped in a voting booth in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., referred incorrectly in some copies to the people shown.
Marie Partenza was assisting Agnes Shay.


Krug International Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: The Transition; Dinkins and Giuliani Join in a Call for Healing and Unity
Declaring that "today we can emphasize our common bonds," Rudolph W. Giuliani made a victory tour of City Hall yesterday and stood shoulder to shoulder with Mayor David N. Dinkins as the two men demonstrated their joint commitment to heal the city after a racially polarized vote.
Sharing the lectern with Mr.
Dinkins in City Hall's Blue Room, Mr.
Giuliani called on the city to come together "whether you voted for me, for David Dinkins or you decided not to vote or you voted for any of the other candidates."


Accounts
*
Alliance for a New New York, a partnership between New York State's Department of Economic Development and utility companies like Consolidated Edison and New York Telephone, to Anderson &amp; Lembke, New York, as the first agency to handle a five-year advertising program, with total billings of $25 million, aimed at attracting businesses to the state. *
Mayo Clinic Scottsdale, Scottsdale, Ariz., to Borders, Perrin &amp; Norrander, Portland, Ore., to handle its account, previously at Nordensson Lynn, Tucson.
Billings were not disclosed.


Favorites? Don't Ask Riley
With the season two days away, Pat Riley is tired of hearing that the Knicks are the favorites to win the National Basketball Association championship.
"I think some people want to see how you handle the pressure just for the fun of it," Riley said today after practice.
"They should just enjoy this season.


Arctco Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


GBC Tech reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Inverness Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Moynihan Asks Big Tax Increase On Ammunition
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan said today that he would insist that President Clinton's health-care plan include a huge increase in Federal taxes on handgun ammunition that would make some especially destructive bullets unaffordable.
The New York Democrat has often contended that the best way to attack gun violence would be to restrict the sale of ammunition, not guns.
Today, for instance, he noted that the nation has a 200-year supply of guns but only a 4-year supply of ammunition.


Balloon Ready to Try Again for Global Flight
Thwarted in two previous attempts to make the first round-the-world manned balloon flight in history, the crew of the Earthwinds Hilton Balloon announced yesterday that its huge craft was ready for a new attempt this weekend.
If all goes well, said Donald D. Engen, the Earthwinds project manager, the $5 million balloon, as tall as a 35-story building, will rise early Saturday or Sunday from Reno Stead Airfield in Nevada, carrying three crew members on a voyage of up to 22 days and 25,000 miles.


Reliance Group Holdings Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Standard Management Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Smart &amp; Final Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 10


Koss Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Classical Music in Review
'Mahagonny Songspiel'  The New School
The New School, home of German intellectual emigres in the 1930's and 40's, is the place where one would expect to find an idiomatic rendering of a Brecht-Weill collaboration.
"Mahagonny Songspiel," seen on Tuesday night, did not disappoint.
It was echt Brecht, with alienation effects galore: singers interfering with the instrumentalists during the overture, placards haphazardly displayed, cadaverous white makeup and a gangsterish God wearing sunglasses, scarf and white gloves.
The only misstep on the part of Peter Wallace, the director, was a somewhat indifferent array of slide projections behind the action.


Brite Voice Systems Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Heist (C.H.) Corp.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Classical Music in Review
League of Composers/ I.S.C.M.  Merkin Concert Hall
The concerts by the League of Composers/I.S.C.M. have a long, honorable history as an outlet for new works.
But fairly or not, they have come to be seen as representing an entrenched old guard, fighting the good fight in behalf of a rigorously organized, predominantly atonal style.


Domestic Vehicle Sales Grew 8.5% in October
The recovery among auto makers that began late in the spring continued last month, with sales of cars and light trucks built in North America climbing 10.3 percent in late October.
For the month, the auto companies reported yesterday, sales of all vehicles -- cars and light trucks, assembled in North America and shipped from overseas -- rose 8.5 percent from October 1992 levels, to more than 1.1 million.


Executive Changes
CHASE SECURITIES INC., New York, a subsidiary of Chase Manhattan Corp., named Barry Berkeley managing director of its new mortgage-backed securities unit.
INTERNATIONAL SPECIALTY PRODUCTS INC., Wayne, N.J., named Richard B. Olsen senior vice president and chief financial officer.
The chemical maker also appointed James P. Rogers senior vice president for finance.


INSIDE
Movement on Crime Bill
The House approved parts of a long-stalled crime bill, financing more police officers, drug treatment for prisoners and gang programs.
Page A18 A Little Routine Bloodletting
The struggle over Senator Bob Packwood's diary shows that spectacular Congressional bloodlettings are no longer extraordinary.
Page A12.
Arab Writers Back Rushdie
A group of Arab and Muslim writers defended Salman Rushdie's right to publish the novel for which Iran has condemned him to death.
Page C17.


Surging Rangers Give Vancouver an Unexpected Detour
Mike Richter knows that a big trade can often bring a team a rush of adrenaline, an influx of enthusiasm that carries over onto the ice.
Of course, the Rangers were pleased to see Steve Larmer in their dressing room last night at Madison Square Garden.
And certainly they were ecstatic when the newly acquired right wing score a goal early in the second period.


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: News Analysis; The Tide Turns on Voter Turnout
For all the predictions of epochal changes that Rudolph W. Giuliani's election will mean at City Hall, his historic victory resulted much less from an overwhelming change in voters' attitudes and more from tiny shifts in the voting blocs that he and David N. Dinkins assembled in 1989.
Those shifts, coupled with higher turnout in white neighborhoods -- especially on Staten Island -- and the failure in some black neighborhoods to capitalize on registration increases, enabled Mr.
Giuliani to amass a 44,000-vote margin.


Don't Award Africa All the Exotic Terms
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 25 front-page article and photo on Nelson Mandela among South Africa's Zulus underscore new political realities: gray-suited African National Congress officials uneasily donning "tribal garb," festooning their hair with beads and goat bladders, and mouthing incantations to ancient tribal and clan gods.


Astrocom Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Elite Image, Red Ink Disappear
Three years ago, the National Horse Show was in the throes of an identity crisis following a cost-effective move from Madison Square Garden to the Meadowlands after a century of renown as one of the most glittering autumn events on the Manhattan social calendar.
Prestige and prize money suffered, and there were rumors that the show, the premier event on the competitive calendar of the world's top show horses, might literally be put out to pasture.


Times to Offer Resume Service
The New York Times Company announced this week that it would offer a new interactive system for employers to advertise jobs and for prospective employees to send resumes.
The new service, called New York Times Fastrak, was developed and will be administered for The Times by Information Kinetics Inc. of Chicago.


Pride Petroleum Services Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: New Jersey Legislature; Cut Taxes 30 Percent? Whitman's Top Statehouse Allies Say Not So Fast
Within an hour of hearing Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman repeat her pledge to reduce the New Jersey income tax by 30 percent over the next three years, the leaders of the State Legislature began distancing themselves from their fellow Republican's plan.
"We are not a rubber stamp," Senator Donald T. DiFrancesco, the Senate President, told reporters today at a post-election news conference.
He and the Assembly Speaker, Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian, voiced strong support for Mrs.
Whitman's goals of reducing taxes and spending but stopped short of endorsing her plan.


Despite S.E.C. Accord, Prudential Fights On
In public statements, Prudential Securities has sought the forgiveness of its clients for the widespread fraud described in last month's settlement with Federal regulators.
But behind closed doors, Prudential's legal team has taken a less remorseful tack, vigorously arguing in litigation that the charges brought by the Securities and Exchange Commission were little more than a collection of falsehoods, people with knowledge of the cases against the firm said.


Strawberry's Statement: Arizona or Bust
DARRYL STRAWBERRY is leaving Los Angeles. Not the Dodgers, the city.
"I'm moving to Arizona, buying a home there," Strawberry said in a conference call Tuesday from Japan.
"I'm sick of L.A. I've been in L.A. all my life. I just want a change of atmosphere.


Hamburger Hamlet Restaurants Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Interpool Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Market Place; Merck takes bad news about a treatment in stride, so far.
TROUBLING reports earlier this week about a promising schizophrenia treatment came at an anxious time for Merck &amp; Company, the world's largest drug maker.
Its mainstay drugs are coming under competitive pressure and analysts were looking for new products to replace the strong sellers over the next few years.
But for the moment, investors did not seem to notice the bad news.
Merck shares rose $1.125, closing at $32.875 yesterday on heavy volume of more than 7.7 million shares on the New York Stock Exchange.


Code Alarm Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dinkins Is Out, but U.S.T.A. Isn't Done
Officials of the United States Tennis Association said yesterday that they do not expect the departure of Mayor DAVID N. DINKINS, a tennis fan and a yearly fixture at the United States Open, to affect the planned $180 million expansion of the National Tennis Center at Flushing Meadows-Corona Park.
The project could be completed by the 1996 Open if construction begins on target next March.
City Council approved it on Sept. 23, but the U.S.T.A. still has no signed lease with the city for use of the parkland.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.94
3.02
2.98
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.05
3.10
2.99
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.23
3.27
3.20
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.22
5.21
6.43
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.10
6.05
7.67
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.20
7.19
8.60
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.56
5.55
6.61
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Snyder Oil Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. DELAY URGED ON KOREA SANCTION
Japan and South Korea have urged Defense Secretary Les Aspin to avoid imposing sanctions against North Korea as long as possible, warning that action to force the North to open its nuclear sites to inspection could touch off terrorist campaigns or military attack if the North's Government feels cornered.
But at the same time, officials in the two countries told Mr.
Aspin, who is here on a four day trip to reassess the Clinton Administration's strategy for dealing with the North Korean nuclear issue, that there would be little choice but to proceed with sanctions if the International Atomic Energy Agency declares that it can no longer verify that nuclear material is not being diverted to a weapons project.


BNH Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Symphony of Architecture at Vassar
AT the Frances Lehman Loeb Art Center, which opens to the public tomorrow at Vassar College in Poughkeepsie, N.Y., the entrance, left, is a whimsical, light-hearted pavilion.
Cesar Pelli designed the 59,500-square-foot center, which includes a renovation of Taylor-Van Ingen Hall, a 1915 Gothic building, and a new museum and sculpture garden.
"It's like a symphony," he said.
"You go through a series of movements."


Woody Allen Fails to Beat A Prosecutor
A criminal-justice panel in Connecticut voted unanimously yesterday to dismiss a complaint by Woody Allen against a prosecutor who had said there was "probable cause" to believe Mr.
Allen had molested his 7-year-old daughter, but then declined to file charges.
The Connecticut Criminal Justice Commission, which appoints state's attorneys and can punish or dismiss them, said after four hours of deliberation that there was no evidence that the prosecutor, Frank S. Maco, the Litchfield County State's Attorney, had violated the canon of ethics for lawyers in his remarks during a news conference in September at which he announced he was dropping the charges.


Missing Cabdriver Found Slain, The 36th Such Victim This Year
A taxidriver reported missing three days ago was found dead yesterday, slumped in the front seat of his yellow cab on a Bronx street with a single gunshot to the back of his head, the police said.
The killing was the 36th this year of a taxidriver and came a week after thousands of drivers staged a demonstration through the streets of Manhattan to bring more attention to the rash of violent crimes that has afflicted the taxi industry.
Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly, acknowledging that he was frustrated by the problem, announced plans that day to add manpower to a task force formed to thwart these crimes.


Loews Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Collider Project Doomed Itself by Excess
To the Editor:
As the Republican leader in efforts to terminate the superconducting supercollider, I want to qualify points made in "Requiem for the Supercollider" (editorial, Oct. 24) and Oct. 26 Science Times articles on the subject.


Review/Film; Behind the Scenes At a Chinese Restaurant
"Combination Platter" was shown as part of the 1993 New Directors/ New Films Series.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on March 27.
The film opened this week.
Setting his refreshingly candid "Combination Platter" in a Chinese restaurant, Tony Chan serves up many things that are not on the usual menu.
This film's events are seen through the eyes of Robert (Jeff Lau), an illegal immigrant from Hong Kong who works as a waiter in Queens.
Robert's desire for a green card gives the film its nominal impetus, but the real subject is the behind-the-scenes aspect of the restaurant's operation.
In the culture gap between occasionally rude American customers and deceptively dutiful Chinese workers, "Combination Platter" finds a rich and offbeat subject.


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Suburbs; Region's Incumbents Are Shaken Winners
While incumbents were toppling almost everywhere, the Republican leaders of Nassau and Suffolk Counties managed to survive election night in one piece, but they suffered a fright they will not soon forget.
In Westchester, Andrew P. O'Rourke, County Executive for 11 years, beat Richard L. Brodsky, a six-term Assemblyman by fewer than 4,000 out of 207,000 votes cast, a far smaller margin than the last time Mr.
Brodsky challenged him in 1989.
In Nassau, Thomas S. Gulotta narrowly held off Benjamin L. Zwirn, the maverick Democratic Supervisor of North Hempstead, by 4 percentage points -- again far closer than his two earlier victories for the County Executive's job.


Fed Reports a Slow to Moderate Improvement in Business
Business conditions in most of the country improved at a "slow to moderate" clip during September and October, but large pockets on both seaboards remained lackluster, an anecdotal survey of the Federal Reserve Board's 12 districts showed today.
The findings of the central bank, though noting renewed strength in motor vehicles and housing, struck much the same tone as two months ago when it also described national growth as "slow to moderate," and seemed less buoyant than implied by various recent statistics.


FPI Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Circus; Commedia dell'Arte in the Little Big Top
Strong-jawed, stalwart, sleek of body, the trapeze artist stands at the center of the single ring, bathed in light that gleams against his royal-blue singlet and tights and his golden cape.
Overhead, beyond reach, hangs the crossbar of his trapeze, the perilous perch for his coming display of daring.
But wait!
All is not well.
In the shadows beyond the ring, a rigger appears to be having trouble lowering the trapeze.
The ropes seem uncooperative.
There is a conversation with the ringmaster.
The rigger hauls a stepladder into the ring.
The trapeze artist ascends, and in a moment he is hanging from the crossbar.
And in another moment, the rigger, who has climbed the ladder to help him remove his cape, is tangled in his feet, head down over the ring and in panic.


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Reaction; Black Leaders Look Hard At Creating a New Party
A day after the defeat of Mayor David N. Dinkins, a Democratic mayor in a Democratic town, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson and several black elected officials said yesterday that they are exploring with renewed vigor the possibility of starting a new party under the banner of Mr.
Jackson's Rainbow Coaliion.
The Rev.
Al Sharpton and State Senator David A. Paterson, who have both recently lost campaigns for higher office, held a news conference yesterday on the steps of City Hall, where they suggested that the Mayor's defeat may present a propitious moment to organize a new party in time for the 1994 elections -- an idea that they have been talking about informally for months.


Elsinore Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American Power Conversion Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: New York City Roundup; Secession in Jeopardy?
When Staten Island residents went to the polls on Tuesday, the vast majority voted for two things: to elect Rudolph W. Giuliani the mayor and to secede from New York City.
But in doing the first, they may have paradoxically subverted their chances of accomplishing the second.
Staten Island gave Mr.
Giuliani 109,000 votes -- 84 percent of its total -- in a race that was decided by just over 44,500 votes.
That kind of turnout made painfully obvious what Mr.
Giuliani knew before Election Day: if Staten Island secedes, it will take with it an important chunk of his core support.


Saga Communications Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Governor; Whitman Triumphantly Pledges Income-Tax Cut by 1994 Budget
Christine Todd Whitman made a triumphant entry into the State House today only hours after claiming a narrow victory over Gov.
Jim Florio.
Appearing before a crowd of legislative leaders and cheering supporters, she said she would get to work immediately to redeem a major campaign pledge: cutting income taxes for most residents, beginning with the 1994 budget.
"My first priorities for the state of New Jersey are creating jobs and lowering taxes," said Mrs.
Whitman, the first woman ever elected governor of New Jersey.
"That's where my focus is going to be."


Judge Clears Tighter Auto Emissions
A Federal judge in Boston ruled late Tuesday that Massachusetts can adopt California's auto emissions standards, despite arguments by the auto makers that this violates the Clean Air Act.
The ruling is at odds with one made earlier this year by a Federal district court judge in Syracuse in an identical suit brought against New York.
The judge in New York ruled in large part in favor of the car manufacturers that the California rules should not be adopted.


Theater in Review
Bremen Freedom  Cucaracha Theater 500 Greenwich Street (between Spring and Canal Streets) TriBeCa Through Nov. 13 By Rainer Werner Fassbinder; translated by Denis Calandra; directed by Paul Lazar and Annie-B Parson; set by Joanne Howard; costumes by Claudia Stephens; lighting by David Moodey; composer and choral director, Stephen Osgood; sound by Robert Leone; stage manager, Joy Burgin.
Presented by Cucaracha Theater, in association with Aaron Etra.
WITH: Stephen Brantley, Stacy Dawson, Joey Golden, Deirdre Harrison, Kirk Jackson, Ilyana Kadushin, Susan Maginn, Kate Malin, Brennan Murphy and Rebecca Wisocky.


Economic Scene; However the N.F.L. handles expansion, challenges are likely.
Oct. 22.
A jury in Boston decides that the National Football League had violated the antitrust laws by restricting William Sullivan's sale of a minority interest in the New England Patriots.
Oct. 27.
N.F.L. owners postpone the award of a new franchise to one of four cities still in the running.


Vacuum Infomercial To Be First for Sears
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company is joining the small but growing list of respectable major marketers producing infomercials, or program-length television commercials.
Sears, the nation's third-largest retailer, said yesterday that it had named King World Direct, a newly formed infomercial division of King World Productions Inc. of New York, to develop and handle the creation and production of infomercials for the Sears Merchandise Group.


Rockwell International Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


PDA Engineering (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Avondale Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mrs. Whitman's Work Won't Be Easy
There are campaign promises that are easily forgotten and campaign promises writ large, like Christine Todd Whitman's pledge to cut the income tax 30 percent if New Jersey voters elected her Governor.
Well, they did.
And now concerned residents can only hope her moderate political heritage will guide her spending cuts, to protect the state's troubled cities and their poor against uncaring budget-slashers from Republican suburbs.
Tuesday's vote was extremely close, not unusual for a state that swings between Democrats and Republicans from one election to the next.
Mrs.
Whitman outpolled Gov.
Jim Florio by only 30,000 votes out of 2.4 million cast.
But she is, undisputably, the winner.


Remarks At City Hall By Giuliani And Mayor
Following is a transcript of the statements by Mayor David N. Dinkins and Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani at a City Hall news conference yesterday, as recorded by The New York Times: By MAYOR DINKINS
I want to read a brief statement.
As you will see it's consistent with the remarks that I made last night, but Rudy and I thought it important that we, that we stand together and that I say the kinds of things I'm about to say and he'll have a brief comment and then we'll take a few questions.
But we each believe this is important for our city.


Prime Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kings Spoil the Plans For Devils' Perfect Trip
The New Jersey Devils continued to cool tonight, losing for the third time in four games due to a roadblock by Kings' goalie Kelly Hrudey.
Hrudey stopped 50 of New Jersey's 52 shots, and Dave Taylor's ricochet goal with 4 minutes 16 seconds left lifted Los Angeles to a 3-2 victory before 16,005 at the Forum.


Osmonics Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Drug Flow Through Haiti Cut Sharply by Embargo
The trade embargo against Haiti has sharply curtailed the flow of illegal drugs through the impoverished Caribbean country, cutting off a trade that provided some military leaders and some of their civilian supporters with millions of dollars a year, United States officials say.
Until United States and other foreign warships began taking up stations off Haiti in mid-October, Drug Enforcement Administration officials say, cocaine was regularly flowing through the country to Florida.
But officials who follow Haiti and monitor drug trafficking say the political tensions in Haiti and the line of ships offshore have caused traffickers to give the country a wide berth.


The sale of Scali may finally be announced today, but Madison Avenue is not holding its breath.
YOGI BERRA never worked at an advertising agency.
But when he declared that it ain't over till it's over, he must have foreseen the on-again, off-again, not-quite-on-again sale of Scali, McCabe, Sloves.
All day yesterday, what Advertising Age has called "the longest-running, most watched soap opera in recent Madison Avenue history" was expected to end with an agreement by the WPP Group P.L.C. to sell Scali, a well-known New York-based agency that handles accounts like Mercedes-Benz of North America, to the Interpublic Group of Companies.


Department 56 reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Global Natural Resources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Martin Luther King 3d Upset on Election Day


American Bancorp (West Va.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Too Much Baby Gear
To The Home Section:
In reviewing baby-care options  [ "New Parents' Style: Bunny Modern," Oct. 21 ] , Dorothy Kalins neglected to mention an alternative that is quite popular in some circles.
It might be called the antique anatomy approach, the basic elements of which are laps, shoulders, arms, hands and fingers.
They can replace the pictured exerciser, bouncing seat, swing and pacifier, saving at least a couple of hundred dollars.


Packwood Case Shows Women Speaking Up
To the Editor:
I am surprised and troubled to find that a man so clever in his use of words and in the understanding of the English language as William Safire has permitted himself the lazy luxury of popular vitriol.


Bristol-Myers To Sell Part Of Clairol
The Bristol-Myers Squibb Company announced yesterday that it had reached an agreement to sell the appliance division of its Clairol subsidiary to the Remington Products Company.
The division, based in Stamford, Conn., sells personal-care items like Aqua-Curl steam hairsetters, Big Shot hair dryers, Swing Setter heated rollers and Salon Effects curling irons.
All these are made in China and the deal involves no manufacturing plants in the United States.


South Jersey Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Phoenix Resource Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mercury Air Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Model of Consistency, Maddux Gets His 2d Young
Greg Maddux changed teams this year, but not much else changed.
Maddux, in fact, displayed remarkable consistency.
He was a 20-game winner for the second successive season, he led the National League in innings pitched for the third straight year and today he won the league's Cy Young award for the second straight time.
Winning in a romp over Bill Swift of San Francisco and his teammate Tom Glavine, the 1991 winner, Maddux became the first pitcher to win consecutive awards with two teams.
He pitched for the Chicago Cubs last year, then defected to the Atlanta Braves as a free agent.


No Headline
"Yesterday our city's votes may have been divided. But today our city will be reunited. I expect nothing less and hope for even more." -- DAVID N. DINKINS.  [ B3:1. ]
"Today we can emphasize our common bonds." -- RUDOLPH W. GIULIANI.  [ A1:6. ]


Egypt Hangs Three Muslims In a Crackdown on Militants
Three Muslim militants were hanged in a Cairo prison today for conspiring to overthrow the Government, the military prosecutor's office said.
The hangings raised the number of militants executed since June to 18, the largest number of political criminals executed in modern Egyptian history.
Another 9 militants are on death row, and 11 who have been sentenced to death are fugitives.


Shifting Back to Communist Era, Ukraine Bars Hard Currency Sale
President Leonid M. Kravchuk decreed strict currency controls today, shutting down the Kiev Interbank Currency Exchange auction and other money exchange points throughout the country.
The decree, signed by Mr.
Kravchuk on Tuesday but made public only today, prohibits the open buying and selling of hard currency and eliminates Ukraine's only market mechanism for determining a realistic exchange rate for the country's interim currency, the Karbovanets.


Continental Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Calendar: Crafts, Antiques and Roses
Arts and Crafts  American Craft Museum, 40 West 53d Street; (212) 956-3535.
The museum will offer a number of talks in conjunction with "The Ideal Home: 1900-1920," an exhibition about the Arts and Crafts movement that will continue through Feb. 27.


Nature Has Created a Tinderbox, But Humans Are Striking the Flint
Arson is now suspected in nearly half the major fires that have raced across Southern California in the past eight days, prompting much public hand-wringing about whether the police could have deterred the crimes and about the mentality of whoever would set the blazes.
But because the tinderbox landscape and hot desert winds made the area so ripe for fire, experts in fire investigations said today that it would be difficult, maybe impossible, to determine all the fires that were begun by arson.
They also said that in some cases a fire might have started even without an arsonist because of the conditions.


Cortines Plan Gives Districts Repair Power
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines yesterday said that he would reorganize the way the New York City's Board of Education handles minor repairs of its school buildings, turning decisions about what gets fixed and when over to local school districts.
Under the plan, each of the city's nearly 40 school districts would receive a fixed portion of money available for minor repairs, and the district superintendent would set priorities and control the spending.
Currently, maintenance decisions are all channeled through the board's Division of School Facilities, which has a backlog of 50,000 unanswered repair orders for the city's nearly 1,069 buildings.


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Giuliani; Overcoming Early Negative Image To Pull Ahead in Voters' Perceptions
For months, the central dilemma of Rudolph W. Giuliani's campaign was how to balance the hard-charging prosecutor's image that made his entire political career possible with the cooler-headed, more statesmanlike approach he wanted to project as a potential mayor of a complex city.
In key moments, his top advisers were often divided, with the candidate and some of his longtime lawyer friends drawn to a tough approach, and David Garth, his top strategist, counseling restraint.
Paradoxically, nothing may have better crystallized that back-and-forth -- or allowed Mr.
Giuliani to end his campaign on an upbeat note -- than a tough but tempered television commercial made 10 days ago and never shown.


No Boon From Yankees
To the Editor:
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has never lost his boyhood love for baseball, but he stands on shaky ground when he uses an economic argument for keeping the Yankees in New York.


Garden Hose Is a Lifeline For a House
I first heard about the wildfires in the Santa Monica Mountains about 11:30 A.M. on Tuesday.
By the time I drove from my office toward my home in Topanga Canyon in the fire zone, the smoke and flames had spread and the sun glowed blood-red.
I left my car at the bottom of our dead-end road and raced up the last half-mile by foot, determined to save my house.
By then it was 2 P.M., three hours after the fire began near a water tank two and half miles up the hill on Old Topanga Canyon Road.


Getty Museum's Brush With Disaster Recalls Fate of Its Ancient Model
Shortly before dawn this morning, with scorching cinders in the air and the dark sky aflame over the J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu, John Walsh faced a moment of alarm.
"It wasn't clear the fire could be contained nearby at Topanga Canyon," Mr.
Walsh, the museum's curator, said hours later.
"It could have easily come up to the houses next to us. We might have been enveloped. It was a cliffhanger."


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: The Capital; Uncertainty Surrounds New Arrival
Tony Constantini, manager of the snack bar in the State House, was curious about how to address New Jersey's newly elected head of state.
"Can you get used to saying Madame Governor?" he asked with a chuckle this morning.
Mr.
Constantini was one of the few people chuckling in the hushed hallways at the seat of New Jersey government today following Christine Todd Whitman's narrow victory over Gov.
Jim Florio on Tuesday.
Until Mrs.
Whitman and her top aides breezed into the Assembly chambers for a news conference in early afternoon, the State House atmosphere was subdued, almost funereal.
All morning long, the hallways and the main lobby seemed as empty as a theater hours before curtain time.


CHUM Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Mets' Saberhagen Makes a Contribution
Mets pitcher BRET SABERHAGEN is contributing $15,384 to the Eye Research Foundation of Central New York through the New York Chapter of the Baseball Writers Association of America.


Downey S&amp;L Assn reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Arrhythmia Research Tech reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Railroadmen's Federal S&amp;L reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Moore Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Prosecutors in Blast Case Identify the Defendants
The parade of witnesses included a trooper from Texas, a clerk for a car service in New Jersey, three real-estate rental agents and a gray-haired executive secretary at a chemical manufacturing company yesterday as the prosecution in the World Trade Center case worked to establish the addresses and the identities of most of the defendants.
The day in court saw the prosecution preparing springboards for later stages in the case, moving from one witness to the other, many of them giving testimony on different defendants, including their whereabouts and their activities in the months before the explosion.


Marseilles President Is Expected to Resign
BERNARD TAPIE, the embattled president of scandal-plagued Olympique Marseilles, is expected to resign by next week, the French League president, NOEL Le GRAET, said in an interview published yesterday in Toulouse, France.
Tapie will probably resign by next Tuesday, Le Graet told the newspaper La Depeche du Midi.
Olympique Marseilles was stripped of its fifth straight French League title and barred from defending the European Champions Cup this fall after an investigation into whether it bribed players of Valenciennes to throw a game,


QVC Is Said to Be in Talks With BellSouth About Bid
QVC Network Inc. and the BellSouth Corporation were meeting yesterday to discuss a possible investment by BellSouth in QVC's hostile $9.6 billion bid for Paramount Communications, according to one executive with knowledge of the discussions.
It was not clear how far along the talks had progressed or whether they would culminate in a deal that would enable QVC to top Viacom Inc.'s friendly bid for Paramount.
It also could not be determined how much money was being discussed.


CBI Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Software Developer's Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Islanders Shake Up Roster
Stung by a 3-8-1 start and worried about empty seats at the Nassau Coliseum, the Islanders shook up their roster yesterday, leaving two healthy regulars at home and calling up three minor leaguers before they traveled to Chicago for tonight's game with the Blackhawks.
Meanwhile, tests showed that the team's captain, Patrick Flatley, has been playing for two weeks with a broken jaw.
He will be out for two to four weeks and remained behind along with left wing Benoit Hogue and center Travis Green, who are healthy but aren't playing well.


Precision Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Brock Exploration Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bomb Figure May Testify, Lawyers Infer
A bombing case defendant charged with plotting to kill President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt was abruptly moved out of his jail quarters on Monday amid signs that he has agreed to become a witness for the Government against Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and other former co-defendants, defense lawyers said last night.
If the defendant, Abdo Mohammed Haggag, a 34-year-old Egyptian, has made a deal to testify for the prosecution, he would be the first of 20 defendants in custody in the two bombing cases involving the World Trade Center and other Manhattan landmarks, including the United Nations, to be turned by the Government.
Prosecutors already intend to use the testimony of an informer, Emad A. Salem, who recorded conversations with Mr.
Haggag and others.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Abbey Healthcare Group, Costa Mesa, Calif., is selling $200 million of 9 1/2 percent senior subordinated notes due in 2002 at 100 through Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Inc.
Redeemable in five years, the notes are rated B-1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and B- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
Dean Witter, Discover &amp; Co. is selling $250 million of 6 1/2 percent notes due in 2005 at 100 through Dean Witter Reynolds.
The noncallable notes are rated A-3 by Moody's and A by S.&amp; P. and yield about 87 basis points more than a Treasury security with a comparable maturity.


General Re Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Sampras Advances Easily  Top-ranked Pete Sampras expects a tougher match from Marc Rosset than he had while advancing to the third round of the Paris Open with a 6-4, 6-2 victory yesterday over a fellow American, David Wheaton.
Wheaton had two double faults in the first game of the second set to give Sampras a 1-0 lead.
Sampras breezed from there.
He has clinched the No. 1 spot heading into the ATP Tour world championships finals starting Nov. 16 in Frankfurt.
Jim Courier, trailing Sampras in the rankings, lost to Magnus Gustafsson of Sweden, 6-4, 6-3, late Tuesday night.
Among other winners yesterday was ninth-seeded Goran Ivanisevic of Croatia, who held off a match point in the third set to advance over Jonas Svensson of Sweden, 3-6, 6-3, 7-6 (7-3).
Ivanisevic's next opponent, Michael Chang, seeded seventh, beat a countryman, MaliVai Washington, 6-7 (1-7), 6-2, 6-3. (AP) Davenport Rallies: Fourth-seeded Lindsay Davenport was shut out in a first-set tie breaker but came back to defeat Ginger Helgeson yesterday in the Bank of the West Classic in Oakland, Calif.
Davenport, 17, triumphed by 6-7 (0-7), 6-2, 6-3.
In another second-round match, Iva Majoli of Croatia, seeded eighth, set herself up for a quarterfinal meeting with top-seed Martina Navratilova with a 6-3, 6-4 victory over Amy Frazier.
Navratilova was taken into a second-set tie breaker Tuesday night before outlasting Marianne Werdel, 6-4, 7-6 (8-6). (AP)


Kenfil Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sterling Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A new take on Lauren: just call it Ralph


Ecuadorean Indians Suing Texaco
Maria Sanchez, who lives in the rain forest of Ecuador, said she cannot bathe in the river and lagoons near her house.
She and her son are reluctant to walk on the road because oil stains her feet and clothing, she said tearfully at a news conference yesterday in New York, and she is also allergic to the gasoline used to clean off the oil.
She was among a group of Indians, some in traditional garb, who came to what they called the "house of Texaco"-- New York -- to have their Philadelphia law firm file suit in United States District Court for the Southern District of New York accusing Texaco of having dumped about 3,000 gallons of oil a day into the lagoons.
They seek more than $1 billion in damages.


Moynihan Asks Big Tax Increase On Ammunition
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan said today that he would insist that President Clinton's health-care plan include a huge increase in Federal taxes on handgun ammunition that would make some especially destructive bullets unaffordable.
The New York Democrat has often contended that the best way to attack gun violence would be to restrict the sale of ammunition, not guns.
Today, for instance, he noted that the nation has a 200-year supply of guns but only a 4-year supply of ammunition.


E. Dwight Salmon, 98, A Professor at Amherst
Prof.
E.
Dwight Salmon, who taught history at Amherst College for 37 years until he retired in 1963, died on Sunday at Martha's Vineyard Hospital in Oak Bluffs, Mass.
He was 98 and lived in nearby Chilmark on Martha's Vineyard.
Professor Salmon taught an introductory course in world history as well as courses on the history of the Middle Ages, Russia, Latin America, the French Revolution, the Napoleonic era and the 20th century.


Music Notes
Marilyn Horne has established a foundation to subsidize art song recitals by young singers.
In 1994, the board of advisers of the Marilyn Horne Foundation will select a singer to be presented in a New York recital in the 1994-95 season.
Eventually, Miss Horne said, the foundation's award winners will be presented in concerts elsewhere in the United States as well.
The foundation does not have a budget, and Miss Horne has just started to raise money for it.
She is presenting a benefit for the foundation at Carnegie Hall on Jan. 16, her 60th birthday.
Besides Miss Horne, the singers on the benefit program include Montserrat Caballe, Renee Fleming, Renata Scotto, Ruth Ann Swenson, Benita Valente and Frederica von Stade, with Martin Katz and Warren Jones accompanying.


Bell Microproducts reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Events: New Museums And Other Architecture
Building a Museum  Arthur A. Houghton Jr.
Gallery at Cooper Union, 7 East Seventh Street; (212) 353-4220.
A show of plans, models and drawings by the architect Daniel Libeskind for the Jewish Museum in the Berlin Museum, starts Wednesday and runs through Dec. 8.
Open Monday through Friday, noon to 7 P.M.; Saturday, noon to 5 P.M.
No charge.


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: New York City Roundup; Incumbents Waltz Back
Despite Rudolph W. Giuliani's victory as a Republican-Liberal candidate in the Mayor's race, the vast majority of Democratic incumbents easily waltzed back into office in City Council elections on Tuesday.
When the results were finally counted in the wee hours yesterday morning, the newly elected City Council, for all intents and purposes, was the same as the old Council, with one critical difference: a Republican mayor means that the Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, has abruptly become the most powerful Democrat in the city.


Knicks Give Students Reasons to Believe
Doc Rivers, the starting point guard, delivered a big assist yesterday at Wadleigh High School in West Harlem, where he and his teammates Patrick Ewing, David Cain and Herb Williams stressed to almost 300 students the importance of staying in school, staying off drugs and believing in their dreams.
"When I was in fifth grade, my teacher had us go up to the board and write down what we wanted to be in life," Rivers said.
"I took the chalk and wrote down pro basketball player. She quickly erased those words and told me to be realistic and write down something else. I took the chalk, thought about it for a while, but again, I wrote pro basketball player.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Winter Ground Covers
Q.
Can you suggest ground covers that tolerate shade and remain green all winter? -- Ruth Gross, Woodbridge, Conn.


Scholastic
Shares of the Scholastic Corporation, the publisher and distributor of children's books and magazines, dropped sharply yesterday after the New York-based company said that its revenue growth was slowing.
An analyst at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company later downgraded the stock to "underperformer" from "performer."


Clinton Joins Counterattack On Health Insurers' TV Ads
President Clinton and the health insurance industry quarreled today over the industry's television commercials, escalating the fight joined on Monday when Hillary Rodham Clinton said the insurers were misrepresenting the President's health care plan.
Two days after Mrs.
Clinton denounced advertisements by the Health Insurance Association of America as a ploy to block change, Mr.
Clinton told an audience here that the industry was seeking only to protect its stake in a system it had left bloated with its paperwork.


Valeriu Georgescu, Oil Executive, Dies; Consultant Was 89
Valeriu C. Georgescu, a retired vice president of Standard Oil of New Jersey and later an international oil consultant in Geneva, died Saturday at his home there.
He was 89.
The cause was complications of cancer, said his son, Peter A. Georgescu of New York.


If Trade Pact Fails, Doubt On Japan Role in Mexico
Contradicting what has become a central argument for the North American Free Trade Agreement, businessmen, diplomats and trade experts say Japan and Europe are unlikely to flood Mexico with new investment and trade if the pact is not approved.
With the prospect for Congressional approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement in doubt, both President Clinton and President Carlos Salinas de Gortari have warned that Japan and other American rivals would seize whatever economic opportunities the United States might pass up in Mexico.


Continental Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Collider Project Doomed Itself by Excess; No One Can Be Proud
To the Editor:


In the Village, Dedicated to the Holidays
HUDSON STREET HOLIDAYS, a store that sells only holiday tree ornaments, candles, wrapping papers and ribbons, is an ephemeral place.
It opened last week at 555 Hudson Street (Perry Street) in Greenwich Village, and will close Dec. 31.


Pacific Western Bancshares Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


McGeehan Ready to Lead Quakers Against the Tigers
A crowd of some 40,000 is expected to turn out for the game between Penn and Princeton, both unbeaten, at Franklin Field in Philadelphia on Saturday.
Many more will be there to watch the Tigers' star running back, Keith Elias, than Penn's quarterback, Jimmy McGeehan.
The unheralded McGeehan doesn't mind.
He is thrilled to be a part of the mild turbulence that has been mounting in his home city this week.
"It's great," he said.
"A little excitement will help. I was reading in the paper the other day where college football in Philadelphia is way down."
It is fitting that McGeehan will be playing such an important role in this game between two 7-0 teams whose likely prize is the Ivy League championship.
He is all Philadelphia, from the East Falls section up near City Line, a graduate of Roman Catholic High School downtown and a Phillies fan.
His brother, John, also a quarterback, helped Penn win two Ivy championships, in 1983 and 1984, and is now a district attorney in Philadelphia.
His father, John, works as a power director for Philadelphia Electric and his mother, Mary, is a legal secretary.
A Key Role
McGeehan's role on Saturday is important because he must sustain the Penn offense to keep the Princeton offense off the field.
Princeton's Elias has been running through defenses for three years and if the Quakers are to win this game they cannot allow the Tiger tailback to have the ball 30 times, or even 20 times.
McGeehan is ready for the task.
A senior, he has had a superb season as a cool director of an offense that has averaged 33 points a game and made few mistakes.
There have been only 12 turnovers and just 34 punts.
"He may now be the best quarterback in the Ivy League," said Steve Tosches, the Princeton coach.
That's a real tribute because the competition includes such good quarterbacks as Dartmouth's Jay Fiedler, Harvard's Mike Giardi, Cornell's Bill Lazor and Princeton's Joel Foote.
There is nothing fancy about McGeehan, a 6-foot, 190-pound drop-back passer good at reading defenses and getting the ball to the right receiver.
He has two excellent targets in Chris Brassell and Miles Macik.
Brassell averages 20 yards a catch and Macik has averaged seven receptions a game in a balanced offense that also features a 156-pound tailback, Terrance Stokes, who averages 111 yards rushing each game.
Stokes is an inside power runner.
"He's tough," says McGeehan, free with his compliments.
"Our offensive line has been great. I have hardly been touched in seven games."  An Upset of Dartmouth
The first game, an upset of defending Ivy League champion Dartmouth in which McGeehan outperformed Fiedler, gave a hint of what the Penn quarterback had become.
There had been more downs than ups in his first two seasons.
He was benched late in his sophomore year as the coach, Gary Steele, went with a senior, Fitz McKinnon, in an effort to win some games and keep his job.
Last season, a new coach, Al Bagnoli, was skeptical and McGeehan did not start at first.
The other day, Bagnoli said: "A lot of his improvement came in the last couple of games last season. Our primary tailback was hurt and we had to go more with the pass. Jimmy stepped up. We've made some subtle changes in how we're throwing the ball and he's been comfortable and confident from the start."
McGeehan has twice played Princeton and is 0 for 2 in close games, losing, 20-14, last year and, 17-12, in 1991 when he had 47 pass attempts.
"Both times we just didn't get the job done," he said.
"Now here comes another chance."
EXTRA POINTS
In the Division I-AA weekly poll, conducted by The Sports Network, Princeton is ranked No. 16 and Penn No. 22.
It is the first time in the history of the poll that two Ivy teams have been in the top 25 in the same week. . . .
The last time Penn and Princeton met as unbeaten teams was 99 years ago.
The Quakers had outscored nine opponents, 330-10, and Princeton its seven, 192-0.
Penn won, 12-0.
But Princeton leads this series, 59-24-1. . . .
The last Princeton team to win its first seven games was the undefeated 1964 team.


Bridge
Almost 60 years ago, a brilliant group of players, with an average age of about 35, became the first life masters based on their playing performances.
They were: David Burnstine (later Bruce); Oswald Jacoby; Howard Schenken; Waldemar von Zedtwitz; P. Hal Sims; B. Jay Becker; Theodore Lightner; Richard Frey; Michael Gottlieb, and Sam Fry Jr.
All played much of their bridge in New York City, although Becker was from Philadelphia and Jacoby migrated to Dallas.
Most lived to be octogenarians, but all are now dead.
One of the last links to this cluster of stars was severed Sunday when Mabel Frey, Richard's widow, died peacefully in her sleep in her Manhattan home at the age of 88.
Bridge was a major part of her life from first to last.
On the diagramed deal, played almost three years ago in a Chicago game at the Cavendish Club, now no more, she held the South cards.
After her partner opened one heart, she charged ahead with Blackwood.
A Tempting Save
The final contract of seven hearts would have been a lay-down, but East saved in seven spades.
This action would be less tempting today, for since the beginning of this year the laws of social bridge conform to duplicate and nonvulnerable penalties for defeats of four tricks or more are heavier.
In this case the save was due to cost 1300, since the defense scores a diamond ruff.
Today it would cost 1700, still profitable since seven hearts would be worth 2210.


A Model of Consistency, Maddux Gets His 2d Young
Greg Maddux changed teams this year, but not much else changed.
Maddux, in fact, displayed remarkable consistency.
He was a 20-game winner for the second successive season, he led the National League in innings pitched for the third straight year and today he won the league's Cy Young award for the second straight time.
Winning in a romp over Bill Swift of San Francisco and his teammate Tom Glavine, the 1991 winner, Maddux became the first pitcher to win consecutive awards with two teams.
He pitched for the Chicago Cubs last year, then defected to the Atlanta Braves as a free agent.


Russia Drops Pledge of No First Use of Atom Arms
The Russian Defense Ministry confirmed today that the Russian military doctrine adopted on Tuesday abandoned the old Soviet pledge not to use nuclear weapons first.
Gen.
Pavel S. Grachev said at a news conference at the Defense Ministry that the doctrine ruled out the use of nuclear weapons against nonnuclear states that had signed the 1968 Non-Proliferation Treaty, unless they were allied with a nuclear-armed country.


Packwood Case Shows Women Speaking Up; What the Diaries Hold
To the Editor:
I read William Safire's "Sleazy Senate Inquiry" (column, Oct. 25) with bewilderment.
He suggests that the Senate Ethics Committee is anxious to get its hands on Senator Bob Packwood's diary because it wants to make the Oregon lawmaker "a scapegoat for generations of Congressional sexism . . . in its zeal to get right with the gender avengers."


Marine Harvest International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Secor Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


I.C.H. Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Capitals' Hunter Gets to Go Back to Work
DALE HUNTER returned to practice yesterday with the Washington Capitals.
It was business -- if that's what you call it -- as usual.
Upon his return yesterday in Odenton, Md., Hunter, a notorious prankster, was greeted appopriately.
"I had my sticks cut, Vaseline in my helmet and tape on the bottom of the skates," he said, grinning.
"I should have been ready for that by now."


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: The Grand Tour; In 5-Borough Journey, Giuliani Calls for New Unity
In a day that was part victory lap, part promise and part thank you, Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday frenetically traversed all five boroughs of New York as its newly elected mayor, sharing a message of conciliation and hope.
Rising after only an hour's sleep to face the bright lights and incessant questions of national and local television and radio reporters in the Hilton Hotel, Mr.
Giuliani promised that he would bind the city's wounds as mayor.
Appearing energetic and relaxed, he still seemed to be campaigning on fast forward.
But his message had changed from just one day before.
Having closed a long and bruising battle against Mayor David N. Dinkins by a narrow 2.4 percent margin of victory, the victor took aim yesterday not at the incumbent but at "the stereotype" that he said many New Yorkers held of Mr.
Giuliani himself.


Marriott International reports earnings for 12wks to Sept 10


Review/Dance; Keeping Trisler's Vision Alive
The Trisler Danscompany was established in large part to keep Joyce Trisler's vision of dance alive.
And that vision -- of dance as energy and craft as much as atmosphere -- was well represented by Trisler's invigorating "Four Temperaments," presented by the company on Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater.
But the honors of the evening went to an artist of a rather different kind, Carmen de Lavallade, whose choreography and performing were a highlight of the enjoyably varied program.
Both Trisler, who died in 1979, and Ms. de Lavallade were trained in dance technique and the art of the theater by Lester Horton, a West Coast dance original.
Both came east at an early age, Trisler to train further at the Juilliard School and Ms. de Lavallade to Broadway and a career as a dramatic dancer.


MNX Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Propositions; Ballot Measures on Term Limits and Crime Draw Wide Support
Voters across the country continued to show strong support for term limits, a tougher than ever stand on crime and opposition to gay rights, while indicating they would pay higher taxes if the revenue was used for health care or education.
Only a handful of significant ballot measures were on state electoral plates in Tuesday's matchups, but the results showed an electorate that was generally unwilling to experiment with new ideas.


Data I/O (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Attack on U.S. Olympians Gets Kohl's Attention
As the countdown continues to the 1994 Winter Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway, political reverberation from last weekend's skinhead attack on American lugers has reached the highest levels of the German Government.
Yesterday, at a cabinet meeting, Chancellor Helmut Kohl demanded through a spokesman that justice be carried out swiftly against the right-wing extremists who attacked the two-time Olympian Duncan Kennedy of Lake Placid, N.Y., and aimed racial slurs at Robert Pipkins of Staten Island.


Envoy in Somalia Voices Both Hope and Fear
At the end of a three-day visit in which he tried to restart political negotiations in the Somali capital, Robert B. Oakley, the United States special envoy here, said he was "moderately encouraged for the near term." But he also warned that the ultimate responsibility for peace lay with the Somalis and that the consequences would be "monstrous" if they did not cooperate.
At a news conference, Mr.
Oakley said that none of the Somalis he had spoken with wanted civil war and that he expected a slow improvement in the negotiations.
But he gave no indication of the next step in the political process, stressing that the lines of communication between the United Nations and Somali clans and among the Somalis themselves had to remain open to avoid renewed civil war.


Warriors' Webber to Sit Out Two Games
Golden State's CHRIS WEBBER, the top pick in the National Basketball Association draft, will probably miss the first two games of the season because of a sprained ankle, the team said yesterday.
Webber, who sprained his ankle at practice Monday night, is listed as doubtful for tomorrow's opener at San Antonio and Saturday's game at Dallas.


Reviews/Fashion; Color It With Silver and Spice
MINIMALISM'S onetime wallflowers are standing out from the pale plaster.
Who could fade into the background wearing silver go-go boots like those at Ghost, or the shimmery, shiny cognac-colored skirts at Liza Bruce?
Antifashion, even when accompanied by music bemoaning a world of drug addiction, garbage and blood on car seats, is looking mighty fashionable these days.
To angry, and obscene, song lyrics, Ms.
Bruce showed her dreamlike vision on Wednesday in Bryant Park.
What is there to be angry about?
Alternative clothing -- like alternative music -- is being taken more seriously than ever.
And Ms.
Bruce's collection offered much hope for, and hints about, the future of fashion.


Southington Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
The Grand Ballroom of the Plaza may well have been one of the few places in town on Tuesday night where people were not talking about the election, not glued to television screens, awaiting the returns.
The 600 people there -- diplomats, international financiers and philanthropists -- were at a black-tie benefit for the 60th anniversary of the International Rescue Committee, which was founded by Albert Einstein to aid victims of persecution around the world.
GEORGE SOROS, the Hungarian-American financier and philanthropist, was honored for his $50 million gift to help people in Bosnia.


Prudential Will Sell Centermark
In the latest deal by a major insurer to shrink its real estate portfolio, the Prudential Insurance Company of America agreed yesterday to sell its Centermark Properties shopping malls for $1 billion instead of offering them to the public as originally planned.
The buyers -- General Growth Properties, a real estate investment trust in Des Moines; Westfield Holdings Ltd. of Australia, and Whitehall Street Real Estate L.P.
III, an investment partnership formed by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co. -- will pay $500 million in cash and assume $500 million in mortgages.


OM Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bowe Becomes Bait For Cuba's Ex-Champ
He has stalked the heavyweight champion in Washington, in Orlando, Fla., and now here.
Jorge Luis Gonzalez has not finished glaring at or baiting Riddick Bowe.
He did it again today, less than a day after he had an altercation with the heavyweight champion after making fun of Bowe's weight.
Gonzalez is the 6-foot 7-inch Cuban-born heavyweight who decked Bowe three times in winning a decision in the 1987 Pan American Games.
Since defecting to the United States two years ago and turning professional, Gonzalez is 15-0 with 14 knockouts.
He is on the undercard Saturday night against Renaldo (Mister) Snipes of Yonkers, who once fought for Larry Holmes's heavyweight crown.


Classical Music in Review
Yin Cheng-Zong  Pianist Carnegie Hall
Yin Cheng-Zong, the Soviet-trained Chinese pianist who took second prize at the Tchaikovsky Competition some 30 years ago, made one of his periodic visits to New York on Sunday evening, playing Haydn, Debussy, Chopin and arrangements of traditional Chinese music.


Health Management Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


AT WORK WITH: Chief Wilma Mankiller; The Name's the Most and Least of Her
When she was 10 years old, says Wilma Pearl Mankiller, the principal chief of the Cherokee Nation, "I set out on what I call my own little Trail of Tears."
Having spent her childhood in Mankiller Flats, near this Cherokee capital in the hills of eastern Oklahoma, she was uprooted in 1956 when her father, a full-blooded Cherokee, enrolled in a Federal program intended to urbanize rural Indians.
She had never been west of Muskogee, and she, her parents and seven brothers and sisters were stepping on a train bound for San Francisco.
"I remember as we drove to the train, I felt so sad," she said.
"I wasn't excited at all. I was trying to memorize every tree, and what the school looked like, which flowers were blooming in my grandfather's front yard, all those sorts of things."
But unlike the Cherokees along the notorious Trail of Tears of the 1830's, who were forced to move from their homeland in what is now the Carolinas and Georgia hundreds of miles west, Wilma Mankiller eventually came home again.
Hers is, in fact, a remarkable tale of a life come full circle, chronicled in a new book, "Mankiller: A Chief and Her People" (St. Martin's Press), which she wrote with Michael Wallis, a Tulsa journalist and author.
It takes her from a childhood in the heart of Cherokee territory to a life as an unhappy housewife in the San Francisco Bay Area to what she says was an awakening in the protests of the 1960's that led her back to Tahlequah in the late 70's as an agitator for water lines, better schools and health clinics.
In 1985, she became the principal chief of the 94,460-member Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma.
The first elected female leader of a major Indian tribe, she won a full four-year term in 1987 and was re-elected in 1991.
Chief Mankiller, whose mother is of Dutch and Irish descent, is a stocky woman whose face radiates a placid authority.
But she can quickly inject a humorous edge into the conversation -- for instance, when the subject of her name comes up.
"Mankiller," an old term of respect for Indian warriors who guarded tribal villages, has been in her family for several generations.
It's not an unusual name in these parts.
There are Fourkillers and Tenkillers and Whitekillers, too.
But outside of Oklahoma, she says, it draws comments, questions and even nervous laughs.
"Some people do earn their names in native culture," explains Chief Mankiller, who turns 48 on Nov. 18.
"I didn't, but I don't always tell people that. Sometimes I just say that Mankiller is my name, I earned it, and I let 'em wonder."
But not just anyone can joke about the name.
As her book makes clear, she was not amused when the editorial page of The Wall Street Journal, noting her presence at President Clinton's economic summit in Little Rock, Ark., said: "Our favorite name on the summit list, we have to admit, is Chief Wilma Mankiller, representing the Cherokee Nation, though we hope not a feminist economic priority." Chief Mankiller calls the remark "a cheap shot" and "a rather unfortunate remark about my surname."
At the modern brick-and-glass Cherokee Nation headquarters, the chief offers a study in eclecticism.
For one thing, her wall decorations range from the tribal seal to Georgia O'Keeffe prints, from old legal codes written in the Cherokee syllabic alphabet to framed letters from Ronald Reagan and George Bush.
"It just came and the staff put it up," she says dismissively of the Reagan letter, which congratulates the chief on her leadership.
"Ronald Reagan was not good on Indian issues at all. I met with him, along with some other people, and he didn't have the tiniest bit of interest in Indian issues," including increasing Federal funds for Indian health or education.
Still, his letter is up there on her wall.
As a tribal chief, she knows plenty of traditional dances.
But her favorite dancing song, she says, is Aretha Franklin's "Respect."
Chief Mankiller is at once the guardian of a centuries-old Cherokee heritage, encapsulated in the seal and the legal codes, and the chief executive of a major corporation, Cherokee Nation Industries, whose income from factories, a motel, gift shops, a ranch, a lumber company and other concerns accounts for nearly half the tribe's $76 million annual budget.
Call the chief and a recording says: "Thank you for calling the Cherokee Nation. If you're calling from a touch-tone phone and know your party's extension, please dial it now."
While the Cherokee have a much stronger economic base than many other tribes, and tend to mix their economic and social activities more freely with the surrounding non-Indian population, Chief Mankiller says the money the tribe directs back into health-care and job-training programs, Head Start and a local high school has not produced miracles.
"If you look at data over the last 20 years, we've had an impact in infant mortality and the educational attainment level," she says.
"We're nowhere near where we need to be on any of those issues, nowhere near, but we're headed in the right direction."
In her book, Chief Mankiller alternates accounts of the Cherokee Nation with her own personal narrative, both uncommon stories of survival.
In her case, a head-on automobile collision in 1979 almost killed her; she has battled a degenerative nerve disorder, myasthenia gravis, and a few years ago she would have died from kidney failure had an older brother not given her one of his kidneys.
"To think of myself outside the context of the tribe or my family or my community would be very difficult," she insists in the interview.
One of the most critical episodes in Chief Mankiller's life was the seizure in 1969 of Alcatraz, in San Francisco Bay, by a group of Indians who claimed the island "in the name of Indians of all tribes." They stayed there for 19 months, and Ms.
Mankiller visited frequently.
"I had felt there was something wrong with me because I wasn't happy being a traditional housewife," says Ms.
Mankiller, who at the time was married to a wealthy Ecuadorean businessman, Hugo Olaya.
"I started listening to what these people were saying. What Alcatraz did for me was, it enabled me to see people who felt like I did but could articulate it much better. We can do something about the fact that treaties are no longer recognized, that there needs to be better education and health care.
"This was also the time of the women's movement," she adds, growing more animated.
"I saw women standing up and speaking out. All these things were powerful influences on me."
She had returned to Oklahoma a few times to see relatives and in, 1971, to take home the body of her father, Charley Mankiller.
By 1977, divorced, she returned for good with her daughters, Gina and Felicia, who still live nearby with their four children.
"I never felt home until I came home," she explains.
"When I came back here, then I began to understand, this is where I belong."
"One day I went to the courthouse in Stilwell to check on some land and I'm walking across the courthouse square. And there's a group of Cherokee men, old guys chewing tobacco, just sitting in judgment of everybody and the world. And then someone said, 'Ho, there goes John Mankiller's granddaughter!' That had such an impact on me. It was very sweet to my ears. I knew I was home, because no one in a courthouse in San Francisco would have ever said that."
Another profound event a few years after she moved back was her marriage to Charlie Soap, 48, a full-blooded Cherokee and community activist whom she credits with helping her get involved with Cherokee issues and to win election as chief.
"My ideas were way more liberal than those of the people I was asking to elect me," she says.
But Mr.
Soap, who had been in the area a long time, helped to assure the elders that she was not too radical and emphasized that, at least before the arrival of the white man, Cherokee women played a major role in tribal government.
Ms.
Mankiller attracted considerable attention with her ascension to tribal leadership in the 1980's and her designation as a Woman of the Year by Ms.
Magazine in 1987 -- as well as with honorary degrees from several Ivy League colleges and installation in the National Women's Hall of Fame in Seneca Falls, N.Y.
She says that when publishers approached her about writing a book, she insisted that it cover plenty of Cherokee history and the flaws of several figures long revered in American history, from Columbus (she includes a quote from the Indian activist Russell Means that Columbus "makes Hitler look like a juvenile delinquent") to Thomas Jefferson.
What's next?
Next year she and her mother are off to Ireland to search for their roots.
And what about 1995, when she is up for re-election?
Her husband, ever the supportive political spouse, says: "I'd certainly like to see her continue. If she runs, I'll be there, supporting her, going down roads campaigning for her."
And Chief Mankiller, the successful politician, is judiciously noncommittal.
"I've kind of put off thinking about that, because it's two years away," she explains.
"Maybe I'll start thinking about it in the spring."


COMPANY BRIEFS
MFS COMMUNICATIONS CO., Omaha, signed a definitive agreement to acquire Fibernet Inc. for as much as $17.2 million in MFS stock.
MORRISON KNUDSEN CORP., Boise, Idaho, said it had been awarded three environmental contracts valued at more than $100 million to clean up two Superfund sites in California and several Army bases in Hawaii.


Bel Fuse Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New York City to Add Car Tracking System
An article in The Home Section last week about car security systems reported that Lo-Jack, a tracking system that leads the police to stolen vehicles, was not yet functioning in the state of New York.


Tense Moments at Museum
With scorching cinders in the air and the sky overhead in flames, the J. Paul Getty Museum was saved by "a kind of ambush." Page B18.


Administration Sweetens Trade Agreement Terms
Trying to help the medicine go down in the most delightful way for lawmakers gagging on the North American Free Trade Agreement, the Clinton Administration has won a new concession from Mexico that would limit sugar imports into the United States, trade officials said today.
As they presented Congress with legislation that would put the trade pact into effect, the officials said new arrangements had also been made that might limit imports of citrus fruit and vegetables, and they promised to monitor closely imports of products like electrical appliances, automobiles and brooms.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  CHINA LEADERS ISSUE DENG BOOK  China's top Communist officials appeared to be preparing for the death of Deng Xiaoping by issuing what is likely to be the final volume of his private speeches.
A3  TRADE PACT STANCE DOUBTED  Contradicting what has become a central argument for the North American Free Trade Agreement, trade experts say Mexico is unlikely to be flooded with new Japanese and European investments if the pact is defeated.
A10


Refugees Fleeing Fighting in Azerbaijan Flock to the Iran Border





RS Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dyersburg Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: An Electorate in Revolt; Voting Nationwide Was Less an Embrace Of G.O.P. Than a Warning to Incumbents
The three major Republican victories on Tuesday were less a partisan triumph than a warning that the revolt against established politicians that helped send President Clinton to the White House may imperil incumbents next year and ultimately threaten Mr.
Clinton himself.
The President said as much yesterday as he assessed the election of Republicans as Governors in Virginia and New Jersey and as Mayor of New York City.
"The American people want change and they want results," he said, echoing his message of the 1992 campaign, when he urged voters to choose him over President George Bush.


Jacobs Engineering Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


HAITIAN TALKS END ON A HOPEFUL NOTE
A group of diplomats, Haitian lawmakers and Government officials met today and said afterward they were optimistic that they could salvage a United Nations-sponsored agreement that called for the return of the nation's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
While members of the delegation said they hoped to resume the negotiations on Friday, it remained unclear whether the military had accepted the overture to return to the bargaining table.
No one from from the military was present at today's meeting, which was held at the home of Prime Minister Robert Malval.


Another Tumble In the Decline Of Main Street
The heart of another Main Street broke today.
Romm's &amp; Company, jewelers at No. 162, after 93 years here the oldest store in downtown Brockton, a Tiffany's to the working class, a store whose third-generation owner is this year's chairman of the downtown merchants' association, packed up and moved to a shopping strip near a highway interchange.
And one more boarded-up cadaver was left on a street where about half the commercial space stands empty.


Hooper Holmes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Celebrating the Many Lives of Linen
AT "Linen," an exhibit at the museum at the Fashion Institute of Technology in Manhattan, the ancient fabric is wrapped around a mummified cat, swathed as canopies and pleated into gossamer dresses.
It is used as theatrical scrim, to make fire hoses (the wetter it gets, the tighter the weave becomes) and towels (the fiber leaves no lint).
The 8,000-year-old fabric, not surprisingly, is being celebrated for its versatility.
"It can be anything from the sheerest of gauze to a sensuous velvet," said Dorothy Twining Globus, the director of the museum.
Its drawback?
"Wrinkles," she said.


Fire Diverted From Los Angeles After It Ravages the Malibu Area
One of the largest firefighting efforts ever undertaken in California succeeded early today in saving thickly populated areas of Los Angeles from a stubborn wildfire, but not before more than 200 homes and 35,000 acres were destroyed in the wealthy beachside enclave of Malibu and nearby canyons.
All night, fires of suspicious origin raged out of control until the Santa Ana winds from the desert abated this morning.
As winds changed, black and orange banks of smoke parted a bit, revealing a scene of terrible desolation to those in a helicopter above.
Vast tracts of rutted hills were blackened, sprinkled with white ash and littered with the forlorn ruins of once magnificent homes.


Radiation Systems Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Harper Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sales for Brooks Brothers Jump 10% in 6-Month Period
Marks &amp; Spencer, the crack British retailer, reported its half-year results yesterday, showing solid improvements at its Brooks Brothers subsidiary, where sales climbed 10 percent, to $169.5 million.
Over all, Marks &amp; Spencer said its pretax profits rose 20.7 percent, to $:307.8 million, or about $209 million.
Operating profits at Brooks, whose struggles during the recession were compounded by falling sales of men's suits, rose 18 percent, to $3.8 million.


Bank of San Francisco reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ogden Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dublin Journal; Nemesis of I.R.A., and No Friend to Protestants
In his hometown of Londonderry, there is an old joke about John Hume, the most respected and influential Roman Catholic leader in Northern Ireland: What is the difference between John Hume and God?
The answer: "God doesn't think he's John Hume."
Mr.
Hume, a 56-year-old former French teacher with a reputation for being haughty and humorless, has been the target of this kind of criticism for most of the 20 years he has been the chief Roman Catholic enemy of the Irish Republican Army and its campaign of violence.


37 Are Arrested In Document Sales
A team of Federal, state and local law-enforcement officials arrested 37 people today, including Federal and state employees, on charges that they sold or conspired to sell fraudulent driver's licenses, Social Security cards, "green" cards, passports and other documents used for personal identification.
The arrests followed a 2 1/2-year undercover operation in which Federal Bureau of Investigation agents bought 146 fraudulent documents -- for almost $19,000 -- from Motor Vehicles Department employees in New York City, Westchester and New Jersey, as well as from Federal employees in the Immigration and Naturalization Service and the Health and Human Services Department.


Review/Theater: The Lights; Crime, Drugs, Trash, the Homeless: Urban Reality at Its Grimmest
The bleak urbanscape that brought New York City a new Mayor this week can be found live onstage at the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater at Lincoln Center.
Howard Korder's play "The Lights" is set in an unnamed "large city" of "the modern era" that would have been right at home in Rudolph Giuliani's campaign commercials.
Crime, drugs and garbage are rampant.
The homeless are always underfoot.
Civic corruption is ubiquitous.
The good old immigrant values that once built the town are in rout.
And Mr.
Korder's prescriptions for salvation are vague.
"The Lights" is a two-hour, 40-minute wallow in the mess that would rather curse the familiar darkness with Expressionist flourishes than light any candles.
It is the second urban nightmare play to arrive Off Broadway this week -- following "The Treatment" at the Public -- and it often seems indistinguishable from recent productions of Jose Rivera's "Marisol" and Sophie Treadwell's "Machinal," not to mention the doomsday Gotham of Tim Burton's "Batman" films.
Given Mr.
Korder's penchant for David Mametesque dialogue, audiences with longer memories will find echoes of Mr.
Mamet's "Edmond" and "Water Engine" as well.


Sequoia Systems Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Thomas Nelson Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Collider Project Doomed Itself by Excess; No One Can Be Proud
To the Editor:


Boyd Gaming Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


GRC Intenational reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1993 ELECTION: Chronology; Tracking the Race for Mayor Since the Primary
Sept. 14: Dinkins easily wins three-way primary against Roy Innis and Eric Ruano-Melendez.
Sept. 17: Giuliani proposes drastically curtailing services for some of New York City's homeless, setting a stringent 90-day limit on many shelter stays.
Dinkins later accuses him of being heartless and punishing children.


Mr. Coffee Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


'Undecideds' Decided for Whitman
New Jersey's voters remained true on Tuesday to their reputation as an independent and volatile electorate by moving in the last weeks away from an incumbent Governor campaigning as a front-runner and handing a come-from-behind victory to Christine Todd Whitman.
An analysis of responses by nearly 2,000 voters leaving the polls from around the state suggests that Gov.
Jim Florio may have run the right campaign for an election being held in mid-October.
It was not until the last few weeks that Mrs.
Whitman, perhaps by softening her campaign style while Mr.
Florio stuck to a scorched-earth approach, captured a bloc of undecided voters that was more than large enough to provide her margin of victory.


Ben &amp; Jerry's Homemade Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Giants' Appraisal of Dallas: 'Definitely Beatable'
There may be ots of talk around the league that the Dallas Cowboys could win the rest of their games, but don't mention any of it to the Giants.
They'll have no part it.
They respect the Cowboys, but they are not in awe of them.
The Giants even seem to be a little cocky, if you go by some of the comments they made today.
And they drew a critical response from Dallas Coach Jimmy Johnson as the two teams turned up the volume in anticipation of their meeting Sunday in Texas.
Giants players talked about last year's Thanksgiving Day game at Texas Stadium, a 30-3 blowout won by the Cowboys.
Toward the end of the game, with the Cowboys in complete control, they were blitzing quarterback Dave Brown, then a rookie.
The Giants interpreted that as an attempt to humiliate them.
Call it trying to find emotional incentives for Sunday's game, call it whatever you wish, but some of the Giants talked about that game as if it were one of the greatest insults of all time.
"You don't forget things like that," said defensive end Keith Hamilton.
"Dallas is the type of team that if you go down, they are going for the jugular. That left a bad taste in my mouth. They had us down and just tried to kick us. You don't forget that. I know I didn't."
Linebacker Corey Miller said: "Jimmy Johnson is a coach that when you're down, he'll keep kicking and stomping. We remember what happened last year."
Johnson, told later in the day of those remarks, was clearly irked.
"It's a simple deal," said Johnson.
"They were trying to score, we were trying to stop them. I did not see their quarterback take a knee. If the quarterback takes a knee, we stop blitzing. I didn't see anybody pull back on us in 1989."
Johnson was referring to the Cowboys' 1-15 season in 1989, when teams were pummeling the sorry Cowboys.
Miller was the most vocal of the Giants players.
And he can probably talk all he wants since he is having an outstanding season.
Miller can back the talk.
And although he didn't say anything shocking, his comments are indicative of how many of the Giants feel.
That is, people are already awarding the division crown to Dallas.
Miller said he believes that the Cowboys are a great team and do have a shot at winning the rest of their games.
But he also said they are "definitely beatable" and "not as good as they were last year."
"I think defensively they're not as strong," said Miller.
"I don't think their linebackers are playing as well as they did last year. I think with our linemen, they can power them. But they're a good football team."
Dallas has dropped off slightly from last season.
It ranks seventh in the National Football League in total defense.
The Cowboys spent much of last season as the league's No. 1 ranked defense.
Cowboy Vows Defense Will Improve
"I'm getting tired of hearing about our run defense," said Cowboys defensive back Darren Woodson.
"We've struggled the last couple of weeks, but we can play better than that. We will prove it this week. You can quote that."
Miller said that one of the reasons for the defensive dropoff was the loss of defensive coordinator Dave Wannstedt, now the head coach of the Chicago Bears.
"To me, they're just not as good," Miller said.
"That's my opinion. They're a great football team. I'm not saying they're not. But it's not like they can't be beat." An Endorsement From Smith
They're not likely to be beat if running back Emmitt Smith has the kind of day he did against the Eagles -- 30 carries for 237 yards, the sixth-highest single-game total ever.
The Giants know that Dallas has only two or three running plays -- the problem is, no one can stop them.
That's because of Smith.
But he isn't taking the Giants' defense for granted.
"I think they're playing with a lot more confidence this year," said Smith.
"I think they have a great defensive scheme over there. They're pursuing the ball, they're getting after the ballcarrier. They're forcing some bad plays, and they're making a bunch of great plays also."
The Giants have allowed just one rushing touchdown this season and only 87 rushing yards a game, second in the conference.
"I just don't see him getting 200 yards against our defense," Miller said. EXTRA POINTS
LAWRENCE TAYLOR spent most of practice Wednesday riding a stationary bike as he tries to rest his hamstring injury.
Coach DAN REEVES said he was doubtful for Sunday's game, but the Giants will know more tomorrow.
Running back RODNEY HAMPTON practiced for the first time since injuring his left knee almost a month ago.
He looked fine and Reeves said he expects him to start.


Silver King Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Curaflex Health Services Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Intervisual Books Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CCP Insurance Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pachinko: A Game Or an Obsession?
PACHINKO is a pinball machine, complete with flashing lights and beeps, but made vertical and small ( 3 feet high by 20 inches wide).
In Japan, where the game has been played for prizes in commercial parlors since the 1940's, half of the adult population has played pachinko, according to the Japanese Cultural Exchange, a New York nonprofit organization.
Gambling is illegal in Japan, so players win balls, which are exchanged for merchandise on the premises.
Authorities apparently look the other way whenever the merchandise is exchanged once again for money at a redemption center, often located a few blocks away.


Ithaca Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sonic Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Connecticut; Mayor Perry Is Denied a Fourth Term by Voters in Hartford
Mayor Carrie Saxon Perry, known for her trademark broad-brimmed hats and a combative approach that often made City Hall a battlefield, was broadly rejected by voters on Tuesday after six years in office.
Ms.
Perry, a 62-year-old Democrat and the first black woman elected mayor of a major Northeastern city, was a formidable force in her first three elections.
But on Tuesday, she was trounced by Michael P. Peters, a city firefighter who had never run for office before.
Mr.
Peters challenged Ms.
Perry for the Democratic nomination for the largely ceremonial post in a primary in September and lost, then simply kept on running, putting himself onto Tuesday's ballot through petitions.
Votes From North End
He got 11,768 votes to 7,022 for Ms.
Perry, according to unofficial results, drawing votes even in some minority neighborhoods in the North End, where the Mayor was untouchable in past elections.
He will take office in December as the first white mayor of Hartford in 12 years.


Books of The Times; A Medley of the Literary and Political
Jack London, Hemingway and the Constitution Selected Essays, 1977-1992  By E. L. Doctorow 206 pages.
Random House. $20.
The unusual combination of subjects that the novelist E. L. Doctorow treats in this arresting collection of essays is apparent in its title, "Jack London, Hemingway and the Constitution."


Essay; 7 More in '94
To Tip O'Neill's dictum, "all politics is local," let me append Safire's Corollary: all local politics is now national.
Looking from the bottom up: a local election in a television age has a national impact.
Looking from the top down: the national fixation on Presidential fortunes has an effect on the decisions of voters in local elections.


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Voices; For Blacks, Loss by Dinkins Undermines Hopes of Change
The defeat of David N. Dinkins, the first black mayor of the nation's largest city, triggered painful soul searching yesterday among black supporters who saw it as a revealing commentary on the state of race relations in New York.
Many predicted that Mr.
Dinkins's loss will translate into a tougher, smarter battle for the empowerment of people of color in New York, where whites, despite being in the minority, now hold all three citywide elective offices.
In interviews yesterday from Queens to Harlem, black supporters of Mr.
Dinkins said the vote showed how race relations have deteriorated in a city that enjoys a liberal reputation.
Many questioned how Mr.
Dinkins, a Democrat, could lose in a city where members of his party outnumber Republicans 5-to-1, especially since most other Democratic officeholders won easily on Tuesday.


Jury Considers Mother Charged in Runner's Death
A jury began deliberating today in the case of a woman who first confessed to the murder of her track-star daughter and then recanted.
The defendant, Vivian King, a 43-year-old nurse's aide, testified this week that she falsely confessed to killing her 17-year-old daughter, Shilie Turner, after a grueling, 10-hour police interrogation last March.
She is charged with first-degree murder and could be sentenced to life in prison.


HomeTown Buffet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 6


Sports Products Deal For Shaquille O'Neal
Shaquille O'Neal, the Orlando Magic basketball star, added another product to his lengthening endorsement roster yesterday, signing an agreement with Score Board Inc. of Cherry Hill, N.J., a marketer and distributor of sports and entertainment products like trading cards and memorabilia.
The terms of the agreement were not disclosed.
The athlete's other product agreements include Pepsi-Cola and Reebok.


American Rice reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Theodore Nathan, 82, Executive and Writer
Theodore Reade Nathan, a retired New York hotel and advertising executive, died on Monday at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 82.
He had had a brief illness, his family said.


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Dinkins; Mayor Is Gracious in Defeat as He Calls for New Yorkers to 'Move Forward'
Mayor David N. Dinkins continued his virtuoso lesson in loser's politesse yesterday, beaming graciously on the steps of City Hall at the man who defeated him and cherishing the durability of the city and its people.
"Move forward, New York -- with love, with respect, and with the knowledge that the best is yet to come," said Mr.
Dinkins, a natty and relaxed host, as he welcomed Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani to the municipal pressure-cooker that comes with victory.


Towns Use Tax Incentives to Lure Companies
Years ago this affluent suburb of Hartford was able to rely on a low tax rate, good schools and even an unmistakable New England charm to persuade companies to move here.
But when Bauer Aerospace, a manufacturer of aircraft test equipment, approached Avon officials last spring about receiving tax abatements if they moved to Avon, town officials agreed.
Bauer saved itself about $32,000 in taxes over seven years, a small amount compared with the $4 million in grants it received from the state, but money Avon might not have had to give up four years ago.


Instron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Fritz Cos. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reader's Digest Assn.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Transplant of Garden to a School Is Approved
Despite the opposition of Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines, the New York City Board of Education voted yesterday to move a community garden onto the schoolyard of Louis D. Brandeis High School to make room for a 35-unit public housing project.
Trying to avoid the loss of low-income housing on the Upper West Side, the board voted 4 to 2 to move the 9,000-square-foot garden across West 84th Street, reducing by one-third an area used for physical education and recess activities at the school.


Officials Watch Clock on Strike Deadline
The National Hockey League offered its on-ice officials a 10 percent pay increase yesterday and then left the bargaining table to study a counterproposal.
The league's response is expected today, less than two weeks before the Nov. 15 strike deadline.
Today is "critical," according to DON MEEHAN, the player agent who is representing the officials.
"We are very quickly running out of room," Meehan said.
"In essence, we feel we are running out of time. It is more than an issue about money. It is also about respect."


Medisys Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dynamics Corp. of America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Celtics Are Not Singing the Blues, Yet
All the scars have not healed. The tremendous void has not been filled.
So the Boston Celtics will open the season Friday against the Knicks in Boston having little idea what to expect.
How can they?
Everything changed for them when Reggie Lewis, their leading scorer and captain, died tragically July 27 after collapsing.
Later, it was determined that he had an abnormally large and scarred heart.


Pricor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Davidson &amp; Associates Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Two Goals for Patrick; No Victory for Whalers
Flames 6, Whalers 3
James Patrick, whom Hartford acquired from the Rangers on Tuesday, scored two goals, but couldn't stop the Whalers' winless streak.
Hartford lost, 6-3, to the Flames, making the Whalers 0-8-1 over the past nine games and 1-5-1 at home this season.
Patrick, a defenseman who was acquired as part of the three-team, eight-player deal that sent Steve Larmer from Chicago to the Rangers, scored both of his goals in the second period.
He also assisted on Geoff Sanderson's 11th goal of the season.


Health-Chem Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Philadelphia Suburban Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Financial Benefit Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Stein Mart Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Kuhlman Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


JERUSALEM VICTOR REASSURES CRITICS
On his first day as Jerusalem's Mayor-elect, Ehud Olmert found himself deflecting worries today that his stunning victory over the long-governing Teddy Kollek would increase tensions between Arabs and Jews and between Orthodox and secular Jews in a city of easily frayed nerves.
As the first change at the top at City Hall in three decades, and as a leading Likud Party figure opposed to the Labor-led Government's peace policies, Mr.
Olmert was not surprised by the expressed concerns.


AutoFinance Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Burr-Brown Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Theater in Review
The Workroom  American Jewish Theater 307 West 26th Street Chelsea Through Nov. 14 By Jean-Claude Grumberg; translated by Tom Kempinski; directed by Nicolas Kent; set by James Wolk; costumes by Lee Austin; lighting by David I. Taylor; sound by Bruce Ellman; asssistant director, Gail Sicilia.
Presented by the American Jewish Theater, Stanley Brechner, artistic director.
WITH: Larry Block, Jennifer Gibbs, Ruby Holbrook, Peter Jacobson, Marcia Jean Kurtz, Deborah LaCoy, Caroline Lagerfelt, Jeffrey Landman, Leslie Lyles and Brent Rickaby.


CHRONICLE
This could be called a banner week for TONY CURTIS.
Today, he will be the guest of honor at a party in SoHo given by Ambassador Galleries, which is exhibiting his art.
On Tuesday, William Morrow published his book "Tony Curtis: The Autobiography." And on Sunday, he is scheduled to speak at the 92d Street Y.
"This all means a lot to me," he said yesterday from his hotel room, "to come back to the place of my birth, first as an actor, then as a painter -- and maybe when I grow up, as a doctor."


METRO DIGEST
THE 1993 ELECTIONS: WHITMAN SAYS SHE'S READY TO WORK Christine Todd Whitman, only hours after claiming a narrow victory over Gov.
Jim Florio, said she would get to work immediately to redeem a major campaign pledge: cutting income taxes for most residents.
A1.
The Republicans who lead the New Jersey Legislature begin distancing themselves from Whitman's plan to cut taxes by 30 percent.
B7.


Reviews/Fashion; Loud? Flamboyant? It's Oldham's Way
GETTING into a Todd Oldham show is as frenetic as getting into a rock concert.
Before Tuesday night's spring show in Bryant Park, the line of ticket holders stretched nearly to Fifth Avenue, and the line of ticketless hopefuls went all the way to the Avenue of the Americas.
Inside the tent, the lucky thousand or so who were granted admission seemed to have difficulty settling down.
Fashion professionals craned to see which celebrities the photographers were crowded around.
They turned out to include Jaye Davidson (in a gray flannel jacket and long black dress), Susan Sarandon (with two children on her lap), Blaine Trump (hiding under a March Hare hat), Quentin Crisp, Ru Paul and Anthony Kiedas of the Red Hot Chili Peppers.


Reviews/Fashion; A First Look at Lauren as Just Plain Ralph
RALPH LAUREN was not quite sure how he should introduce his secondary collection of casual clothes, called Ralph.
His competitors Donna Karan and Calvin Klein had staged separate fashion shows for their similar collections.
Mr.
Lauren decided to open his main show yesterday with a selection of his Ralph styles.
It was a wise decision.
They were the hit of his show.
They were decidedly informal, but they stopped this side of sloppiness.
They were young, but not out of bounds for the more mature woman.


Before the Crowds Arrive


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Ballots Measures; New Brooms Sweep In Power of Recall and Term Limits as Well as Candidates
New Weapon: The Recall
New Jersey voters gave themselves new leverage over elected officials Tuesday, approving a constitutional amendment that would allow the recall of everyone from borough council members to United States senators.
The measure, the only statewide ballot question, was approved by a margin of 75 percent to 25 percent.


Fuel Dispute Is Brewing In E.P.A.
In a collision between clean air in New York and foreign policy in Latin America, the Environmental Protection Agency in Washington is considering a request to let Venezuela ship gasoline to the Northeast that contains more of a smog-producing chemical than American refiners will be allowed to market.
The request from Venezuela has created an alliance of two perennial enemies, the domestic oil companies and the top environmental officials of the Northeastern states, who have asked the E.P.A. to deny the request.
But the Venezuelan Ambassador to the United States, in a stiffly worded letter, has complained that under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, to which both countries are signatories, the United States must allow the imports.
And officials in Washington say the State Department has asked the Environmental Protection Agency to interpret the gasoline rules in a way that favors the Venezuelans.


Capital Guaranty Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Muslim Thinkers Rally for Rushdie
For the first time since Salman Rushdie was condemned to death by Iran on the ground that he blasphemed Islam in his 1989 novel, "The Satanic Verses," an important group of Arab and Muslim writers and intellectuals has spoken out in defense of his right to publish the book.
Rather than simply putting their names to a joint declaration, though, each has written a brief essay or poem -- or in the case of the Moroccan composer Ahmed Essyad, a short piece of music -- dedicated to the British author and to the principle of freedom of expression.


United Healthcare reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Quarterback Understudy To Entertain Off Off Broadway
The Jets are 0-2 against backup quarterbacks this season, so they're in no position to take Miami's Scott Mitchell for granted.
Not that they would anyway, considering that Mitchell has been doing a pretty good impression of Dan Marino for the last three weeks.
"I told the players not to sell this guy short," Jets Coach Bruce Coslet said.
"He's been an understudy there for four years. He knows their offense. He doesn't look like a guy who hasn't played much. He's in total control."


Chinese Issuing What May Be Deng's Final Book
China's top Communist Party officials appeared to be preparing for the death of their paramount leader this week by issuing what is likely to be the final volume of Deng Xiaoping's private speeches.
The book includes blunt comments about his role in ordering the Tiananmen Square crackdown and his fear that democracy in China could ignite civil war.
The appearance of these valedictory writings at a time when the 89-year-old Mr.
Deng's health is reported to be failing, together with the saturation coverage they are receiving in official news media, reflects what Western diplomats here say is the insecurity of Mr.
Deng's successors over China's political stability after his death.


Boomtown Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Russia Warned Over Libya By U.S., Britain and France
The United States, Britain and France have warned President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia that relations between their countries will suffer if Moscow continues to block plans for new sanctions against Libya over its refusal to extradite two men accused in the bombing of a Pan American World Airways jet over Scotland five years ago.
President Clinton and Prime Ministers John Major of Britain and Edouard Balladur of France sent separate messages to Mr.
Yeltsin this week conveying this warning and saying that public opinion in their countries demands additional measures against Libya over the Pan Am bombing, in which 271 people were killed, diplomats here say.


House Breaks Impasse on Crime, Passing Limited Measures
After two years in which sweeping anticrime legislation has been stalled in Congress, the House of Representatives today approved a series of narrower and less divisive measures that would help state and local governments fight crime with 50,000 new police officers, treatment of drug-abusing prisoners and recreational activities for members of youth gangs.
But House leaders said that although these and perhaps other anticrime provisions might also be passed by the Senate and enacted by the end of the year, it was likely that a House-Senate conference would incorporate them once again into a broader package that might not be taken up by both houses until 1994.


Edmark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Larmer Knows Keenan's Method
Steve Larmer was a smoker when Mike Keenan took over as the head coach of the Chicago Blackhawks in June of 1988.
He had heard about Keenan's tough-guy reputation, his disciplined practices and emphasis on physical fitness.
What Larmer quickly learned, though, is that Keenan is uncompromising when it comes to some off-ice behavior, particularly the smoking of cigarettes.
And so, at age 27, Larmer quit smoking.


Davis Distributing reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Genzyme Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Celtics Are Not Singing the Blues, Yet
All the scars have not healed. The tremendous void has not been filled.
So the Boston Celtics will open the season Friday against the Knicks in Boston having little idea what to expect.
How can they?
Everything changed for them when Reggie Lewis, their leading scorer and captain, died tragically July 27 after collapsing.
Later, it was determined that he had an abnormally large and scarred heart.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
MUCH of childhood is marked by experimentation, including the search for altered states of consciousness.
A 5-year-old spins until dizzy.
An 8-year-old sits transfixed in front of a video game.
By the time they reach early adolescence, that normal experimentation can take a dangerous turn.
According to a 1992 national survey of eighth graders, released this year by the Institute for Social Research at the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor, approximately 70 percent of eighth-grade students say they've used alcohol, and 27 percent admit they've been drunk.
The next most popular drugs among children this age were cigarettes (45 percent), smokeless tobacco (21 percent), and marijuana or hashish (11 percent).


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Mayoral Elections; Results Hint at Secondary Role for Race
Six weeks after President Clinton, campaigning in New York, described some opponents of Mayor David N. Dinkins as unwilling to vote for "people who are different than we are," a notable feature of mayoral elections around the country was how secondary a role race and ethnicity played.
In Minneapolis, which is 78 percent white, Sharon Sayles Belton became the city's first black mayor by outpolling a white man, Jon Derus, who ran a law-and-order campaign.
In Seattle, Norman Rice, who four years ago became the first black mayor in a city that is 75 percent white, easily defeated a white opponent who focused on crime.


Mogilny Signs New Contract With Sabres
Right wing ALEKSANDR MOGILNY, who shared last season's N.H.L. goal-scoring title with TEEMU SELANNE of Winnipeg, signed a multiyear contract with the Buffalo Sabres, the team announced yesterday.
Terms were not disclosed, but the contract reportedly will pay an average base salary of $2.7 million for the next four years.


Computer Network Technology Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Three Dubious Political Fixes
Exit polls and anecdotal evidence suggest that voters in and around New York City agonized over their choices of candidates yesterday.
Which makes it all the more perplexing that these very same voters flocked to simplistic ballot proposals masquerading as cure-alls for America's political ills.
In New York City, voters overwhelmingly approved a proposal limiting elected officials to two consecutive four-year terms.
"Government here will never be the same," crowed Ronald Lauder, who spent $1 million campaigning for the idea.
It sure won't.
Eight years from now, everyone elected yesterday -- from Rudolph Giuliani on down -- could be on the streets.


30-Year Bond's Yield Jumps to 6.10%
The bond market continued its swoon yesterday, with prices of longer-term Treasury securities falling for the fourth straight day.
The price of the 30-year Treasury bond was hardest hit, as its price fell 21/32 point while its yield, which moves in the opposite direction, jumped to 6.10 percent, from 6.05 percent on Tuesday.


David D. Seltz; Franchise Expert, 83
David D. Seltz, an expert on sales and retail franchises, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 83.
His family said the cause was cancer.


Theater in Review
Stempenyu!
Folksbiene Playhouse 123 East 55th Street Through Jan. 17 Book by Sholom Aleichem; adapted by Dora Wasserman; directed by Bryna Turetsky; music by Eli Rubinstein; choreography by Felix Fibish; additional dialogue by Miriam Kressyn; set and lighting by Harry A. Feiner; costumes by Lorna Gotzman; stage manager, Judith Scher; translator, Hy Wolfe; technical director, Larry Zolotor.
Presented by the Folksbiene Playhouse of the Workmen's Circle, Ben Schechter, artistic director; Morris Adler, president.
WITH: Julie Alexander, Mina Bern, Richard Carlow, Shira Flam, Hershey Felder, Cara L. Gaffen, Miriam Greenberg, Norman Kruger, David Rogow and Zypora Spaisman.


A Sad Exit in Jerusalem
As Mayor of Jerusalem for 28 years, Teddy Kollek has presided memorably as the blunt-spoken but equitable magistrate of a fractious city.
In his prime, he would begin at dawn by walking through Jerusalem, paying its diverse inhabitants the courtesy of listening.
Parks and museums filled what had been battlegrounds; a once-divided city was united by efficient municipal services.
Even more impressive was the grudging respect accorded Mr.
Kollek by the resentful Arab third of Jerusalem's 550,000 inhabitants.
At 82, having lost an election he reluctantly contested, Mayor Kollek bows out at an awkward moment.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, who persuaded him to run, incautiously declared that local elections could be seen as a referendum on Israel's agreement to withdraw from Gaza and parts of the West Bank.
But his appeal backfired; turnout throughout Israel was low and his candidates lost in Tel Aviv as well as Jerusalem.


Ogden Projects Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Allied Healthcare Products Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Washington Federal Savings Bank (D.C.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Inbrand Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Florio; Clinton Offers Condolences on Defeat
The day after losing a race that some analysts viewed as a referendum on Bill Clinton's tough-love economic policies, Gov.
Jim Florio received a condolence call from the President.
"He said he and Hillary felt very badly," said Audrey Kelly, a spokeswoman for Mr.
Florio, who conveyed the gist of the early afternoon phone call.
"But he was very proud of the Governor and the race that he ran and the legacy that he'll leave."


International Recovery reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A. Louis Carafiello; Ad Agency President, 64
A.
Louis Carrafiello, president of Carrafiello Diehl &amp; Associates, an advertising agency in Irvington, N.Y., died on Monday at Phelps Memorial Hospital Center in North Tarrytown, N.Y.
He was 64 and lived in Ossining.
The cause was a heart attack, the family said.


SPSS Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Voters Speak, and Dummy Stays
It's a worker's dream come true.
A San Francisco police officer, Bob Geary, used a ventriloquist's dummy to make friends on his beat.
But his bosses were not happy.
They told him he needed written permission to use the dummy at work.


Jimmy A. Williams; Horseman, 76
Jimmy A. Williams, a former Hollywood stuntman who became one of the nation's leading trainers of Olympic riders and horses, died on Sunday at the Hospital for the Good Samaritan in Los Angeles.
He was 76.
The cause of death was respiratory failure, said Alan F. Balch, president of the Flintridge Riding Club in La Canada, Calif., where Mr.
Williams had been riding master since 1956.


Nets to Open With Options, Not Answers
Expect Dwayne Schintzius, who totaled 142 minutes of playing time for the 1992-93 season, to have some difficulty opening the regular season as the Nets' starting center.
He will be opposing Hakeem Olajuwon of the Rockets on Friday in Houston and David Robinson of the Spurs on Sunday in San Antonio.
So Coach Chuck Daly has been carefully considering his options.
One is the possibility of using the All-Star forward Derrick Coleman at center.
Another is to make Jayson Williams, the 6 foot 10 inch former St.
John's star, the backup to Schintzius.
It was Schintzius who was serving as the backup to the 7-foot Benoit Benjamin before Benjamin developed a urinary tract infection that will sideline him for another 10 days.


A Model of Consistency, Maddux Gets His 2d Young
Greg Maddux changed teams this year, but not much else changed.
Maddux, in fact, displayed remarkable consistency.
He was a 20-game winner for the second successive season, he led the National League in innings pitched for the third straight year and today he won the league's Cy Young award for the second straight time.
Winning in a romp over Bill Swift of San Francisco and his teammate Tom Glavine, the 1991 winner, Maddux became the first pitcher to win consecutive awards with two teams.
He pitched for the Chicago Cubs last year, then defected to the Atlanta Braves as a free agent.


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: Polls; New Jersey Voting Experts Try to Figure Out Where They Went Wrong
Was it a case of enormous changes at the last minute, or were the polls simply wrong?
Heading into Tuesday's election, every public poll except for one gave Gov.
Jim Florio a substantial lead, albeit a diminishing one, over his Republican opponent, Christine Todd Whitman.
Based on these polls, most newspapers in the New Jersey area, including The New York Times, treated Mr.
Florio as the likely winner.
Most Washington pundits who make a living off prognostication picked Mr.
Florio.


Nobels Pile Up for Chicago, but Is the Glory Gone?
The University of Chicago, the home of great conservative economists like Milton Friedman and George J. Stigler, has had an extraordinary run.
Just how extraordinary was underscored last month when Robert W. Fogel, an economist who revised history's view of slavery, took the university's fourth Nobel Prize in economics in four years.
With seven Nobel Memorial Prizes in Economic Science in all, the bold, brilliant, free-market Chicago school has won as many Nobels as M.I.T., Stanford and Harvard universities combined.
Long distinguished by its emphasis on empirical research, strikingly simple ideas and a biting, polemical style, Chicago has been kicking sand in Cambridge's face since its economics department was founded in 1892 by James Laughlin, an archconservative.


THE 1993 ELECTIONS: City Hall; Sea of Democrats Awaits Republican Mayor-Elect
For months Rudolph W. Giuliani appeared on the steps of City Hall as he campaigned for mayor.
Yesterday, the day after he was elected, he finally got to go inside, and the Republican-Liberal discovered that it was full of Democrats.
When he takes the oath of office on Jan. 1, he will find that the New York City Comptroller will be a Democrat.
So will the new Public Advocate, the Council Speaker, the Council majority and the Borough Presidents of Manhattan, Brooklyn, Queens and the Bronx.
The Governor, the majority leader of the State Assembly, the State Comptroller and the State Attorney General will all still be Democrats, as will the Congressional majority and the President.


A Step Up in the Shoeshine Business; New Chairs Outside Grand Central Are Welcomed by Some (but Not All) Shiners
For the shoeshine men in front of the entrance to Grand Central Terminal, life has long revolved around the simplest of cycles: the seasons, the weather, the surge and ebb of commuters.
On a nice day as many as two dozen shoeshiners would set up a makeshift shop from used furniture, plastic milk crates and all manner of throwaway things.
The assembled entrepreneurs would shout out about the shortcomings of passers-by's shines, wink at women they had grown to appreciate and joke endlessly with one another.
But last Friday, this tumultuous scene changed fundamentally.
Five high-backed, blond-wood chairs, upholstered in forest-green vinyl and costing more than $1,000 each, sprouted against Grand Central's southern wall on 42d Street.


Littelfuse Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Rock; Altered States of Sound
For music as obscure and cloudy as David Sylvian and Robert Fripp played at the Beacon Theater on Tuesday night, its presentation was surprisingly straightforward.
Everything about the music suggested otherworldly experiences, dream states.
When he sang, Mr.
Sylvian sang with a thick vibrato, using heavy baritone notes that at times sounded artless, like a parody of a drunken lounge singer.
It was all meant to imply a sort of melancholic emotionalism.
Mr.
Fripp dropped enigmatic ideas, short bursts of sound or melody through songs, usually distorted and misty, and sometimes recalling Arab or Indian scales.
By contrast the band just stood there, rarely suggesting anything at all, except professionalism.
That, too, was a pose, but at least it was fairly concrete.


Physicians Health Services Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Vote For Mayor and Comptroller by Assembly District
MAYOR
Bronx
Rptng
Dinkins
Giuliani
Marlin
Bockmn
Breman
74 Mott Haven, Hunts Point
100%
20,881
4,364
178
13
23
75 Clasons Pt. W Farms, E Trmnt
100%
17,436
4,316
145
10
15
76 Union Port, Parkchtr
100%
16,111
7,529
215
20
12
77 High Bridge, Morris Hghts
100%
18,050
2,080
80
33
14
78 Univ Heights, Fordham
100%
12,716
3,480
127
29
9
79 Tremont, Morrisania
100%
24,184
4,464
132
10
28
80 Morris Park
100%
9,137
19,797
309
35
28
81 Riverdale
100%
11,613
21,460
395
68
44
82 Thrgs Nk, Eastchtr, Baychtr
100%
13,840
24,603
345
25
43
83 Williamsbridge, Wakefield
100%
22,192
5,658
254
74
60
Total
100%
166,160
97,751
2,180
317
276
62.3%
36.7%
0.8%
0.1%
0.1%
Brooklyn
Rptng
Dinkins
Giuliani
Marlin
Bockmn
Brennan
39 Fltlnd, Canarsie, Mill Basin
100%
5,934
30,320
483
64
31
40 East New York, Brownsville
100%
22,350
1,377
81
11
8
41 Canarsie, Gravesend
100%
11,863
20,926
337
27
38
42 Midwood
100%
13,431
3,129
80
9
13
43 Crown Heights, Flatbush
100%
18,459
2,421
51
3
6
44 Flatbush, Park Slope
100%
13,925
17,002
296
99
82
45 Midwood, Manhattan Beach
100%
4,296
26,654
280
55
36
46 Coney Isl, Brighton Beach
100%
9,283
19,318
321
26
29
47 Gravesend, Bensonhurst
100%
2,922
23,361
363
115
33
48 Borough Park
100%
3,079
23,201
320
19
13
49 Bath Beach
100%
2,603
24,181
219
14
19
50 Greenpoint, Williamsburg
100%
11,261
13,369
243
15
20
51 Sunset Park
100%
11,307
7,583
235
37
27
52 By Rdg, Red Hk, Bklyn Hgts
100%
13,971
22,995
506
71
92
53 Bushwich
100%
11,158
5,755
152
35
25
54 Cypress Hills
100%
11,983
4,146
164
19
16
55 Crown Heights
100%
22,239
585
196
6
3
56 Bedford-Stuyvesant
100%
26,714
700
72
7
3
57 Fort Greene, Prospect Hgts
100%
25,822
1,961
108
29
21
58 Canarsie, Flatbush
100%
19,589
2,063
158
9
9
Total
100%
262,189
251,047
4,665
670
524
50.5%
48.4%
0.9%
0.1%
0.1%
Manhattan
Rptng
Dinkins
Giuliani
Marlin
Bockmn
Brennan
62 Low Man, City Hall, Chntwn
100%
10,711
12,279
182
77
61
63 Lower East Side
100%
19,094
17,353
328
89
111
64 Chelsea, Flatiron District
100%
18,256
16,468
295
96
116
65 Yorkville, Gracie Mansion
100%
13,388
24,055
361
58
80
66 W Village, SoHo, TribeCa
100%
24,290
15,754
201
143
153
67 W Vill, Chls, Clnt, U.W.S.
100%
22,108
19,180
196
223
96
68 East Harlem
100%
24,774
5,532
135
17
20
69 Upper W Side
100%
25,916
10,350
172
95
70
70 Central Harlem
100%
29,464
1,110
68
14
6
71 Manhattansville, Mrngsd Hgts
100%
21,634
7,065
156
43
23
72 Inwood, Washington Hgts
100%
10,337
4,772
449
58
19
73 Upper E Side
100%
13,386
26,455
285
32
77
Total
100%
233,358
160,373
2,828
945
832
58.6%
40.3%
0.7%
0.2%
0.2%
Queens
Rptng
Dinkins
Giuliani
Marlin
Bockmn
Brennan
23 Rkaways, How Bch, Ozone Pk
100%
5,793
30,079
447
28
28
24 Oakland Gardens, Douglaston
100%
8,472
32,839
472
57
45
25 Flushing
100%
6,275
14,630
294
23
27
26 Whitestone
100%
6,926
34,193
553
79
72
27 Utopia, Hillcrest
100%
8,917
24,285
365
26
48
28 Forest Hills, Rego Park
100%
7,322
29,288
331
38
50
29 St. Albans, Cambria Hgts
100%
23,795
5,011
131
12
4
30 Woodside
100%
5,326
22,557
463
40
53
31 S Ozone Pk, Locust Manor
100%
20,252
4,779
153
12
16
32 Jamaica, S Jamaica
100%
22,876
4,724
144
19
10
33 Qns Vill, Hollis, St Albans
100%
26,238
8,167
303
15
28
34 Elmhurst
100%
4,893
9,525
212
36
24
35 Corona
100%
11,478
6,625
138
32
19
36 Jackson Heights
100%
5,716
19,853
327
Y39
43
37 Sunnyside, Lg Isl City
100%
8,471
11,837
274
29
28
38 Lng Isl Cty, Woodsd, Elmhst
100%
3,868
26,186
567
68
36
Total
100%
176,618
284,578
5,174
553
531
37.8
60.9%
1.1%
0.1%
0.1%
Staten Isl
Rptng
Dinkins
Giuliani
Marlin
Bockmn
Brennan
59 North Shore
100%
11,595
26,136
702
48
69
60 Mid-Island
100%
5,230
37,801
713
45
146
61 South Shore
100%
3,718
45,428
659
30
47
Total
100%
20,543
109,365
2,074
123
262
15.5%
82.6%
1.6%
0.1%
0.1%
Citywide Totals
100%
858,868
903,114
16,921
2,608
2,425
48.1%
50.6%
0.9%
0.1%
0.1%
COMPTROLLER
Bronx
Rptng
Hevesi
Badillo
Lim
Bollrt
Harris
Kirklnd
74 Mott Haven, Hunts Point
100%
13,152
6,556
96
279
119
98
75 Clas Pt, W Frms, E Trmnt
100%
15,278
7,663
99
323
136
80
76 Union Port, Parkchester
100%
12,656
8,014
125
188
118
48
77 High Bridge, Morris Hgts
100%
13,813
2,973
81
191
130
68
78 Univ Heights, Fordham
100%
9,262
4,199
78
180
77
40
79 Tremont, Morrisania
100%
18,159
6,316
123
296
206
76
80 Morris Park
100%
10,098
16,136
194
292
126
71
81 Riverdale
100%
14,142
16,613
277
350
98
87
82 Thrg Nk, Etchr, Bychr
100%
14,927
19,796
385
337
141
77
83 Williamsbrdg, Wakefield
100%
19,451
5,424
92
209
101
48
Total
100%
140,938
93,690
1,550
2,645
1,252
692
58.5%
38.9%
0.6%
1.1%
0.5%
0.3%
Brooklyn
Rptng
Hevesi
Badillo
Lim
Bollrt
Harris
Kirklnd
39 Ftlnds, Cnrse, Mill Bsn
100%
11,593
21,767
349
281
61
42
40 East New York, Brnsvil
100%
17,096
1,812
68
162
105
55
41 Canarsie, Gravesend
100%
14,720
14,783
275
188
74
48
42 Midwood
100%
11,532
2,626
51
81
67
22
43 Crown Heights, Flatbh
100%
15,777
2,683
41
90
1,071
32
44 Flatbush, Park Slope
100%
15,692
12,553
203
180
189
88
45 Midwood, Manhtan Beach
100%
9,466
18,477
234
176
97
57
46 Coney Isl, Brghtn Beach
100%
10,811
14,380
234
238
96
53
47 Gravesend, Bensonhurst
100%
6,357
17,005
242
199
71
57
48 Borough Park
100%
5,707
17,710
350
186
279
98
49 Bath Beach
100%
5,440
18,303
234
204
51
44
50 Greenpnt, Williamsburg
100%
13,948
7,104
136
143
105
64
51 Sunset Park
100%
9,035
8,288
134
223
144
52
52 By Rg, Rd Hk, Bkln Hgts
100%
17,208
16,833
376
316
174
143
53 Bushwich
100%
6,827
6,843
89
166
97
58
54 Cypress Hills
100%
7,969
5,295
83
180
78
42
55 Crown Heights
100%
17,219
1,107
53
183
73
46
56 Bedford-Stuyvesant
100%
20,713
1,095
76
171
117
54
57 Fort Grne, Prspect Hgts
100%
22,099
1,917
75
113
171
59
58 Canarsie, Flatbush
100%
16,546
1,738
129
114
67
23
Total
100%
255,755
192,319
3,432
3,594
3,187
1,137
55.7%
41.9%
0.7%
0.8%
0.7%
0.2%
Manhattan
Rptng
Hevesi
Badillo
Lim
Bollrt
Harris
Kirklnd
62 Lr Man, Cty Hl, Chnatwn
100%
10,426
9,312
316
114
137
89
63 Lower East Side
100%
20,037
13,005
274
216
210
160
64 Chelsea, Fltiron Dist
100%
20,660
11,670
264
163
182
153
65 Yorkvle, Gracie Mans
100%
20,142
15,026
310
181
109
148
66 W Vill, SoHo, TribeCa
100%
26,123
10,744
225
122
332
217
67 W Vil, Chls, Clnt, UWS
100%
26,898
12,088
222
129
218
164
68 East Harlem
100%
17,638
6,425
148
171
157
179
69 Upper W Side
100%
25,541
7,640
149
143
234
117
70 Central Harlem
100%
23,600
1,663
62
129
126
36
71 Manhtnsvle, Mrngsd Hgts
100%
18,179
5,607
107
123
146
336
72 Inwood, Washington Hgts
100%
7,912
4,668
115
296
125
199
73 Upper E Side
100%
20,415
16,814
345
199
56
90
Total
100%
237,571
114,662
2,537
1,986
2,032
1,888
65.9%
31.8%
0.7%
0.6%
0.6%
0.5%
Queens
Rptng
Hevesi
Badillo
Lim
Bollrt
Harris
Kirklnd
23 Rkawys, How Bch, Ozne Pk
100%
12,428
19,989
362
345
69
53
24 Oklnd Gardens, Doglastn
100%
18,289
20,228
487
296
70
263
25 Flushing
100%
8,618
10,208
398
170
112
41
26 Whitestone
100%
15,896
22,275
461
385
93
66
27 Utopia, Hillcrest
100%
16,062
14,673
354
286
90
71
28 Frst Hills, Rego Park
100%
18,971
15,875
308
178
60
53
29 St. Albans, Cmbria Hgts
100%
21,244
4,066
112
153
118
33
30 Woodside
100%
9,828
15,346
393
268
73
62
31 S Ozne Pk, Locust Mnr
100%
17,004
4,000
207
200
109
48
32 Jamaica, S Jamaica
100%
20,280
3,744
107
173
108
45
33 Qns Vill, Holl, St Albns
100%
24,237
6,619
224
280
112
44
34 Elmhurst
100%
5,686
7,315
165
137
45
35
35 Corona
100%
11,224
5,065
157
111
65
29
36 Jackson Heights
100%
9,028
13,327
461
300
126
80
37 Snyside, Lg Isl City
100%
8,882
8,501
209
224
123
321
38 Lg Is Cy, Wdsd, Elmhrst
100%
9,087
17,896
511
342
73
71
Total
100%
226,764
189,127
4,916
3,848
1,446
1,315
53.1%
44.2%
1.2%
0.9%
0.3%
0.3%
Stn Isl
Rptng
Hevesi
Badillo
Lim
Bollrt
Harris
Kirklnd
59 North Shore
100%
14,475
17,880
545
714
178
134
60 Mid-Island
100%
11,398
25,737
545
668
140
124
61 South Shore
100%
10,417
31,984
723
776
101
93
Total
100%
36,290
75,607
1,813
2,158
419
351
31.1%
64.8%
1.6%
1.9%
0.4%
0.3%
Ctywd Totals
100%
897,318
665,399
14,248
14,231
8,336
5,383
55.9%
41.4%
0.9%
0.9%
0.5%
0.3%


Mr. Giuliani's Victory
The insults flew until the the polls closed, but when the the vote was in, Mayor David Dinkins and Rudolph Giuliani put aside the bitterness that marked their campaign and behaved with a decency and civility that made New Yorkers proud of both men.
With characteristic grace, the defeated Mr.
Dinkins urged his crestfallen supporters to rally behind Mr.
Giuliani, and went on to put the election in eloquent perspective: "You see, you see, my friends," Mr.
Dinkins explained, "elections come and go, candidates come and go, mayors come and go, but the life of the city must endure." That one word, "endure," conveyed an understanding of the complexity and magnitude of the problems ahead for the next mayor, and an appreciation that he cannot hope to solve them without a shared commitment by all.


L.B. Foster reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Benefit for Bosnian Writers
"An Evening for Sarajevo: A Benefit for Bosnian Writers," a public reading presented by the PEN American Center on Nov. 30, is to feature Joseph Brodsky, Mary Gordon, Jamaica Kincaid, Tony Kushner, Arthur Miller, Susan Sontag, Derek Walcott, Wendy Wasserstein and several other writers.
A special guest at the reading, to be held at 7:30 P.M. at Symphony Space, Broadway at 95th Street, will be Zlatko Dizdarevic, a writer from Sarajevo.
The trumpet player Wynton Marsalis has composed a work for the occasion.
Tickets are $20.
Information: (212) 864-5400.


Theater in Review
How the Other Half Loves  Theater at St.
Peter's Church 619 Lexington Avenue (at 54th Street) Through Nov. 21 By Alan Ayckbourn; directed by Alex Dmitriev; set by James Morgan; costumes by Holly Hynes; lighting by Jerold R. Forsyth; original music by Steven D. Bowen; fight direction by Ricki G. Ravitts; production stage manager, Alan Bluestone; production manager, Joseph V. DeMichele.
Presented by the York Theater Company, Janet Hayes Walker, producing director; Molly Pickering Grose, managing director, in association with One World Arts Foundation Inc., W. Scott McLucas, executive director; George Rondo, artistic director.
WITH: Mary Kay Adams, Peter Bloch, Susanne Marley, James Murtaugh, Woody Sempliner and Tracy Thorne.


Public &amp; Private; Like It Was
Covering the first Koch administration was as easy as covering the circus: if you can't get a story out of all those acrobats, high-wire acts and clowns, you might as well pack up your notebook and go into arbitrage.
The Mayor was three rings, all by himself, when the anecdotes were still new and the shtick still fresh.
Sitting for an interview in the back of the sedan one day, he told me this story: he had been on the boardwalk at Coney Island when an elderly woman took his hand.
"Mayor," she said, "make it like it was."


Burlington Industries Equity Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Au Bon Pain Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Investors Bid Up I.B.M. While Others See Risk
Last week, after seven months on the job, Louis V. Gerstner Jr., the chairman of I.B.M., issued an assessment along with the company's financial results for the third quarter.
"I am confident I.B.M. is on the right track," he declared.
Many investors apparently share that confidence, bidding up the price of the International Business Machines Corporation's shares by 13 percent, to $50.75, since the company reported a smaller-than-expected loss last week.
On Tuesday, the stock jumped $3, after a longtime critic of I.B.M., Thomas T. Rooney, an analyst at Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, upgraded his rating to "very attractive" from his previous "neutral" designation.


Many Tiny Ripples Create a Sea Change
Rudolph W. Giuliani's victory resulted less from seismic changes in voters' attitudes than from tiny shifts in the voting blocs that he and Mayor David N. Dinkins assembled four years ago, the first time they ran against each other.
This time, Mr.
Giuliani was helped by higher turnouts in white neighborhoods, especially on Staten Island, where enthusiasm for the secession referendum drew more people to the polls.
The increased turnout on Staten Island accounted for half of his winning margin of 44,000 votes.


Elek-Tek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article in Science Times on Oct. 26 about the demise of the superconducting supercollider project misspelled the name of the Treasury Secretary.
He is Lloyd Bentsen.


Bio-Rad Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Collider Project Doomed Itself by Excess; No One Can Be Proud
To the Editor:


Trimas Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Prudential Securities' lawyers are working aggressively to limit the firm's liability in a fraud, brokerage executives say, despite public statements that it hopes to make amends to investors who lost millions in limited partnerships.  [ Page D1. ]
I.B.M. management's confidence about the company's direction is not shared by all analysts.  [ D1. ]


Devils Happy to See Ducks
At least the Mighty Ducks are next.
On a shot that literally went through their goalie's wickets (legs), the Devils fell to the Los Angeles Kings Wednesday night and began thanking their lucky stars for expansion.


BellSouth May Join QVC Bid
The BellSouth Corporation is close to signing a deal to invest at least $2 billion in QVC Network Inc.'s bid for Paramount Communications Inc., two executives with knowledge of the discussions said yesterday.
Besides providing QVC with the money to raise its hostile $9.5 billion bid for Paramount, such a deal could substantially alter the alliances that have been struck between the telecommunications and entertainment industries.


Old Republic International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Olsten Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Sampras, Becker Gain  Top-seeded Pete Sampras and the three-time champion Boris Becker, seeded third, advanced to the quarterfinals of the $2.1 million Paris Open with straight-set victories today.
Sampras beat Marc Rosset of Switzerland, 7-5, 6-3.
Becker kept alive his undefeated streak in the tournament by defeating Karel Novacek of the Czech Republic, 7-6 (11-9), 6-2. (AP) Garrison-Jackson Overcomes Nerves Even though Tracy Austin's comeback attempt is still in the fledgling stage, the prospect of facing the former two-time United States Open champion made Zina Garrison-Jackson nervous.
Even though Austin, 30, is back on the tour after a 10-year layoff, when Garrison-Jackson stepped onto the court Wednesday night to play her in the second round of the Bank of the West Classic, in Oakland, Calif., she wanted to play her best.
She did, losing only 2 points on her serve in winning the first set, 6-0, and then taking the second, 6-2, in a match that lasted 55 minutes. (AP) GOLF  Magee Leads Kapalua  Andrew Magee, recording a birdie and eagle on consecutive holes, shot a six-under-par 67 to take the first-round lead yesterday at the Kapalua International in Hawaii.
Scott Hoch, Peter Jacobsen and Noland Henke were two strokes back at the Kapalua Resort on the island of Maui. (AP)


Boots Make a Statement: Is It Fashion or Politics?
The idea was to rid the high school of what officials said were emblems of violence and hate, thick-soled storm trooper boots, Los Angeles Raiders jackets and other attire favored by skinheads and gangs.
But the idea apparently got out of hand in this quiet Dallas-Fort Worth suburb, with Doc Martens, both boots and shoes, suddenly being put into the same category as storm trooper boots when school officials began enforcing a ban on Monday.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  TOKYO AUTO MAKERS PINCHED  The yen's rise comes at a bad time for Japanese auto makers, who are seeing car prices pushed up in the United States while sales in Japan are hurting.
A1  AIDS ANXIETY GROWS IN EUROPE  Charges that a German company distributed AIDS-infected blood to hospitals is spreading anxiety in Germany.
The scandal has now erupted in other European countries where hospitals bought blood from the firm.
A1


Primerica Team Would Manage Travelers
The Primerica Corporation, which has said it will change its name to Travelers if it completes the acquisition of the insurer as expected later this year, has not included any Travelers executives in the top ranks of the new company.
Instead, in a management reorganization announced yesterday, Primerica said control of the company would reside with a core of four Primerica executives, most of whom have long associations with Primerica's chairman and chief executive, Sanford I. Weill.
Adding a Title
Among the four, James Dimon, the 37-year-old who has been Mr.
Weill's protege and right-hand man for more than 10 years, will continue as president and add the title of chief operating officer.
Mr.
Dimon has played a central role in arranging and negotiating mergers and acquisitions, starting with Mr.
Weill's takeover of the Commercial Credit Corporation in 1986, and continuing through this year's acquisitions of the Shearson brokerage business from American Express and the Travelers Corporation.
Robert I. Lipp will be chief executive of the Travelers insurance business, and has been the Primerica official most involved in the Travelers efforts to cut costs and improve business since December 1992, when Primerica bought a 27 percent stake in the company.
Mr.
Lipp, who is 55, was a former president of Chemical Bank who joined Commercial Credit in 1986 and is credited with transforming it into a highly profitable consumer-finance company.
Frank G. Zarb, who is 58, has been an associate of Mr.
Weill at various times since the 1960's.
Mr.
Zarb will continue as head of Primerica's Financial Services, an insurance agency specializing in sales of term life policies to middle-income consumers.
He will also continue to head American Capital Management and Research, a mutual fund company with $16.6 billion of assets.
Robert F. Greenhill, the newest member of Primerica's cadre of senior executives, will continue as chairman and chief executive of Smith Barney Shearson, the securities firm.
Since leaving Morgan Stanley in June, Mr.
Greenhill, who is 57, has hired more investment bankers so the securities firm's corporate finance businesses can grow and match the stature of the branch-office network.
His connections landed Smith Barney Shearson the role as adviser to Viacom Inc. in its bid for Paramount Communications.


Review/Art; From the 19th Century, Works by Americans Not Often Encountered
With much attention being paid to the reopening of the Metropolitan Museum of Art's 19th-Century European art collection, it is easy to overlook the less grandly packaged group shows of American work from the same period on view in Manhattan.
In addition to "Dreams and Shadows" at the National Academy of Design (review on page C31), there are several group shows, large and small, all of which offer seldom-encountered work.
Two of the exhibitions are at the Metropolitan itself.
"Master Drawings of the Hudson River School" is a selection of some three dozen works on paper.
In broad outlines, the history of American landscape painting is here in a nutshell, from its sleepy topographic beginnings to Thomas Cole's romantic "Fountain" (1843), as atmospheric as an opera set.
In the tenderly rendered tree studies of Jervis McEntee one finds the blend of pragmatism and poetry that defined the American landscape at its best, a mixture also evident in the work of Frederic Edwin Church.
His "Tequendama Falls Near Bogota, Colombia" has a gestural burst of white gouache for falling water, but beside it are color notions rendered in a precise, penciled script.


Islanders Extend Free Fall on Skates
This Islander defeat had a rare and enhanced level of frustration.
When they lost by 4-2 to the Chicago Blackhawks tonight, two of Chicago's goals came on deflections off New York sticks, and two came after Islander players broke their sticks and skated with nothing in their hands.
During the second period, when the Islanders took 42 of Referee Kerry Fraser's 60 penalty minutes, Vladimir Malakhov got a two-minute penalty for unsportsmanlike conduct and a 10-minute misconduct for something he said to Fraser; and Darius Kasparaitis got two minutes for cross-checking and 22 more for many things he said that prompted Fraser to eject him.


Inside Art
Gains and Losses at the Met
There has been an unusual amount of activity this week at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
For starters, the institution is $10 million richer, thanks to Doris Duke, the heiress and philanthropist who died on Oct. 28.
The museum didn't know of its windfall until Tuesday, when Howard J. Rubenstein Associates, the public relations concern, announced the contents of Ms.
Duke's will for the executors.
"It is highly unusual to find out about a bequest from a public-relations firm," said Harold Holzer, the Met's chief communications officer.
"But we'd be happy to take a surprise like that every week."


U.S. Troops to Help Clear Roadblocks in Somalia
American soldiers in Somalia will use newly arrived tanks and armored personnel carriers to assist United Nations forces in clearing roadblocks from the streets of Mogadishu, the Pentagon said today.
The plan to help open supply routes in the city was part of the strategy the White House announced last month in dispatching the armored reinforcements to the East African country.
But it represents a more assertive American posture than has been displayed in the weeks since, in which United States soldiers have remained essentially confined to guarded compounds.


A Stronger Yen Is Hurting Sales Of Japan's Cars
The Big Three may still be complaining in Washington and Tokyo that prices of Japanese cars and trucks are suspiciously low.
But Japanese prices have risen faster than those of American auto makers, and in the marketplace the Americans have not hesitated to crow about why.
"It's the exchange rate, you simpleton," declares a television advertisement promoting relatively cheap Oldsmobiles.
Despite their best efforts, Japanese auto makers' combined share of the American car and truck market is slipping.
In fact, over the course of the 1993 model year, which ended in September with 13.6 million vehicles sold, the Japanese companies lost almost a full percentage point of the market -- their biggest loss in a decade -- to 23.7 percent.
The Big Three gained a point and a half over all, to 73.4 percent.
HB&gt;A $3,300 Disadvantage
For the Japanese, the timing of the strong yen could not be worse.
It comes as a torpid car market and rising labor costs in Japan are slicing into profits, and the Big Three are selling much-improved cars and trucks.
In October, several Japanese auto makers saw sales of their imports plunge even as sales of their North American-built vehicles rose, reflecting in part the burden of the higher yen.
Vehicles built in Japan and sold in the United States now cost about $3,300 more than comparably equipped counterparts built by the Big Three, according to a study by Ronald A. Glantz, an auto industry analyst for Dean Witter.


ISM Information reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Elcotel reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cable Car Beverage reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Spoken Word
TONY CURTIS, 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
The actor, who made his acting debut 50 years ago at the Y, will speak with Charlie Rose.
Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $16.
Information: (212) 996-1100.
OPERA LECTURE, 70 Lincoln Center Plaza, Kaplan Penthouse, 10th Floor.
A discussion of Mozart's "Die Zauberflote" by Bridget Paolucci, a lecturer and music correspondent for National Public Radio.
Tomorrow at 11:45 A.M.
Sponsored by the Metropolitan Guild.
Admission: $8.
Information: (212) 769-7021.


In New Tajikistan, Islam Can Be a Crime
To the Editor:
When the Russian Army helped bring to power a neo-Communist Government in Tajikistan, we were too afraid of the constructed fear of "fundamentalism" to understand what really happened.


Selfix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Balchem Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Stepan Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Robert Jacobs, 88, An Architect Noted For Asphalt Plant
Robert Allan Jacobs, who practiced architecture in New York for 40 years, died yesterday at his home in Pawling, N.Y.
He was 88.
The cause was heart failure, said his wife, Margot.


Favored Knicks Expect Few Favors
Finally, the waiting has ended.
The Knicks open their much-anticipated 48th season Friday night in Boston against the Celtics.
It is a matchup of two teams with far different expectations.
New York, coming off a 60-victory season and an Atlantic Division championship, is the favorite to win the Eastern Conference and one of the favorites to win the National Basketball Association championship.
The Celtics, still reeling from the death of Reggie Lewis this past July 27, are in danger of suffering their first losing season since 1978-79, the last time they failed to make the playoffs.


While Senator Deliberated, a Top Aide Politicked
At the same time that Senator Orrin G. Hatch had been saying publicly that he had not made up his mind about a Clinton Administration judicial nominee, one of his a top aides began distributing damaging material about her which supporters characterized as a smear campaign.
Senator Hatch said in an interview today that he had been unaware that his senior aide was sending out the packets urging the journalists to stir up a campaign against the nominee, Rosemary Barkett, the chief justice of the Florida Supreme Court.


Kemper Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Art in Review
'The New Bauhaus/School of Design in Chicago'  'Photographs 1937-44'
Banning and Associates  138 West 18th Street  Chelsea  Through next Friday
When Laszlo Moholy-Nagy moved to Chicago shortly before World War II, he carried with him an interest in unusual photographic effects that had characterized his earlier teaching at the Bauhaus in Germany.
This valuable show includes work from 1937 to 1944 by Moholy-Nagy, other teachers and students at the school he founded, known first as the New Bauhaus, then as the School of Design in Chicago.


Associated Communications Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gore and Perot Are Set to Debate Trade Accord
The White House dared Ross Perot today to debate Vice President Al Gore on the North American Free Trade Agreement before the House votes on it in two weeks, and Mr.
Perot quickly accepted.
The challenge was publicly issued by President Clinton as he campaigned here for the accord, which Mr.
Perot has long denounced as an ill-conceived deal that would send American jobs flowing to Mexico.


747 Skids Off Hong Kong Runway Into the Sea


Review/Film; A Family That Overcomes (Music, Please)
"A Home of Our Own" is a shamelessly heart-warming family memoir that, with a good, crafty performance by Kathy Bates and with soundtrack music that tells you when to sob, often succeeds.
Tony Bill directed Patrick Duncan's screenplay, which is set in 1962 and is about the self-styled "Lacey tribe," six indomitable children, 5 years old to 15, and their plucky, widowed mom, Frances (Ms. Bates).
When first seen in Los Angeles, Mom is at the end of her rope.


Ripples in an Election
The elections on Tuesday were not about President Clinton, and certainly not about the North American Free Trade Agreement.
But some in Washington think the results will make it harder for President Clinton to prevail when the North American Free Trade Agreement comes up for a decisive vote in about two weeks.
"Clearly Nafta has long-term advantages," said Representative Robert G. Torricelli of New Jersey, one of the small band of Democrats still undecided on the issue.
"But I have to balance that against the short-term economic pain I would be asking some of the workers in my district to accept. The election showed how high people's anxieties about jobs are, in addition to higher taxes, at least in my state, so it strengthened my reservations about Nafta."


U.S. Should Match Europe's Shorter Workweek; Illusory Recovery
To the Editor:
You report Oct. 25 that President Clinton believes the economy has turned the corner, on the path of a steady recovery.
To get a better perspective on this view I urge the President to visit Vermont, where in the last year a Digital plant has closed, St.
Johnsbury Trucking has closed, Johnson Controls is planning a shutdown, I.B.M. and G.E. have slashed hundreds of well-paying jobs, and workers from several companies are negotiating give-back contracts.


Consultant to Head Foote, Cone Office
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding said yesterday that it had appointed Joel Hochberg to head its Los Angeles office as executive vice president and general manager, effective on Monday.


Alpine Lace Brands (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sweet Mystery of Life, At Last I've Found It
Beavis and Butt-head were rewarded this week for renewing their Rangers season tickets.
In a trade, the Blues dealt off two skilled and popular skaters and gained a certified goon who was unavailable to fight for the Rangers right away because he was under suspension.
People must like violence in their sports.
While everyone's talking about health-care reform, here's football doing its best to cripple healthy young men.
And boast about it.
The National Football League offers enough carnage in its relentlessly marketed crunch-time videos to keep Tom and Jerry flattened forever.
Here's baseball, the Pastime, where throwing the ball at a batter's head is a critical tactic.
Little Leaguers learn it.
So-called trash-talking in basketball is a form of brutality that came from the meanest streets as, depending on your urbanologist, a toughening survival technique or a way of keeping everyone down.
Boxing still exists.
In fact, the week began with the first sanctioned amateur bout between women, in the state of Washington.
And if the World Cup succeeds in sowing a soccer legacy in America, the game that sprouts will be more violent than what now exists.
Face it; we like it.


RLI Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American Re Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


On My Mind; Sidewalks: Clinton and Giuliani
The Dinkins mayoralty campaign in New York City was rich in celebrities, a whole glitter of them -- singers, actors, big-name politicians, rappers, comedians, and of course the two greatest superstars of all, Bill Clinton and Barbra Streisand.
But the Giuliani campaign struck back with its own Hollywood and Broadway contingent.
It was called Ron Silver.


Landauer Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pratt &amp; Lambert Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Diversity's Down Side; Image and Reality Clash in a New Jersey Town, and Hispanic Residents Feel the Impact
The men who used to gather in front of stores here to shoot the breeze are gone, brushed off the streets in recent weeks in police sweeps that made loitering seem like a major crime.
The sweeps, prompted by business owners who complained that the men were scaring off customers in Dover's quaint, turn-of-the-century downtown, were among several efforts the town has made recently to attract visitors.
Two weeks ago, there was a five-kilometer race, and before that a food festival and street fair.


Bids Allowed By Contractor In Plea Accord
Last year, a New York City school construction contractor suspected of evading Federal taxes made a bid for leniency, the authorities say.
Seeking a softer sentence, he offered to help expose a bid-rigging scheme in the school construction and repair programs.
The contractor secretly pleaded guilty and became an undercover informer for Federal prosecutors and for the city's School Construction Authority, the agency that awards school contracts.
For their part, besides promising to put in a good word with the judge in his tax case, the authorities agreed to another benefit for the contractor: his company was allowed to obtain $10 million in school work, even though his tax conviction would normally have disqualified him from bidding for such contracts.


Immunomedics Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Duff &amp; Phelps Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Possible Link Examined in Cabby Slayings
A single assailant, wanted in the wounding of a taxi driver last month, may also be responsible for the killing of two other drivers over the last few weeks, police investigators said yesterday.
The Chief of Detectives, Joseph R. Borrelli, said the man wanted in the wounding of a driver on Oct. 15 in Astoria, Queens, may also have shot and killed a driver the next day in Washington Heights and also murdered another driver, whose body was found in his cab earlier this week on a Bronx street.


CWE Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Film; Cowboy Mythos In London
The appeal of American cowboy mythology is so potent that almost anybody can succumb to it.
That is one of the themes of "Wild West," an antic romp about three Pakistani brothers in London who form a country-and-western band called the Honky Tonk Cowboys.
Stoked on the hard country music of Steve Earle and Dwight Yoakam and decked out in fringe and a cowboy hat, the band's leader, Zaf Ayub (Naveen Andrews), dreams of making it big in Nashville.
Zaf's fantasies are hyped by the band's loony manager, who drives a garish limousine and totes a pistol.


Age Will Be Served
At 65, BOB COUSY says he has just reached the speed limit of age and now that the National Basketball Association All-Star Game will no longer feature an old-timers game, he needs a new arena in which to dish out the assists that made him legendary.
He appeared at the Marriott Marquis Hotel in Manhattan as the formation of one was announced yesterday.
It will be an international Senior Games, for athletes at least 50 years old, and will be held every three years in Bermuda, starting April 13-27, 1996.
The expected 3,000 participants in a wide range of sports will not need to qualify as in the Olympics, and there will be two levels of competition: elite and masters.
More information can be obtained by calling (800) 223-6106.


Art in Review
'Dreams and Shadows' 'Thomas H. Hotchkiss in 19th-Century Italy'
National Academy of Design  1083 Fifth Avenue (at 89th Street)  Through Jan. 16
Now all but forgotten, Thomas H. Hotchkiss had the sort of brief career ending in poverty and an early death of tuberculosis that epitomized the Romantic cliche of an artist's life.
He was born in the 1830's in Coxsackie, N.Y., and died in 1859 in Sicily, having spent much of his short career painting Rome, its surrounding countryside and other picturesque corners of Italy.


Meridian Insurance Group Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Anti-Turkey Kurdish Separatists Blamed for Attacks Across Europe
Kurdish separatists attacked Turkish embassies and offices across Europe today, killing one person, wounding at least 23 others and inflicting serious property damage.
It was the second time this year that Turkish targets in Europe have been attacked in coordinated assaults.
The attacks today were carried out in at least 25 communities in Germany and 3 in Switzerland, as well as in London, Copenhagen and Vienna.
The fatality was in the German city of Wiesbaden, where a 30-year-old Turkish patron at a Turkish restaurant died in a firebomb attack.


Art in Review
Peter Campus
Paula Cooper Gallery  149 Wooster Street (at Houston Street)  SoHo  Through next Friday
Somber images of nature dominate this beautiful show.
In his latest computer-altered photographs, now in color, Peter Campus uses close-ups of dying leaves, stark tree trunks and insects to create a sense of a nature more ominous and unsettling than nurturing.


Columbia Healthcare Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Union to Get Trustee
The Manhattan District Attorney's office and a national plumbers union yesterday agreed to the appointment of a trustee to run a New York City local whose top officials were indicted last month on corruption charges.
Under the court agreement, 10 current and former officers of Local 2 of the Plumbers Union will be removed or barred from holding office by the local's parent organization, the United Association of Journeymen and Apprentices of the Pipe Fitting Industry of the United States and Canada.


INSIDE
Neglecting Gifted Students
The nation's smartest students sit bored and unchallenged in classrooms and ultimately learn less than their counterparts around the world, a new Federal study found.
Page A23.
Builder Guilty but Successful
A New York builder who pleaded guilty to tax charges was still allowed to get work at city schools because he agreed to be an informer in a corruption case, officials say.
Page B1.
The Frugal Business Traveler
Companies are increasingly requiring employees to fly in economy class and stay in cheaper hotels.
Airlines and hotels believe corporate frugality will continue for years.
Page D1.
Picasso's Perfect Score
Sotheby's auctioned a collection of 88 artworks by Picasso, and every lot was sold.
One drawing brought five time its estimate.
Page C3.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL  American League MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Declined to exercise its 1994 option on Robin Yount, outfielder.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Promoted Don Leppert, minor league field coordinator, to coordinator of Florida operations; Larry Corrigan, scouting director, to minor league field coordinator; Mike Radcliffe, Midwest scouting supervior, to scouting director; and Mike Ruth, scout, to Midwest scouting supervisor.
National League CINCINNATI REDS -- Agreed to terms with Jerome Walton, outfielder, on a minor-league contract.
Assigned Scott Robinson, pitcher, outright to Indianapolis of the American Association.
Purchased the contracts of John Courtright and Kevin Jarvis, pitchers, from Chattanooga of the Southern League.
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association NBA -- Awarded a franchise to Toronto, beginning in the 1995-96 season.
CHICAGO BULLS -- Placed John Paxson, guard, and Scott Williams, center-forward, on the injured list.
Acquired JoJo English, guard, from the Minnesota Timberwolves for an undisclosed draft choice.
Waived Al Hamilton, forward.
CLEVELAND CAVALIERS -- Placed Terrell Brandon, guard, on the injured list.
INDIANA PACERS -- Placed Kenny Williams, forward, and Haywoode Workman, guard, on the injured list, and Ledell Eackles, guard, on the suspended list.
MINNESOTA TIMBERWOLVES -- Placed Stanley Jackson, guard, on the injured list.
NEW JERSEY NETS -- Waived Tate George, guard.
Placed Benoit Benjamin, center, on the injured list.
NEW YORK KNICKS -- Waived Nate Johnston, forward, and David Cain, guard.
Placed Eric Anderson, forward, on the injured list.
PHOENIX SUNS -- Placed Tim Kempton, center, and Cedric Ceballos and Malcolm Mackey, forwards, on the injured list.
FOOTBALL National Football League MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Signed Chris Singleton, linebacker.
Waived Chuck Bulloufgh, linebacker.
Hockey  HOCKEY National Hockey League DALLAS STARS -- Recalled Trent Klatt, right wing, from Kalamazoo for the International Hockey League.
Sent Derrick Smith, left wing, to Kalamazoo.
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Agreed to terms with Jeff Beukeboom, defenseman.


Rockland to Investigate Scandal-Tainted Utility
Rockland County's gas and electric utility has agreed to cooperate in a criminal investigation of embezzlement and illegal campaign contributions and to open its books to examination by independent investigators, the company and the Rockland County District Attorney announced yesterday.
The company, Orange and Rockland Utilities, will also reimburse customers for money that it misappropriated, the District Attorney, Kenneth Gribetz, said.


Norcen Energy Res.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


At the Bar; Catering to a feminist superstar, judges find themselves tangled in a free-speech debate
Though Catherine A. MacKinnon's views on pornography and censorship are highly debatable, one thing she has regularly refused to do is debate them -- at least, some assert, with women who hold opposing opinions.
Ms.
MacKinnon, a professor at the University of Michigan Law School, believes that pornography directly leads to violence and discrimination against women and must be suppressed.
She is a charismatic speaker; so eager are interviewers and conference organizers to mollify her that feminists who consider her views censorious and harmful to women have grown used to being unceremoniously dropped from programs at which she is scheduled to appear.


Breaking Impasse on Crime Bill, Senate Supports $22 Billion Plan
In a breakthrough on a big anticrime measure, the Senate tonight voted 94 to 4 to set up a $22 billion trust fund to provide localities with 100,000 new police officers over five years and money to build regional prisons to house the nation's most violent inmates.
Both Republicans and Democrats said the amendment, which doubled the amount of money in the original legislation, went far to soften the partisan rancor over gun control and the death penalty that has stymied efforts to pass a crime bill for two years.


Household International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Procession of Candles Honors African-Americans of the Past


Lowe Group Buys Scali, McCabe
The long expected sale of Scali, McCabe, Sloves by the WPP Group P.L.C. to the Lowe Group, one of the Interpublic Group of Companies' three agency networks, finally took place yesterday after more than two years of on-again, off-again talks.
"I'm very pleased the negotiations have finally come to an end," Frank Lowe, chairman of the Lowe Group, said.
"I've never known any so protracted in my life."


Nationwide Cellular Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Iranians, Marking '79 Crisis, Assail U.S. as Rift Again Widens
Iranians today celebrated the 14th anniversary of the seizure of the United States Embassy in Teheran with blistering anti-American speeches and demonstrations that appear to be part of a widening rift between Washington and Teheran.
The street marches, which included a rally by thousands of Iranians and a model of the Statue of Liberty with its arm drenched in blood, came a day after the country's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, ruled out the resumption of relations with the United States and criticized Iranian officials who call for talks with Washington.


Bias Found Against Bright Minority Students
In a ruling that would expand the liability of schools in desegregation cases, a Federal magistrate yesterday found that the Rockford, Ill., Public Schools had discriminated against bright minority students by failing to include them in classes for high achievers.
No previous ruling has held that the exclusion of minority students from such classes violates desegregation law and is therefore discriminatory.
The ruling, by Magistrate Patrick M. Mahoney of Federal District Court, now goes to Federal District Judge Stanley Roszkowski, who is expected to approve the findings and decide remedies, lawyers for both sides said..


K N Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Let's Tighten Reins On Credit Reports
To the Editor:
While some in the credit industry have instituted procedural modifications to the 23-year-old Fair Credit Reporting Act, we need comprehensive change to reinforce the principles of confidentiality, accuracy and relevance that underlie the law.


American Water Works Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Prodigal Breakfast Returns to New York
BREAKFAST has long been New York's forgotten meal.
"No time, gotta run" is the morning mantra for many New Yorkers, and the result is a city of people biting through the plastic covers of their coffee cups while they bounce on the subway, or trying not to get cream cheese all over their papers as they unwrap rolls at their desks.
Power breakfasts, you say?
Hotel dining rooms around the city still draw crowds of business executives for their morning meetings.
But to the true breakfast lover, who believes there are few sights as delectable as a platter of plump biscuits, perfectly scrambled eggs with an oblong slice of country ham, or even a bowl of homemade granola ringed with fresh fruit, the term "power breakfast" corrupts the wonder of the meal.
With the emphasis on business at the expense of pleasure, the relaxed ambiance is lost.
Instead, breakfast becomes an exercise in fear: fear of making the wrong impression.


Under Senate Streamlining Plan, The Powerful Would Be Less So
The Senate made public today its half of a long-promised plan to rid Congress of lethargy and bloat, in large part by halving the Senate's huge flock of subcommittees and writing a Federal budget every two years instead of annually.
Those and some other measures in the plan strike directly at the powers of the committee chairmen and appropriators who run Congress.
Precisely how they could be persuaded to support them was unclear.


Art in Review
Ashley Bickerton
Sonnabend Gallery  420 West Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through tomorrow
Ashley Bickerton's weirdly mesmerizing and almost beautiful exhibition dares to be irrelevant.
Where did this come from?
With his characteristic steely, deadpan, obsessive approach to craft, Mr.
Bickerton has constructed a series of objects that are a surreal reverie on, of all things, the South Pacific, through which he recently traveled for several months.
It's amazing that anyone would spend so much energy and care on the making of a translucent turquoise rubber self-portrait head, topped with dyed human hair shaped into the form of a desert island, and tiny palm trees, also made of hair, coming out of the head like a pair of horns.
Or a hanging gaggle of bronze fruit bats and coconuts topped with a giant blue bronze palm leaf, a kind of desert island weather vane.
Or a black rubber shark in a leather suit hung from the ceiling along with plastic bags filled with vivid blue mouthwash.


Sunshine-Jr. Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Franklin B. Lincoln, Aide in Transition Of Nixon, Dies at 85
Franklin Benjamin Lincoln Jr., a lawyer who represented President-elect Richard M. Nixon in dealings with the staff of President Lyndon B. Johnson during the transition in 1968, died on Tuesday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
He was 85 and lived in Short Hills.
He had a short illness, his family said.


Fear of H.I.V.-Infected Blood Spreads Past German Borders
A furor over charges that a German company distributed H.I.V.-infected blood, perhaps knowingly, to dozens of hospitals is causing anxiety throughout Germany, and it spread today to other European countries where hospitals also bought blood from the accused company.
Italy, Sweden, France, Switzerland and Austria today halted the sale of blood products purchased from the company, UB Plasma.
Officials in Britain, Greece and the Czech Republic began intensive searches to see if any of the potentially tainted products were stored in their hospitals.


Ion Laser Technology Inc.  (ECM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fila Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bernard Decker, 89, Judge Who Upheld Nazi Right to March
Bernard Martin Decker, a retired Federal judge in Chicago who upheld an Illinois town's right to ban pistols and a neo-Nazi band's right to march in the suburban village of Skokie, died on Tuesday in a Lake Forest nursing home.
A longtime resident of Waukegan, Ill., he was 89.
Judge Becker, a Republican appointed by President Kennedy in 1962, presided over the long battle over injunctions involving Skokie ordinances that impeded the Nazis' parade in the late 1970's.
It pitted the heavily Jewish village against a neo-Nazi group whose right to free speech and assembly was argued by the American Civil Liberties Union.


FHP International Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Film; Finishing Symphony Called Life
Since his vintage years with Ingmar Bergman, Max Von Sydow has seemingly worked without stop around the world playing roles that don't come up to his instep, wrestling with Satan in "The Exorcist" and suffering serenely as God's son in "The Greatest Story Ever Told." With the exception of "Hannah and Her Sisters" and "Pelle the Conqueror," he hasn't had much to do recently except collect his paychecks.
He's one of the cinema's great underused resources.
This is the principal reason to see "The Silent Touch," the new British-Polish-Danish co-production starring Mr.
Von Sydow, who is Swedish; Sarah Miles, who is English, and Lothaire Bluteau, who is French Canadian.
The film, which was directed by Krzysztof Zanussi, who is Polish, is set mostly in Denmark, though everyone speaks English, maybe because it's the lingua franca of the people who put the movie deal together.


Firearms Agency Struggles to Rise From Ashes of Waco Raid
After the worst year in its long history, the small Federal agency that ran the botched February raid on the cult near Waco, Tex., is trying to pick itself up.
Under new leadership but still undergoing a catharsis, the agency, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, has begun to reassess how its 2,000 agents should be enforcing the nation's firearms laws in the aftermath of one of the bloodiest law-enforcement debacles of recent times.


TV Weekend; 'Zelda': From Madcap to Madness
Like the political Kennedys, the literary Fitzgeralds -- F. Scott and Zelda -- have become almost obsessive national myths, their lives generating innumerable books and films with claims to assorted revelatory truths.
With the 30th anniversary this month of the John F. Kennedy assassination, television will be presenting a slew of movies and documentaries over the next few weeks, exploring President Kennedy and his family from every conceivable angle.
Meanwhile, TNT has decided to poke once more into the lives of the Fitzgeralds.
Graced with one memorable performance, "Zelda" can be seen on Sunday at 8 and 10 P.M. and midnight.
As the title suggests, this portrait of the tempestuous, doomed marriage is seen primarily from the wife's point of view.
It starts at a 1918 party in Montgomery, Ala., where a budding writer in World War I uniform puts aside his liquor flask long enough to fall in love with a vivacious young belle named Zelda Sayre, who informs him that "I always wanted to swim naked in the moonlight." It ends more than a decade later, the Roaring 20's over, with Zelda entering a sanitarium and Scott realizing that "my wife is never going to get well again."


Watermelon in Gaza
To the Editor:
A caption in "A Palestinian Version of the Judgment of Solomon" (news article, Oct. 16) reads: "Until recently in the Gaza Strip, Palestinians were arrested for carrying watermelon slices because the colors were the same as those of their banned flag." Having investigated the matter with the proper authorities, I can state that such arrests have never been official Israeli policy.
If such an isolated and unsanctioned act did occur, no individual was ever prosecuted under such innocent circumstances.


Sea Containers Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Consumers Water (NMS) reports earnings for 12mo to Sept 30


Graff Pay-Per-View reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


For Cuomo, Elections Seeded Many Clouds and Few Linings
For Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, the victory of Republican mayoral candidates in New York City and two upstate cities on Tuesday have created new political hurdles that will complicate his efforts to win re-election to a fourth term next year.
Political strategists and some of his supporters say the Governor, who has not announced whether he will run, must address the disaffection of black voters who blame the Democratic Party for Mayor David N. Dinkins's defeat.


Administration Offers New Math To Bolster Health Plan's Appeal
Struggling to convince Americans that its health care plan would save most people money, the Clinton Administration today produced its third set of predictions of how many Americans would pay more, or less, for health insurance.
Last week, Donna E. Shalala, Secretary of Health and Human Services, threw a scare into the Administration's friends and cheered its enemies by declaring that 40 percent of Americans who now have health insurance would pay more.


Trade-Pact Battle Lines: Wheat vs. Corn
When the talk at Ralph and Cleo Thompson's farmhouse social shifted from the cold, wet weather to the North American Free Trade Agreement, it quickly became apparent that here in the rural Midwest, where you stand on the agreement depends on what you grow.
Mark Johnson picked at the roast beef on his plastic plate while explaining his opposition to the pact, which would eliminate tariffs and other trade barriers among Canada, Mexico and the United States.


Concord Camera Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Taylor to Play Limited Role
On Sunday you may see Lawrence Taylor as you've never seen him before: as a part-time role player.
Taylor's injured hamstring has made significant improvement since undergoing acupuncture treatment by Dr.
Nan-sung Chu on Tuesday.
Still, it is hampering him, so he will only be used in pass-rushing situations against the Cowboys.
Kanavis McGhee, who is in the third season of what has been an uneventful career, will get his first start.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BITECH CORP., Toronto, a resource development company, said it had paid $5 million to acquire a sixth oilfield in Russia for its Silur Co. subsidiary.
BUTLER MANUFACTURING, Kansas City, Mo., has reached a definitive agreement to sell its Walker Electrical Products division to Wiremold Co. of West Hartford, Conn., for $35 million.


Hadson Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dinkins to Leave for a Vacation And, on Return, to Plan Future
Mayor David N. Dinkins is scheduled to leave today for a one-week vacation in Puerto Rico.
Some of the Mayor's friends and aides say that when he returns he will begin to confront important questions about his future, ranging from where he and Mrs.
Dinkins will live to what the Mayor will do when he leaves office in January.
Mr.
Dinkins, 66 years old, has not talked yet about his plans, several close friends and senior aides said yesterday.
"David Dinkins is not going to retire," said Basil A. Paterson, the former New York Secretary of State, who is one of the Mayor's oldest friends.
"He'll stay in the city and he'll stay active."


Fresh Talents Dish Up Tasty Design
The seating at fashion shows is divvied up as though for a tug-of-war across the runway: buyers on one side, journalists on the other.
And designers sending their clothes down the catwalk are caught in between.
Should they please the news media with tumultuous change, or please the buyers with a gentle evolution of what sold last year?
Some of New York's fresh talents -- like Victor Alfaro, Cynthia Rowley and the designers of the Finis collection -- are simply walking away with the rope this season.


Public Schools Are Failing Brightest Students, a Federal Study Says
The nation is failing its smartest students, who sit bored and unchallenged in classrooms and ultimately learn less than their counterparts around the world, according to the most comprehensive Federal study in two decades on the status of education for the gifted and talented.
The report, by United States Department of Education, recommends a more challenging curriculum for these children and a better system for identifying them, rather than relying simply on I.Q. tests and achievement scores.


NATIONAL SEMICONDUCTOR IN TECHNOLOGY DEAL WITH NEC
The National Semiconductor Corporation said yesterday that it had signed a technology partnership agreement with the NEC Corporation of Tokyo aimed at building a market in Japan for Ethernet-based computer networking.
Ethernet, developed by the Xerox Corporation, is the dominant technology in the United States for connecting personal computers to networks, but it has been slow to take hold in Japan.


Christopher Spells Out New Priorities
Secretary of State Warren Christopher redefined priorities for America's foreign policy today, but restoring democracy to Haiti, ending the war in Bosnia and reconciling warring parties in Somalia were not on his list.
In his first formal appearance before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee since May, Mr.
Christopher sought to divert attention from the Administration's performance in those three countries, dismissing them as "difficult situations" where "things have not gone exactly as we had planned."


Computer Language Research (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Morgan Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


AGCO Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nu-Kote Holdings (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


As Liberia's Factions Talk, Strife and Fear Drag On
For the last three months, Liberia's political factions have engaged in something rare for this war-battered country: peaceful negotiations to resolve the bitter differences that have led Liberia from dictatorship to anarchy.
Compromise has been elusive, however, and the three main armed factions remain deadlocked on the issue of forming a national government.
As a result, politicians, foreign diplomats and relief workers fear that Liberia may be heading back down the path to full-scale civil war.


A Pro-Trade Cabinet Takes Office in Canada
Jean Chretien formally took office today as Canada's 20th Prime Minister, and he immediately named a moderate, pragmatic Cabinet that is unlikely to walk away from free trade with the United States and Mexico.
The new Ministers of Finance and International Trade, Paul Martin Jr. and Roy MacLaren, both have backgrounds in international business and reputations as staunch free-traders.


Image Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


No Headline
"The only sure thing about luck is that it will change." -- GOV.
JIM FLORIO, quoting a fortune cookie that he said he got at lunch yesterday.  [ B1:4. ]


Hollywood Entertainment Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cineplex Odeon reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nanny Case Hears Expert In Child Abuse
A 10-month-old baby who suffered a fatal skull fracture while in a nanny's care may have been abused on two prior occasions, a child-abuse expert testified in a pretrial hearing today.
Prosecutors want to use testimony about those incidents at the trial of the nanny, Ann Franklin, but her lawyer is opposing the request.
Judge J. Emmett Murphy of Westchester County Court is expected to rule shortly after the five-day hearing ends.


Jets' Mitchell a Tight End With Loose Lips
Tight end Johnny Mitchell would be a senior at Nebraska right now had he not opted for the National Football League draft as a sophomore in 1991.
After two years with the Jets, the first-round draft pick is just a manchild in the rough and tumble N.F.L., a physically gifted athlete still struggling with the nuances of the game and the politics of the locker room.
The Jets adore his offensive talent, yet some of his teammates cringe when he opens his mouth.
Recently, while Mitchell was giving an interview in front of his locker, some teammates to his left began shaking their heads in disbelief at what he was saying.


Robert Hellendale, 76; Ran a Paper Company
Robert Hellendale, a retired chief executive in the paper manufacturing industry, died on Saturday at Greenwich Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 76 and lived in Riverside, Conn.
His family said he had been ill for a long time.


CHRONICLE
Even the noblesse are obliged to face a publicity juggernaut when they write a book.
Take, for example, VISCOUNT LINLEY, Princess Margaret's furniture-making son, who is about to embark on a grueling tour to promote his new book, "Classical Furniture," which is being published by Harry N. Abrams.
Coming directly from their honeymoon in Africa, Viscount Linley and his bride of one month, the former SERENA ALLEYNE STANHOPE, arrive in New York tomorrow.
On Sunday, CHRISTOPHER (KIP) FORBES, is giving the newlyweds a luncheon at the Forbes family estate in Far Hills, N.J.
In the evening, BLAINE TRUMP will give them a dinner party in Manhattan, according to Ruth Kennedy, managing director for David Linley Furniture, a custom-order company.
Miss Kennedy was in New York early to lay the groundwork for the visit.


Rebuilding Dreams in Wire and Wax
Raven Chanticleer may have the most famous roommates in New York.
There are Malcolm X and Martin Luther King Jr., Adam Clayton Powell Jr., Josephine Baker and Fannie Lou Hamer.
These are not just ghosts from the past.
They are figures that seem to live and breathe in Mr.
Chanticleer's house on West 115th Street, which is also the home of the African-American Wax Museum.


Be Careful Turning Corners In Dallas
The Dallas Cowboys' starting cornerbacks, Kevin Smith and Larry Brown, took opposite routes to the National Football League.
Smith's trip was like a heel-clicking waltz down the Yellow Brick Road compared to Brown's journey.
Brown's was simply like running into a brick wall.
Smith was a first-round draft choice in 1992 from Texas A&amp;M.


Continental Airlines reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Strawberry to the Royals?
DARRYL STRAWBERRY may get to move from Los Angeles after all.
Not quite the way he envisions it, however.
The Dodgers are working on a trade that may send him to the Kansas City Royals, The Los Angeles Times reported yesterday.
The newspaper said the deal could send left fielder KEVIN McREYNOLDS and one or more other players to the Dodgers, with the Royals making Strawberry a designated hitter.
Some $8 million remains over the last two years on Strawberry's contract, but that is said to be no problem for the Royals in the wake of GEORGE BRETT 's retirement.


Sega Selects McCann-Erickson
Sega of America in Redwood City, Calif., said yesterday that it had selected McCann-Erickson San Francisco to handle an $8 million to $10 million campaign for a new toy division aimed at younger children and their parents.
McCann San Francisco was awarded the account after a three-month review that began with 28 agencies and narrowed to three other finalists: Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein in San Francisco, which handles Sega's $65 million consolidated video games account aimed at older game players; Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partnersin Los Angeles, and Young &amp; Rubicam San Francisco.


Michael Anthony Jewelers Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


As Rates Rise, Signs of a Shakeout Grow; Stocks in Selloff For Second Day; Dow Loses 36.89
With their anxiety over rising interest rates apparently snowballing, investors hacked away at the stock market for a second day yesterday, forcing one of the most sweeping selloffs of the year.
The Dow Jones industrial average plunged 36.89 points, to 3,624.98, after falling 35.77 points on Wednesday.
The steep two-day drop came after the index had hit four record highs since late last month.
Declining issues on the New York Stock Exchange led advancing issues yesterday by more than 3 to 1.


More Information Units Will Be Sold by Nynex
The Nynex Corporation, continuing with its plan to leave the information services business, said yesterday that it had agreed to sell several units of AGS Computers Inc. for undisclosed terms.
Nynex, the Bell operating company serving the Northeast, said the sale of the AGS units, and the earlier sales of its London-based BIS Group and Systems Strategies Inc., would result in a $250 million to $275 million charge against fourth-quarter earnings.


Capitol American Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Anna Sui Pounds Out the Beat
Today's question is "Who will wear all those baby-doll dresses designers are showing for spring?" They're decidedly not meant for the nursery-school set nor for a fashionable sophisticate.
Who then?
Anna Sui came up with one answer in her rollicking show on Tuesday night in Bryant Park.
Her twentysomething customers who have enough style and wit to wear them the way the designer shows them: with black underwear peeking through white eyelet, with a marabou stole and headdress, with ankle socks and high heels, with silver backpacks and lug-soled Mary Janes.
Or, if you're a man, over longjohns (the men's wear she showed last season had no dresses).


Imco Recycling Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reynolds &amp; Reynolds reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Abroad at Home; If Nafta Loses
It is as a symbol that the North American Free Trade Agreement really matters.
The economic effects of the agreement on this country would be marginal.
But if Congress turns Nafta down, the political consequences would be enormous.
No matter how the opponents tried to disguise it, the world would see defeat as a message that America has gone protectionist.
That would encourage the protectionism already rising in France and elsewhere in Europe.


Policy Pitch to Silicon Valley
Returning to Silicon Valley, where the Clinton Administration introduced its technology policy early this year, Government officials huddled today with high-technology industry executives to demonstrate that the Administration remains committed to the "information infrastructure," "data superhighways" and other buzz concepts that make a techie's blood race.
Silicon Valley's traditionally Republican leadership tilted toward the campaign of Bill Clinton last year.
But it has since appeared to waver in its backing of the President.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "SOPHISTRY," Playwrights Horizons Studio, 416 West 42d Street, Clinton.
Jonathan Marc Sherman's drama about a college professor who is charged with sexual harassment, directed by Nicholas Martin.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 3 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
All performances are sold out, but returned tickets are sometimes available; those interested may put their names on a waiting list one hour before the performance.
Information: (212) 279-4200.
"SNOWING AT DELPHI," WPA Theater, 519 West 23d Street, Manhattan.
A comedy about six friends who meet at an upstate farmhouse during the holidays by Catherine Butterfield; directed by Pamela Berlin.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $22.
Information: (212) 206-0523.


Key P.L.O. Official Accused of Spying for Israel
A key official at the P.L.O.'s Tunis headquarters has been arrested by the Tunisian authorities on charges of spying for Israel, the Palestine Liberation Organization has announced.
P.L.O. officials said the accused man, who held a key position in the office of the P.L.O. security chief, had supplied the Israelis with highly secret information over the last two years.


Accounts
*
Midas International Corp., Chicago, to the Evans Group, Seattle and Pheonix, to handle its local advertising in Alaska, Arizona, Idaho, Oregon, Washington and parts of Montana, previously handled by Wells Rich Greene BDDP, New York, which continues handling Midas's national account.
Billings were estimated at $2.5 million.


Review/Film; New Twist: Your Kidney or Your Life
Maybe there are many screenwriters who daydream about stepping into their own stories to find a deeper meaning and fundamental truth.
Luckily, most of them have the sense to let the whim pass.
Not Charlie Pope (Miguel Ferrer), the tough-guy hero of "The Harvest," who ventures to Mexico to do some research after certain studio types are less than charitable about his latest oeuvre.
"They'd treated me like a hack," he mutters, in a voice-over meant to heighten the film noir atmosphere.
"But frankly, at that point I wasn't so sure they were wrong."
David Marconi, the writer and director of this self-congratulatory fantasy, sends Charlie into the midst of a murder mystery, complete with Mexican workers who mysteriously swab blood off the walls of Charlie's room.
The story also supplies the beautiful, mysterious Natalie (Leilani Sarelle) and a few pretentiously dissolute locals, all of whom seem to be conspiring to hide something from Charlie.
These circumstances lead, not exactly inevitably, to Charlie's abduction by organ thieves who covet his kidney.
The film is at its most wildly optimistic in referring to Charlie's adventure as " 'Chinatown' all over again."


CHRONICLE
Name that tune?
If it was sung in any English language movie made since the introduction of talkies in 1928, chances are that ARTHUR ROSENBLATT, an architect and the associate director of the Bryant Park Restoration Corporation, and his wife, RUTH BENJAMIN, a writer, can.
They are the authors of a new book, "Movie Song Catalog," published by McFarland &amp; Company, which specializes in reference books about the performing arts.
The book lists every song sung in 1,460 musical and nonmusical films, along with information about the movie, director, score, orchestra, vocalist and other details.


David A. Hungerford Dies at 66; Found Genetic Change in Cancer
Dr.
David A. Hungerford, a co-discoverer of the first visible genetic abnormality in cancer cells, died on Wednesday at his home in Jenkintown, Pa.
He was 66.
The cause of death was lung cancer, said Eric Rosenthal, a spokesman for the Fox Chase Cancer Center in Philadelphia.
He said Dr.
Hungerford smoked cigarettes until about 10 years ago.


Malibu Fire Controlled, And the Sleepy Rejoice
When word passed along the line, just before dawn today, that the dangerous fire that ravaged Malibu had been brought under control, a throaty cheer went up among the exhausted firefighters.
The firefighters, some from as far away as Oklahoma, descended on Von's Supermarket in Pacific Palisades, where grateful residents of the oceanside community on the western edge of Los Angeles good-naturedly quarreled over who would buy them orange juice and doughnuts.
Movie stars like Charles Bronson and Mark Hamill mingled with the crews, thanking them for saving their houses.


As Rates Rise, Signs of a Shakeout Grow; Plunge in Bonds Threatens to Halt A Yearlong Rally
The plunge in the bond market over the last week, which pushed the yield on the 30-year bond up to 6.17 percent yesterday, has been a little like the fires in California.
Selling has swept the market like wind-driven flames while traders and investors watched, stunned and unable to stop it.
And the selling could push yields even higher today if the October employment data fan the market's concerns about the recent pickup in economic growth.
If that happens, more traders and investors will agree that the yearlong rally in the bond market is over.


Bonn Bans U.S.-Russian Games in Germany
It started out as a bright idea to strengthen ties between the American and Russian military.
But so far it has strained relations with Washington's key European allies.
The proposal was for American and Russian troops to exercise together for the first time, probably at a NATO training base at Hohenfils, Germany.


Montana Power reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


Business Travel Takes a Pay Cut
The luxurious business trip has not yet gone the way of the three-martini lunch, and corporations are not requiring executives to pack a bedroll for out-of-town travel.
But so intent are companies on holding down costs that they are increasingly requiring employees to fly in economy class and to stay in hotels to match.
Airlines and hotels are basing their plans on the assumption that corporate frugality will continue for years.


Halifax Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; So the stock market didn't crash in October, after all. But what was that noise on Madison Avenue?
OCTOBER is often a tumultuous month on Wall Street.
This time, it was quiet.
But on another street -- Madison Avenue -- it was another story altogether.
There is no advertising equivalent of the Dow Jones industrial average or the Standard &amp; Poor's indexes to measure account volatility.
However, by one estimate, marketers last month announced reviews, changed agencies or consolidated assignments on accounts with total annual billings of $1.08 billion to $1.18 billion.


Giuliani Starts Assembling City Hall Transition Team
Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Mayor-elect, began yesterday offering prominent campaign supporters key roles on the transition team that will be putting together his government and helping shape policy for City Hall.
Robert F. Wagner Jr., a Democrat who crossed party lines to endorse Mr.
Giuliani in the last crucial weeks of the campaign, was asked to become the senior policy adviser in the transition effort.
Mr.
Wagner was a deputy mayor under Mayor Edward I. Koch and has also served as president of the Board of Education.
By contrast, the transition team chairman, Peter J. Powers, is a lawyer with no experience in government.


British Rape Case Stirs Call to Not Identify Accused
After a much-publicized court case in which a defendant accused of rape was found not guilty, Britain's senior judge has come out in favor of a change in the law to allow a defendant in a rape case to remain unidentified in the press unless and until he is convicted.
At a law conference in Brighton over the weekend, Lord Taylor, the Lord Chief Justice, said the law, which permits only the rape victim to remain anonymous, was unfair to the accused.
He called for a return to the situation before 1988, when newspaper and broadcasters were allowed to identify the defendant only after he had been found guilty.


Wendy's International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Corrections
Because of a computer malfunction, an article in some editions yesterday about indications that a defendant charged in a bombing plot had agreed to become a witness for the Government included a scrambled passage.
It should have read: "The situation is expected to be cleared up today when defendants in the second bombing case convene for a pretrial conference before judge Michael B. Mukasey. Mr. Haggag's absence would be a strong indication he is no longer a defendant."


A Whitaker-Chavez II Bid
Pernell Whitaker, the welterweight champion who seemingly outfought Julio Cesar Chavez in a controversial draw on Sept. 10, will make a multi-million-dollar offer to Chavez for a rematch.
Dan Duva, Whitaker's manager, is expected to make the offer on Saturday.
Presumably, the bout would be held next spring on HBO.


Whitman Names 2 for Staff Of New Governor's Office
Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman began shaping her administration today, choosing as her first two staff members a former member of Governor Thomas H. Kean's administration and a prominent young leader in the state Republican Party.
The announcement that Judith Shaw would be chief of staff and Peter Verniero would be chief counsel capped a day in which Mrs.
Whitman met with legislative leaders and continued a victory bus tour of the state to thank voters for her razor-thin victory over Gov.
Jim Florio.


Playboy Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


2 Police Officers Arrested In Theft of a Victim's Gun
Two police officers assigned to the 34th Precinct in Washington Heights were arrested late Wednesday night on charges that they stole a gun from a dying man who was shot during a gun battle between rival drug gangs last July, the authorities said yesterday.
Witnesses told investigators that one of the officers took the gun from the side of the shooting victim and that the other officer drove off with it in a patrol car.
The investigators said they presumed that the officers then sold the gun.


Beene: If Ever a Wiz There Was
Geoffrey Beene is a designer of singular accomplishments.
He celebrated his 30th anniversary as the head of his own company with a book, a half-hour film and a display of 65 styles from his spring collection.
There was no fashion show.
While he appreciates the importance of movement in presenting clothes -- he has used ballerinas as models -- the static display enables viewers to examine his seams (he uses as few as possible), his fabrics (he sometimes creates his own via quilting and other techniques) and his shapes.





Canadian Tire reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Independent Insurance Group Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


All 88 Picassos Sell In Auction at Sotheby's
Sotheby's has always been a company known for taking risks, and its sale of 88 Picassos from the Stanley J. Seeger collection last night was a risk well taken.
Every lot sold, with some works bringing double their estimates.
One drawing brought five times as much as expected.
This was Sotheby's at its marketing best..
As soon as the auction house announced the sale in late September, the works were sent on tour to prospective collectors and dealers in major art capitals around the world.
The efforts paid off.
The auction house's viewings in the last week were packed with art-lovers, and last night the salesroom was frenetic as dealers and collectors created bidding wars that made it seem the sale would never end.
The auction lasted nearly three hours, with buyers from Zurich, Paris, London, Mexico, Asia and various spots in the United States fighting hard to make a purchase.


Police Assault Charged
Manchester United's ERIC CANTONA and BRYAN ROBSON said yesterday that they were assaulted by Turkish police officers after the team's elimination from the European Champions Cup in Istanbul, Turkey, Wednesday night.


Misdemeanor for Coleman, Then He'll Help at Fire Site
The Vince Coleman firecracker saga will be resolved on Friday.
Coleman's attorney, Robert Shapiro, negotiated a plea bargain today with officials from the Los Angeles District Attorney's office.
The Met outfielder's felony charge of unlawful possession of an explosive device will be reduced to a misdemeanor when he appears in Superior Court Friday morning.


Gap
Shares of Gap Inc. dropped yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange after the company was one of several specialty retailers to report lower sales for October.
The stock price had risen 40 percent from early September, apparently because several analysts raised their investment ratings on the San Francisco-based company.


Grieg Sesquicentennial
To celebrate the 150th birthday of the Norwegian composer Edvard Grieg, the Edvard Grieg Society of New York is to present a concert on Sunday at 8 P.M. at Alice Tully Hall.
Per Brevig is to conduct the Orchestra of St.
Luke's, with the soprano Torgun Birkeland performing songs by Greig and the piano duo Bradshaw and Buono playing the premiere of Johan Kvandal's Concerto for Two Pianos.
Also on the program are Grieg's Norwegian Dances and Incidental Music to "Sigurd Jorsalfar." Tickets are $15 to $50.
Information: (212) 875-5050.


Markel Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Phoenix Re Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jurors Tell Tales of Woe and Outrage
The young woman in the white suit nervously took her seat at the witness table to address the stern-faced panel.
"My name is Deirdre Kane," she began.
Then, with a vengeful gleam, she said, "And I am a refugee from the jury system."
Members of the Jury Project, a panel appointed by Chief Judge Judith S. Kaye to recommend changes in New York State's jury system, heard the public's exhortations, recommendations and frustrations yesterday in a peppery session that could have been dubbed Juror Furor Day.
Reeling from story after story of outrage, Carleton Irish, a panel member, asked Maureen McCarron, a private school administrator: "Did you leave with any good feelings?"


Home Video
The movie business acknowledges that if a film is altered for television or videocassette, the public should be told.
But told what?
In 1992, several organizations of directors, writers and cinematographers petitioned Congress to force detailed labeling of altered movies through proposed legislation called the Film Disclosure Act.


CenCall Communications Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fear of H.I.V.-Infected Blood Spreads Past German Borders
A furor over charges that a German company distributed H.I.V.-infected blood, perhaps knowingly, to dozens of hospitals is causing anxiety throughout Germany, and it spread today to other European countries where hospitals also bought blood from the accused company.
Italy, Sweden, France, Switzerland and Austria today halted the sale of blood products purchased from the company, UB Plasma.
Officials in Britain, Greece and the Czech Republic began intensive searches to see if any of the potentially tainted products were stored in their hospitals.


Key Tronic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Mary Shea Giordano; Philanthropic Leader, 90
Mary Shea Giordano, for many years a leader of Roman Catholic philanthropic groups in New York, died on Tuesday at St.
Patrick's Home for the Aged in the Bronx.
She was 90.
Mrs.
Giordano served as president of the Ladies of Charity of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York for 25 years starting in 1952.
She also served on groups advising Catholic Charities, Fordham University, St.
John's University, Elizabeth Seton College and St.
Joseph's Seminary in Yonkers.


Art in Review
Chuck Close
Pace Gallery  142 Greene Street (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Nov. 27
Chuck Close continues to stretch the limits of the gridded portrait style that has defined his art since the late 1960's.
Some of these paintings have a new looseness and a jangly rhythm that push them to the brink of unread ability, but somehow never over the edge.
The best of them, like a portrait of John Chamberlain, threaten to dissolve into so many brilliant lozenges of color.
A self-portrait is made up of freewheeling circles, dashes, ovals and dots in a grid of large squares, which, up close, brings to mind the structure and something of the jazziness of Mondrian's "Broadway Boogie-Woogie"; you have to stand pretty far back before the abstract patterns congeal into an image of Mr.
Close's familiar face.


Gaylord Container Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Camden Property Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Where There's Smoke There May Be Dunston
The Mets, continuing their urgent push to acquire a shortstop, spoke with the Chicago Cubs late Wednesday night, apparently about trading for Shawon Dunston.
"We had encouraging talks with a number of clubs this week, and that was one of them," General Manager Joe McIlvaine acknowledged.


WITH RUSSIAN AID, BETTER SPACE LAB
An international space station built with substantial Russian participation would be larger, cheaper to construct and completed two years sooner than the previous proposal, space agency officials said today.
National Aeronautics and Space Administration officials said they and their Russian counterparts had devised a cooperative manned space program that calls for more joint missions than previously discussed, leading to completion of a permanently staffed orbiting space laboratory in the year 2001.


Restaurants
"Have you tried the cheese yet?" asks the man in the little cap, strolling up to the table.
"The cheese man here is the best."
"Who's that?" we ask.


U.S. Should Match Europe's Shorter Workweek
To the Editor:
Hasn't the time come to consider an American workweek more commensurate with the workweek of our friends in Europe?
The latest international data of the Bureau of Labor Statistics are for 1991.
They show that in Germany, Norway, France and Denmark the workweek -- including vacations and holidays -- averaged 30 hours.
In Sweden it was 28 1/2 hours!
Our American workweek, including vacations and holidays, averaged 37 hours.


Amrion Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Young Rider Learning Obstacles of Sport
Gaby Salick, a Princeton sophomore negotiating her first year of competition on the grand prix horse show circuit, was understandably unnerved when she aimed her horse at a 7-foot wall last Saturday night in Washington in her successful first attempt to win a Puissance event.
But it wasn't the wall, it was the fire and the Santa Ana winds on the other side of the country that worried Salik when she tackled her second career Puissance barrier here tonight at the National Horse Show.
This time, it was her horse, Elan 2+2, who had the jitters.
He twice refused to jump the wall at 6 feet despite having won the Washington event with a leap of just over 7 feet.


Jaco Electronics (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bio-Dental Technologies (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sithe Energies Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Southern Electronics Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


International Murex Technologies Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


France Growth Fund reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cambridge NeuroScience Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Penn Engineering &amp; Mfg.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sun Sportswear Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Charles Schwab Corp., San Francisco, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell $100 million in debt securities. *
Massachusetts Health and Educational Facilities Authority is selling $129.8 million in tax-exempt revenue bonds priced to yield a maximum 5.68 percent for an issue due in 2023 through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
Serial bonds with shorter maturities are priced to yield from 2.70 percent in 1994 to 4.20 percent in 1998, 4.80 percent in 2003, 5.25 percent in 2008 and 5.40 percent in 2010.
Another long-term bond due in 2014 is offered at a price to yield 5.50 percent, while another due in 2018 is priced to yield about 5.648 percent.
The bonds, which are for Boston College, are rated A-1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


Gulfmark International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.98
2.92
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.06
3.05
2.99
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.24
3.23
3.18
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.26
5.22
6.41
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.17
6.10
7.68
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.27
7.20
8.62
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.61
5.56
6.55
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A Cop Stalks Trouble, Right There in Motor City
It is not a good sign that Peter Weller, who originated the title role of the cyborg police officer in the hit movie "Robocop" and its sequel is not around for Part 3.
In the latest episode of the series, which seems to have nearly run out of steam, he is portrayed by Robert John Burke, an actor who bears some resemblance to Mr.
Weller while lacking his forerunner's tongue-in-cheek glint of authoritarian machismo.
Once again, the setting is a crumbling, futuristic Detroit that is riddled with crime.
When the police are not battling gangs of "Splatterpunks" -- rotten-toothed, spiky-haired youths who look like a surreal hangover from 1977 -- they are in cahoots with Omni Consumer Products, a Japanese-owned conglomerate.


Last Mass at a Historic Church


CONFLICT IS SEEN BETWEEN REGIONS IN HEALTH PLAN
While President Clinton's sweeping proposals would extend health care equally to all Americans, consumers and businesses in and around older urban areas like New York City are likely to find themselves paying substantially higher premiums for coverage than their counterparts elsewhere, and in many cases even higher than today.
At its core, the Clinton plan would create a web of regional "health alliances" to pool the purchasing power of consumers and negotiate on their behalf for lower prices for health insurance.
The Clinton system would not necessarily produce new costs -- indeed it is intended to operate more efficiently than what Americans have now -- but it will almost certainly reshuffle the deck in who has to pay the costs of medical care.
Sharing Cities' Burdens
The states, not Washington, are to create these new purchasing pools and decide their boundaries.
What is critical, though, is that the regional alliances that include big cities with costly health care burdens will be forced to charge their residents more than those that do not.


Settlement Backed in Texas on G.M. Pickups
A Texas state judge approved a settlement on Tuesday under which the General Motors Corporation will give $1,000 coupons to 645,000 owners of older pickups that Federal safety officials say may pose a fire hazard.
The settlement resolves a class-action lawsuit bought in 1992 on behalf of Texas owners of full-size G.M. pickups built between 1973 and 1987.
The plaintiffs claimed that the fire risks posed by the vehicles' side-mounted fuel tanks had reduced their resale value.
A similar case involving 5.7 million G.M. pickup owners nationwide is pending in Federal court in Philadelphia.


METRO DIGEST
HIGHER HEALTH-CARE COSTS
While President Clinton's sweeping proposals would extend health care equally to all Americans, consumers and businesses in and around older urban areas like New York City are likely to find themselves paying substantially higher premiums.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Corrections
A table of Long Island election results yesterday misstated the party affiliation of Mark Morgenstern, a candidate for Nassau County district attorney.
He ran on the Liberal Party line, not Right to Life.


Giuliani's Most Trusted Aide Juggles Demands of Success
In a cluttered office at the campaign headquarters of Rudolph W. Giuliani, which is now papered with hastily prepared signs reading, "Office of the Mayor-elect," Peter J. Powers reflected on the abrupt transition from campaign manager to builder of a new administration.
Amid the detritus of the campaign -- paper coffee cups, crumpled pamphlets, an ashtray of cigarette butts and, not unexpectedly, a growing stack of telephone messages -- Mr.
Powers has suddenly found himself thrust into the center of the swirl of demands and pressures Mr.
Giuliani faces as he puts together the city's first Republican administration in a generation.
Seeking Common Ground
There are the Republican Party leaders anxious to have a crack finally at City Hall.
There is the Liberal Party, which gave Mr.
Giuliani a ballot line to attract disaffected Democrats.
There are the Democrats who switched teams in the name of fusion.
There are blacks embittered by the campaign, and other constituencies like women and Hispanic residents.
Not to mention Mr.
Giuliani's myriad promises of change and inclusion and decisions based on merit.


Tuesday's Tea Leaves
The pundits have stretched their analytical powers to the limit to find meaning in Tuesday's elections.
Their judgments range from the minimalist (nothing much happened) to the apocalyptic (the Democrats are headed for disaster in 1994).
One point on which most agree is that this is a terrible time to be an incumbent.
And on that they are surely right.
Eight months into the Clinton Presidency, people remain anxious and frustrated, worried about their jobs and their country and gripped by a clammy sense that things aren't quite right and ought to be better.
This is the malaise that Ross Perot successfully tapped into last year, and on Tuesday it translated into a brushfire of protest.
Like those houses in Malibu, the incumbents just happened to be in the way.


Giuliani Plays It Straight on 'Seinfeld'


American Medical Response Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Marketer Is Chosen By Interactive Network
Peter Sealey, a former Coca-Cola marketing executive, yesterday was named president and chief operating officer of Interactive Network Inc., a Silicon Valley start-up company that runs an interactive television service.
Mr.
Sealey, 53, who has been described as a consumer marketing futurist, left the soft drink maker in July.
He will begin his new job on Jan. 3.


Books of The Times; A Couple's Long Stroll Toward a Livelier Life
Miles Away
A Walk Across France
By Miles Morland
Illustrated. 238 pages. Random House. $21.
Stories of journeys line one of literature's longest shelves.
To set off on a path with a goal in mind and eventually, after great effort, to reach the goal is, after all, a perfect prescription for a narrative.
And thus the journey is attractive to writers both literally and -- the horror! the horror! -- as a metaphor.


Relaxed Florio Regrets Little Except Losing
Relaxed, self-effacing and uncharacteristically jovial, Gov.
Jim Florio made his first public appearance today since his re-election defeat and blamed the loss on a late surge of support by undecided voters for a tax-cut plan by his opponent, Christine Todd Whitman.
"I think it is fairly clear that in the last couple of weeks, people started looking at Mrs. Whitman's tax-cutting proposal, even those who may have reservations about it," Mr.
Florio said.


Fear of H.I.V.-Infected Blood Spreads Past German Borders
A furor over charges that a German company distributed H.I.V.-infected blood, perhaps knowingly, to dozens of hospitals is causing anxiety throughout Germany, and it spread today to other European countries where hospitals also bought blood from the accused company.
Italy, Sweden, France, Switzerland and Austria today halted the sale of blood products purchased from the company, UB Plasma.
Officials in Britain, Greece and the Czech Republic began intensive searches to see if any of the potentially tainted products were stored in their hospitals.


Review/Film; Building a Future on a Shaky Past
"Bone" isn't a word that often turns up in movie titles.
As used by the writer and director Steve Kloves in "Flesh and Bone," it suggests something tough, ominous and strikingly deliberate, qualities that perfectly capture the mood of Mr.
Kloves's transfixing second feature.
Although this film's story and setting locate it light-years away from "The Fabulous Baker Boys," his earlier romance steeped in world-weary diffidence and late-night glamour, these two films have a lot in common.
They share the sharp stylistic imprint of a young film maker who is no longer merely going places.
He has arrived.
Mr.
Kloves happens to make films -- he also wrote "Racing With the Moon" (1984) -- but he thinks like a novelist.
He creates original stories out of whole cloth, with a novelist's ability to interweave narrative threads, sustain haunting symmetries and look deep into his characters' hearts.
That aspect of his talent is especially clear in "Flesh and Bone," which doesn't match the sultriness of "The Fabulous Baker Boys" but tells a much more ambitious story.
It begins with a heart-stopping prologue set in an isolated Texas farmhouse.
This house, seen twice during the story, provides the film with a set of dramatic bookends, and with a near-biblical sense of right and wrong.


ADAC Laboratories (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Market Place; Just looking for opportunities in beer can kill an investor's gusto.
LIGHT beer.
Dark beer.
Dry beer.
Steam beer.
Ice beer.
Wheat beer.
Pilsner.
Porter.
Stout.
When it comes to beer, drinkers have an incredible number of choices.
But investors will find far fewer ways to sample the beer market.
And right now, none of them seems very attractive.
That's notwithstanding the excitement in the beer industry earlier this week after Hicks, Muse &amp; Company agreed to pay $390 million for the G. Heileman Company, the nation's fifth-largest brewer.
Industry executives and analysts expect more deals as part of a continuing consolidation.
But people interested in beer are probably better off putting a foot on the bar rail than looking for a stock play.


Arthur J. Klein; Entertainment Lawyer, 61
Arthur J. Klein, a New York lawyer for 35 years who often represented actors and other people in entertainment, died on Tuesday at his apartment in Manhattan.
He was 61.
The cause was a heart attack, said Martin Garbus, a law partner.


Art in Review
Oyvind Fahlstrom
Sidney Janis Gallery  110 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through Nov. 13
The work of Oyvind Fahlstrom, a Swedish artist who died of cancer in 1976 at the age of 47, occupies a frequently overlooked niche in the history of Pop Art, one that is illuminated by this small, excellent retrospective.
It includes 25 works dating from 1963 to 1975: drawings, paintings on paper and a collage whose magnetized motifs can be moved around, as well as three colorful cutout sculptures, reintroducing an artist who was, in essence, a political miniaturist.


Piedmont Management Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Merrill Lynch Offers Settlement to Real Estate Investors
Investors in a real estate partnership widely sold by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company have been offered a settlement that would return to them less than 2 cents on every dollar of their original investment.
Lawyers familiar with the case warned that many investors could collect substantially more, but only if they decide by Dec. 1 not to participate in the settlement.
The settlement offer was sent to investors recently by Beigle &amp; Sandler, a Chicago law firm handling the lawsuit in Federal court in Chicago.


Review/Film; Inner Voices, This Time From Dogs
Like an over-dressed Christmas tree, "Look Who's Talking Now" is a movie so eager to shine that it arrives draped in several layers of sentimental tinsel and cutesy-pie decorations.
The third film in the series that began four years ago with the surprise blockbuster "Look Who's Talking" continues the gimmick of observing an all-American family through the eyes of creatures who don't speak.
But in Part 3, the perspective has shifted from the human to the canine.
And the sound of stars mouthing the inner thoughts of dogs is somehow funnier than that of grownup actors doing wisecracking voice-overs for gurgling infants.
Once again John Travolta and Kirstie Alley play James and Mollie Ubriacco, an indefatigably cheery middle-class couple whose two frisky children, Mikey (David Gallagher) and Julie (Tabitha Lupien), have reached the ages of 6 and 4, respectively.
The fun begins when James is hired to be the highly paid private pilot for Samantha D'Bonne (Lysette Anthony), the beautiful, snooty chief executive of an international cosmetics company.
When Samantha donates her elegantly coiffed poodle to the Ubriaccos at the same moment that they acquire a stray mongrel, their home becomes the site of a comic class struggle.


Cisco Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 24


AllState Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mitel Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about rising sales at Brooks Brothers misstated the pretax profits of the store's British parent company, Marks &amp; Spencer, when converted from British pounds to dollars.
For the six months that ended March 31, Marks &amp; Spencer earned the equivalent of $464.8 million, not $209 million.


Plan for a TV Screen in Grand Central Draws Criticism
Eager to increase revenues, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority will erect a high-definition television screen at Grand Central Terminal later this month in a test of an advertising, news and entertainment program that officials say could raise $1 million a year.
But because the screen is planned for the east end of the main concourse at Grand Central, one of those rare buildings where public use and landmark architecture intersect to form a sense of public ownership, there have been cries of sacrilege from architects, planners and some of the thousands of commuters who pass through the terminal's soaring spaces and triumphal archways.


Universal Holding Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


For Children
Urban Forest Ecology Center
Van Cortlandt Park  West 242d Street (at Broadway)  The Bronx  (718) 548-7070  Recommended ages: 4 and up
Central Park has its new Charles A. Dana Discovery Center, and Van Cortlandt Park has a new center as well.
It opened on Monday and focuses on how to preserve the 5,000 acres of woods in New York City.
For 7 1/2 million squeezed urban dwellers, it's a challenge.


Rights Lawyer Defends Both Croats and Serbs
In the turmoil that has engulfed much of the former Yugoslavia over the last two years, the practice of law has also become precarious, particularly for those engaged in civil rights cases.
Nikola J. Barovic, a Belgrade lawyer, says that in the course of defending clients accused of "anti-state activities" he has been threatened twice at gunpoint by militiamen, once in Croatia and once in Serbia.


Bard (C.R.) Inc.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Giants Decide Two Backs Are Better Than One
When Rodney Hampton thinks about the games earlier this season, when he was carrying the football 30 and 40 times a game, his legs begin to ache.
He never complained about carrying the ball so much, but he was like those horses in Central Park that take tourists on carriage rides.
Steady, dependable, but seriously overworked.
All right, so Hampton's a thoroughbred, not just any horse.
But the point is that in 4 games he had an impressive 124 carries, or 31 a game.
That's a lot, even for a big guy like Hampton.


Michael's Week Ends On Maybe and What If
Gene Michael was probably the only general manager working at the general managers' meetings this week without a contract.
But he was apparently well ahead of some of his colleagues in his readiness to make deals.
"I think we were more prepared to do something than most other teams," Michael said as the meetings ended today.
"We have some things that have a chance to be done, but the other teams have to go home and look at their budgets and talk to their owners. They're going to take this back and digest it and decide what they can do with their payrolls."


Sales Data Offer Few Clues To Stores' Holiday Prospects
There was little consistency in the October sales figures reported yesterday by most of the major retail chains, leaving merchants with few hints about how they will fare during the critical holiday sales season.
For every department store operator that had sluggish sales in October, there was one with healthy gains, a pattern that held true for most other types of retailers.


CCL Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Shot Heard Round the Boroughs


Peres Hinting at Another Israeli-Arab Accord
Israel's Foreign Minister, Shimon Peres, has dropped broad hints of a possible breakthrough in peace negotiations with another Arab country.
But he played down intense speculation in the press here today of an approaching agreement comparable to the one that Israel signed two months ago with the Palestine Liberation Organization.
As a sign of the mixture of anticipation and confusion that Mr.
Peres created with remarks on Israel television on Wednesday night, Israel was reported today as being on the verge of an important step forward with -- depending on the newspaper one read -- Syria, Jordan, Saudi Arabia or Tunisia.


CREDIT MARKETS;
The issuance of new corporate debt is running at a record pace, according to Stephen W. Carter, an analyst with MCM/Corporatewatch.
He said yesterday that the total of debt sold to date is about $250 billion compared with $207 billion for all of last year.
Yesterday, about $1.2 billion of new corporate paper was sold, including $700 million of bonds by the Pacific Gas and Electric Company through Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.


Editorial Notebook; Confronting Slaughter in the Streets
My cousin Paul was shot to death at the age of 16.
My brother Blake, a dealer of cocaine, was murdered at 22.
My boyhood friend Stephen, number 14 on our football team, was shot four times in the head while conducting his heroin business.
A second Stephen, in what sounded like a crack-induced frenzy, murdered three people, one of whom I also knew, then hanged himself in jail.
I'd list more, except that space forbids it.
Most people who write for a living don't have lists like this.
That's because most people who write for a living are white, and white people tend to die of natural causes.
Black people, especially black men, are murdered in inordinately high numbers.
Thus those of us who make up the new and tenuous black middle class live with a grisly backdrop.
The prematurely dead number so many that we sort them by category: the violently dead; the drug-addicted, dead of overdoses; the nearly dead, whose departures we expect at any moment.


Panel Reports Genetic Screening Has Cost Some Their Health Plans
Some American workers have already lost their jobs and others their health insurance on the basis of information obtained through genetic screening, a panel of the National Academy of Sciences said today.
If laws are not passed soon to curb the problem, the panel warned, thousands more Americans will face such discrimination.


Croatian Refugees Flee Fighting in Central Bosnian Town


Jurors Convict Mother in Death Of a Track Star
After deliberating only four hours, a jury today convicted a 43-year-old woman of murdering her teen-age daughter, who was one of the nation's most promising young female track stars.
The defendant, Vivian King, a nurse's aide, was found guilty of third-degree murder, not first-degree murder as charged, in apparent recognition by the jurors of mitigating circumstances that included her drinking 88 ounces of beer and corn liquor on the night of the slaying last winter.


Diner's Journal
New Places in Old
In the lean atmosphere of the 90's, new restaurants are often retreads, old places recycled instead of elaborate new constructions.
There are exceptions, to be sure: the multi-level Harley-Davidson Cafe in a former bank building comes to mind.
So far this fall, dining in New York has been enriched by new places emphasizing Mediterranean fare, steaks and an occasional newly minted cuisine.
Here is a sampling in Manhattan: CIAO EUROPA, 65 West 54th Street in the Hotel Warwick, serves a blend of European and Italian food.
The owners are Tony and Frank Pecora of Letitzia on the Upper East Side.
Main courses are $13.50 to $20.
Telephone: (212) 247-1200.


Open Season on Nets as Nets Open
The Nets open their season tonight in Houston against the Rockets, and few people give them a chance to be serious contenders, but don't say that too loudly.
"We don't count ourselves out," said 6-foot-10-inch power forward Derrick Coleman.
"You look at all the new people we have and it's going to be a little bit of a struggle, but we'll surprise some people."


Review/Theater: Timon of Athens; From Rich Altruist To Ranting Hermit
IN its first two years, under the directorship of Tony Randall, the National Actors Theater developed the unenviable reputation of a company that could turn gold into dross.
According to most reviews, such dramatic masterworks as "The Crucible" and "The Seagull" seemed to shrivel into abject clunkiness.
While its production of "Saint Joan" last season received muted critical approval, few people expected inspirational lightning to strike the Lyceum, where the troupe is now based, at least not for some time.
Given this gloomy background, the idea of the company's opening its third season with Shakespeare's "Timon of Athens" appeared, on the surface, pretty foolhardy.
A maddeningly sketchy, fractured work with the formal stiffness of a medieval morality play, it is widely believed never to have been completed by its author, and its performance history is scant.
In short, it is about as close as you come to dross in the Shakespearean canon.


Italy's High Drama
After 20 months of scandal and sensation, arrests and investigation, this is a country that has reviled its politicians and jailed its businessmen, defrocked its spies and sullied its generals.
It is a land that has sunk into fretting and worry over a rash of bombings, over unsolved mysteries that return to haunt it, over daily disclosures of official wrongdoing that suggest nothing will get better before it gets worse.
If there is one central, unanswered question that hovers over the Italians it is this: How will the blighted Italy of disgrace and scandal pull itself back into sync with the Italy of progress and prosperity it once imagined itself to be, or the Italy its reformers want it to be again?


Radio Dispatchers Set to Rival Cellular Phones
Offering a potentially cheap and quick way to compete in the cellular telephone market, companies with radio licenses to link taxi and truck fleets have suddenly become hotly sought properties.
The trend continued yesterday when Vanguard Cellular Systems Inc., the nation's 14th-largest cellular telephone company, with operations from Maine to Florida, agreed to invest as much as $197 million in Geotek Industries, a small radio-dispatch company based in Montvale, N.J.
That stake followed a $40 million investment in Geotek on Tuesday by a partnership led by the money manager George Soros.


On Stage, and Off
TV or Not TV: That Is the Question
Resurrecting a knotty Broadway problem, the producers of "Damn Yankees," the musical revival due at the Marquis in February, have asked Actors' Equity, the performers union, to allow a pay-per-view telecast of the show.
In response, earlier this week, the union, which has opposed such performances in the past, submitted its own proposal to the producers.
No one on either side would divulge the specifics of the proposals, but everyone spoke with cautious hope that a resolution was possible and that Broadway could then get on with an experiment that seems overdue.
"We understand the need to bring in new money to the industry," said Alan Eisenberg, the executive secretary of Actors' Equity.
"It leads to more productions. But we also don't know whether things like taping and pay-per-view on a show have, as a consequence, a shortened run. There's no empirical evidence."


Review/Film: Remains of the Day; Blind Dignity: A Butler's Story
IN the late 1930's, in a stately home of England called Darlington Hall, Stevens (Anthony Hopkins) is the butler.
He's the supreme commander of a vast staff that includes the housekeeper, the underbutlers, the cooks, the maids, the footmen, the scullery helpers, even those people who work outside the great house.
As the members of his staff are expected to serve him, so Stevens serves his master, Lord Darlington (James Fox).
He serves without question.
Or, as he says at one point, "It's not my place to have an opinion."
Stevens is not just any butler.
Through a combination of hard work, long hours, denial of his own needs and carefully blinkered intelligence, Stevens has become what his peers would acknowledge to be a great butler.
In his world he's the equivalent to Lord Darlington, someone who, when the chips are down, is to be trusted.
Stevens is a man of honor and dignity, which become for him, as for the intensely dim-witted Lord Darlington, fatal flaws.


Why Not Mandatory Liability Insurance for Handgun Owners?
To the Editor:
The constitutionality of handgun controls has so thoroughly dominated public debate that other methods of curbing handgun violence are seldom considered.
Well-established principles of tort and insurance law might be applied to solve handgun violence.


Bowe Shadowboxes: Tyson Is the Shadow
Riddick Bowe warmed to his subject himself -- this morning.
In only two more days he will defend his heavyweight crown against Evander Holyfield, the fighter he needs to beat convincingly to give him, and others, further perspective on his place in boxing history.
"Ali was defined by his opponents," Bowe explained.
The champion was serious now, with none of the tough street talk that has marked his verbal run-ins with Holyfield.


Judge May Sever Some Charges in Case Involving a Plot to Bomb Landmarks
A Federal judge yesterday told lawyers defending the 15 men charged with sedition in a conspiracy to blow up New York City landmarks that he might be ready to sever the 1990 killing of Rabbi Meir Kahane from the case as well as charges involving what prosecutors say was a plot to assassinate the Egyptian President, Hosni Mubarak.
Speaking at a pretrial hearing in a courtroom packed with 14 defendants and their lawyers, the judge, Michael B. Mukasey, asked what the Kahane killing and the alleged plot to kill Mr.
Mubarak had to do with sedition, which is the overarching element in the indictment.


Voters Amend Constitution
Voters in New York State on Tuesday approved three proposals regarding the handling of debt.
By 54 percent to 46 percent, voters amended the State Constitution to permit more flexible terms in borrowing by counties, municipalities and school districts.


United Water Res.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Senate Vote Breaks Crime Bill Impasse
The Senate voted 94 to 4 to set up a $22 billion trust fund to provide local governments with 100,000 new police officers over five years and money to build regional prisons to house the most violent inmates.
Both Republicans and Democrats said the amendment, which doubled the amount of money in the original bill, softened the partisan rancor over gun control and the death penalty that has stymied passage of a crime bill for two years.


Sport Supply Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


N.C.A.A. Selects Arizonan As Director
Cedric Dempsey, the athletic director at the University of Arizona, has been picked to become the third executive director of the National Collegiate Athletic Association.
He will succeed Dick Schultz, who abruptly announced his resignation in May after an N.C.A.A. investigation concluded that he had knowledge of illicit loans to University of Virgina athletes during his tenure as the Virginia athletic director, something Schultz has repeatedly denied.
Schultz, who replaced Walter Byers, the N.C.A.A.'s first executive director, in 1987, has continued to serve pending selection of a successor.


Review/Art; Mike Kelley's Messages: Mixed and Mystical
One of the more striking works in Mike Kelley's often disturbing, sometimes beautiful and always demanding exhibition at the Whitney Museum of American Art is a big colorful banner made of pieces of felt.
It depicts a cheery and motherly cookie jar and is emblazoned with the words "Let's Talk About Disobeying."
The phrase conjures an ambiguous stew of psychological, moral and sexual suggestions.
There's a ring of Mother Superior authority that may stir some childhood memory of being caught with one's fingers where they shouldn't be.
The words also have an almost thrilled conspiratorial tone, as if one had been apprehended by a fellow traveler who wants all the details.
In addition, these evocations of punishment and pleasure converge along a path toward something darker: the words suggest a dominatrix speaking to a paying customer.
Cookies are the least of it.


Critic's Notebook; Of Mystics, Minimalists and Musical Miasmas
"It does not invoke the history of music," Virgil Thomson once wrote of Erik Satie's "Mass for the Poor," composed in 1895.
"Its inner life is as independent of you as a Siamese cat." Classical music has been somewhat overrun in recent years by Siamese cats.
The halting, hushed, minimal, liturgical manner that occupied Satie toward the end of the 19th century has come round with a vengeance.
Composers have perfected a mysterious, glassy gaze, writing as if the history of music were at an end.
Heading a particular movement known as "mystical Minimalism" is the Polish composer Henryk Gorecki, whose huge, immobile Third Symphony showed up in New York last week with the Orchestra of St.
Luke's.
Elektra Nonesuch's recording of the piece has reached a half-million record buyers, not to mention millions of moviegoers watching the climactic sequence of Peter Weir's "Fearless." Close behind is Arvo Part of Estonia and Germany, whose evanescent sonorities and softly pulsing rhythms have been documented by the ECM label.
Works by Mr.
Gorecki, Mr.
Part and the like-minded Giya Kancheli of Georgia are scheduled for two Brooklyn Philharmonic concerts this weekend at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, under the banner "European Mystics."


Corrections
Because of a transcription error, excerpts from Rudolph W. Giuliani's victory speech in some copies on Wednesday rendered a passage incorrectly.
It should have read: "As we look to the future we must proceed with one thing in mind. Whatever adversity we face, we will face it together, and whatever the benefits, they will be distributed evenly and fairly." (The correct word was "adversity," not "diversity.")


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
Stock market investors' fears of rising interest rates heightened, forcing a sweeping sell-off.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 36.89 points, to 3,624.98, as anticipation rose that money would flee the stock market for higher-yielding bonds.  [ Page D1. ]


Sports of The Times; There Are Many Ways To Be Missed
A LIFE-SIZE poster of Reggie Lewis greeted a visitor to Jack Grinold's office on the campus of Northeastern University yesterday, but Grinold said it was one of those days when the realization that Lewis is gone hit home just a little harder than usual.
This was not because the Celtics were to open the season tonight against the powerful Knicks without their best player, or much hope of making the playoffs.
Yesterday happened to be the deadline for postmarked entries in the annual Reggie Lewis Turkey Give Away, a reminder that it was the time of year Lewis would have been around the office if the Celtics were in town.


Serv-Tech Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Murder Indictment Given In Bucket-Tossing Case
Citing "circumstances evincing a depraved indifference to human life," a grand jury handed up an indictment of second-degree murder yesterday against the man who threw a bucket from a Washington Heights rooftop that killed a police officer in the street below.
Grand jury proceedings are closed and protected by secrecy laws, but the panel apparently rejected an appeal made before it last week by the defendant, Pedro J. Gil, who has admitted to throwing the bucket but has contended he did not intend to kill anyone.
By appearing, he was seeking to receive a far less severe charge of second-degree manslaughter, which carries a maximum prison sentence of 5 to 15 years.
Instead, Mr.
Gil, 22, faces a maximum sentence of 25 years to life.


Canyon Resources (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Beukeboom Grants Keenan His Big Wish
Two days after he traded defenseman James Patrick, the player furthest out of favor with Coach Mike Keenan, Rangers General Manager Neil Smith managed to sign holdout Jeff Beukeboom, the defenseman Keenan has longed to see in a New York jersey.
Beukeboom, 28, agreed to terms late this afternoon and is expected to join the team in time for practice Friday.
He signed a three-year contract that is believed to be worth slightly more than $2 million.
Beukeboom will earn approximately $650,000 this season, $675,000 the next and $700,000 in the final year.


Medical Freedom
To the Editor:
On the conflict between establishment and alternative medicine, and the Food and Drug Administration's stand on vitamins and herbs, I submit a quotation from Dr.
Benjamin Rush, one of the signers of the Declaration of Independence (to be found, among other places, in "The Great Quotations," compiled by George Seldes):


Elbit Ltd. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Athlete Is Butcher's Ticket to Press Pass
DUST off a seat in the press box, boys. Sid Frenkel's back in business.
It had been a long year in the wilderness, or rather, behind the counter, for Mr.
Frenkel, a year of slicing cutlets and trimming porterhouses and waiting for the phone to ring.
And now at last, word has reached him over at the Ideal Meat Market that his journalistic skills are once again required.


Corrections
A news analysis article yesterday about shifts in voting patterns in the New York City mayoral election misstated the party affiliation of Mayor Edward G. Rendell of Philadelphia.
He is a Democrat, not a Republican.


Consolidated Natural Gas Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Packwood Disgrace
The scene in the Senate chamber was ugly.
Bob Packwood, fighting for his political life, forced his peers to take him to court for his diaries and papers.
A few senators concocted a civil liberties case against compelling Senator Packwood to produce diaries that he himself had invoked in his own defense against sexual misconduct charges.
Only the final vote of 94 to 6 to enforce the Ethics Committee's subpoena redeemed the distasteful two-day debate.
The Ethics Committee should not reward Senator Packwood's intransigence; it ought to seek an early court hearing to enforce the subpoena.
But that need not interfere with action on the main front -- to hear the two dozen complainants in the sexual misconduct cases.


Plains Resources Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30





MLX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Echo Bay Mines Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


National Securities Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


Block Drug Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


OPTI Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Job Seekers Outpace Hiring Rise
Expectations of a recovering economy sent thousands of formerly discouraged job seekers back into the market last month, pushing the unemployment rate higher despite further expansion in the number of jobs.
Payrolls expanded by 177,000 jobs and factory employment ended a seven-month slide, the Labor Department reported today, but the unemployment rate edged up a tenth of a point, to 6.8 percent, because people entered the labor market at a faster rate than jobs were created.


Review/Fashion; Visions of Victoriana
Richard Tyler was in command yesterday.
In the Anne Klein collection he showed earlier this week, his skills were put to work to update a traditional sportswear company.
In his own Richard Tyler collection, he could give free rein to his own vision.
And a beautiful vision it was.
Some may think frock coats and Victorian nightshirts aren't what women want to wear at the end of the 20th century.
But Mr.
Tyler managed to give these styles a contemporary spin.
He kept the frock coats light as a breeze and showed them open over sheer nightshirts that are cropped to shirt length or as flippy skirts that barely peeked out from coat hems.


Berkley (W.R.) (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bombing-Plot Defendants Criticize Treatment in Jail
Ibrahim A. Elgabrowny has come to despise orange -- the color of his jail jumpsuit.
Tarig El-Hassan says he is still waiting for new glasses to replace the pair he lost when the F.B.I. arrested him.
And Clement Hampton-El says he works five hours a day swabbing floors, his only escape from what would be 23 hours a day of solitary confinement.
The three men are among 13 defendants imprisoned in the Metropolitan Correctional Center in lower Manhattan, awaiting trial in the plot to bomb the United Nations, Hudson River tunnels and other New York City landmarks.


Outback Steakhouse (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Moscow Still Controls Ukraine's Nuclear Arms; Removal Is the Goal
To the Editor:
Your editorials sometimes seem to live a separate life from the events reported in your news columns.
"Ukraine's Wasting Nuclear Asset" (editorial, Oct. 26) is a good example.


Classical Music in Review
Jan Opalach Baritone Kathryn Bache Miller Theater


Medical Tech Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


AmeriHealth Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


90's Knock at Litton's Gilded Doors
After nearly 30 years, Litton Industries, the aerospace and weapons company, is leaving its palatial headquarters here and heading for a sterile office complex in the San Fernando Valley.
The reason, executives say privately, is that the offices' more than passing resemblance to a grand Southern mansion, complete with English-style furnishings and needlepoint tapestries, is at odds with the no-frills image that military contractors must present in a time of austerity.


'So No One Will Suspect I'm Afraid'
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 26 Science Times article on the psychological lift of a truly happy smile tells us that according to a discovery by Paul Ekman, we can generate our own emotions even if we are in a neutral state.
Dr.
Ekman instructed the subjects in his experiment to "raise your cheeks, part your lips and let your lip corners come up." Thus, we can generate an emotion of enjoyment, though we may be in merely a neutral state.


American Air's Route Award
The Transportation Department yesterday tentatively awarded American Airlines routes to London from the carrier's hubs in Nashville and Raleigh-Durham, N.C., edging out Delta Air Lines and its Salt Lake City hub.
Though the American routes are to London's Gatwick Airport rather than the more popular Heathrow Airport, they are highly coveted by city officials and airlines, in part because they are limited in number by an aviation agreement between the United States and Britain.


Giuliani Says He Might Keep Minority Contracts Program
Taking his message of reconciliation to areas of New York City that supported his opponent, Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that he would reconsider his pledge to abolish the Dinkins administration program that directs a share of city contracts to minorities and women.
And in another issue of particular concern to black and Hispanic New Yorkers, Mr.
Giuliani reaffirmed the promise he made to give the new civilian police complaint review board at least a year to work before considering any changes.


Investors Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Counsel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tinsley Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


White Sox Decide to Bid Adieu to Jackson
Bo Jackson, who made a remarkable physical comeback this year with an artificial hip, became a free agent yesterday after the Chicago White Sox decided not to exercise the 1994 option in his contract.
The White Sox decided to give Jackson $150,000 in termination pay rather than a 1994 salary of $2.41 million, which could have grown to $3.75 million if he became healthy.
He earned $2.41 million this past season, during which he batted .232, hit 16 home runs and drove in 45 runs.
He played in 85 games but needed to play in 125 for the 1994 option to become automatically vested.


Jordan's King Said to Meet Israeli As Speculation About Pact Rises
Disclosures that King Hussein of Jordan met secretly this week with Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of Israel intensified already considerable speculation here today that the two countries have moved closer to an eventual peace agreement.
Israeli press articles suggest that progress has also been made through a secret channel in Israel's negotiations with Syria.
They include a report today of possible exchanges of land that would guarantee a continued Israeli military presence on the Golan Heights, which Syria insists on getting back in return for a peace treaty with Israel.


Conseco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Program to Curb Abuses in Building Inspections Has Begun
To the Editor:
A report on corruption scandals in the New York City Department of Buildings (news article, Oct. 23) suggests that city agencies, including this one, were not aggressive in anticorruption programs.
You cite as examples rarely rotating inspectors, allowing supervisors or inspectors to choose routes and make appointments, failing to install computer systems to detect inspectors not handing in paperwork and lack of an independent unit to check the work of field inspectors.
You also mention a commissioner's failed attempt in 1966 to increase visibility of inspectors by putting them in uniforms.


Steinbrenner Solvent, Baseball Says
The Yankees will apparently not be affected by the bankruptcy of George Steinbrenner's American Ship Building Company.
Bud Selig, baseball's acting commissioner, said yesterday that he knew of no possible implication the bankruptcy could have for the Yankees.


Telebit Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


French Workers Protest Layoffs


Ralston Purina Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Quaker Chemical (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Data Systems &amp; Software Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Robertson Picks a Fight
ALVIN ROBERTSON of the Detroit Pistons had a fight with BILLY McKINNEY, the team's player personnel director, shortly after McKinney told him on Thursday that he was being suspended for three games for skipping practices and missing back rehabilitation sessions, two newspapers reported yesterday.
Robertson pinned McKinney on a courtside table during a practice session at Auburn Hills, Mich., and coaches and players had to pull him off, The Detroit Free Press and The Oakland Press of Pontiac, Mich., reported.


Oscar I. Janowsky, City College Leader In 1950's, Dies at 93
Prof.
Oscar I. Janowsky, director of graduate studies in liberal arts and science at City College in the 1950's and a professor of history from 1924 until he retired in 1966, died on Thursday at Princeton Medical Center in Princeton, N.J.
He was 93 and lived in Jamesburg, N.J., his retirement home for more than 20 years.
His family said the cause of death was a stroke.


Sequent Computer Sys (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Strict New Test On Car Exhaust Set in New York
To make the air cleaner, life will soon get more complicated for the owners of 5.8 million cars and other vehicles in New York City and vicinity.
Beginning in 1995 or 1996, those vehicles will have to undergo a new emissions test every two years at one of 37 new inspection stations, at a cost of $25 per test, New York State announced yesterday.


In-Your-Face Defense Is Dolphins' Face-Saver
Stung by a poor performance in its first meeting with the Jets this season, the Miami Dolphins' defense plans to smother Jets' quarterback Boomer Esiason when the two teams meet Sunday in the Meadowlands.
"When they play-actioned in the last game, Boomer had a lot of time to throw," free safety Louis Oliver said today, referring to New York's 24-14 victory Sept. 12.
"This time, we're gonna have guys in his face all day long. Count on it. We're gonna be challenging every single series to come up with the plays. You won't see the same team you saw in that last game."


AlaTenn Resources (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hawker Siddeley reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


After 3 Years of Assisting in Suicides, Kevorkian Lands in Jail


Perot Debate Seen as Way To Try to Save Trade Pact
The White House strategy in challenging Ross Perot to a debate on the North American Free Trade Agreement is based on a calculation that the trade measure is in trouble in Congress and can be rescued if the opposition can be closely identified with Mr.
Perot, President Clinton's advisers said today.
"The more the face of anti-Nafta is Ross Perot, the better off we are," a senior White House official said.
The view in the White House, buttressed by opinion polls, is that Mr.
Perot's public standing has dropped significantly this year.


Great-West Lifeco reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Liqui-Box Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Review/Ice Skating; Blue Genies Steal the Rangers' Home Ice
Anyone can bring coals to Newcastle. But what about ice to the desert?
Leave that feat to the Disney wizards, who have transformed the ice at Madison Square Garden into a slick sultanate in their latest effort to conjure money out of the ancient tale of Aladdin, who thwarts an evil vizier and wins the hand of a beauteous princess with the aid of a genie who rises from a magical lamp.
The vehicle for this excursion into the literature of Middle Eastern profits is "Walt Disney's World on Ice: Aladdin," which opened on Thursday night and runs through tomorrow.
The show, which is produced by Kenneth Feld and sponsored by A.T.&amp;T., is also to play at Nassau Coliseum in Uniondale, L.I., from Nov. 16 through Nov. 21 and at Byrne Meadowlands Arena in East Rutherford, N.J., from Nov. 23 through Nov. 28.


Michigan Judge Denies Custody of Girl to Her Biological Parents


Who Ever Said the Film Business Was Glamorous?


Q &amp; A
Consolidating Student Loans  Q What is the best way to consolidate my educational loans, which vary in interest rate from 5 percent to 10 percent?
MARY ANN T. BANEZ, Baltimore
A Once a Federal student loan is in the repayment period, it can be consolidated with one loan servicer at one interest rate.
Information about agencies that consolidate these loans is available at most college financial aid offices.


A Test of Retraining
When a Zenith television factory was relocated to Mexico last year, many laid-off employees entered Government-financed retraining programs.
Their experiences may be a test case of the sort of retraining efforts promised by the Administration if the free-trade pact is approved.
Article, page 10.


Morgan Products Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


After the Jobs Went South: A Town Finds Pitfalls in a Retraining Effort
Bill Beeman thought maybe it was not so bad when the Zenith television factory here sent his job to Mexico.
The Federal Government, after all, was offering a lifeline to workers hurt by foreign competition -- money to train for a new line of work.
"When I signed up," said Mr.
Beeman, who is 42 and had worked at the plant for 23 years, "they said there would be enough funds there to get you through two years of school."


METRO DIGEST
NEW AUTO EMISSION TESTS DUE
To make the air cleaner, life will soon get more complicated for the owners of 5.8 million vehicles in New York City and vicinity.
Beginning in 1995 or 1996, vehicles will have to undergo a new emissions test every two years.
Page 1.
SENATOR'S BROTHER SENTENCED TO PRISON
Armand P. D'Amato, who was convicted of mail fraud in connection with payments he received from a military contractor to lobby his brother, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, was sentenced to five months in prison and five months in home detention.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY
GIULIANI RECONSIDERS A STAND
Rudolph W. Giuliani said he would reconsider his pledge to abolish the Dinkins administration program that directs a share of city contracts for minorities and women.
Page 1.
Giuliani said he would ask transition team members to pledge not to do business with city agencies for six months after the transition.
Page 26.
SAME STADIUM, NEW PLAYERS
Rudolph W. Giuliani was a Yankees fan long before he was elected Mayor of New York, and his devotion to the team will alter the public tone, if not the financial dynamics, of efforts to keep the team from leaving the city.
Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman has not been part of New Jersey's efforts to woo the Yankees, but she has quickly entered the game.
Page 26.
SETTLEMENT IN WRONG-MAN CASE
A cabdriver whose innocent stop at an automated teller led to the splashing of his face across the pages of two newspapers, along with a description of him as a serial rape suspect, has won a $300,000 settlement.
Page 27.
DEFENDANTS COMPLAIN ABOUT JAIL
Three of the 13 defendants in the Metropolitan Correctional Center in lower Manhattan awaiting trial in a bomb plot have complained of their treatment.
Page 27.
PENNIES SPURNED
There is only one place in New York City where you are guaranteed the right to turn in coins, including pennies, for bills, and that place is none too happy to accept your change.
Page 27.
REGION
STABLE REPORTS BRING ANGER
In Westchester County, where residents spend $68 million a year on their horses, horse lovers reacted with anger to reports that nearly 100 Arabian horses were living without adequate shelter at a Yorktown Heights stable.
Page 28.
PROPELLER KILLS AIRLINE WORKER
An airline ground-crew worker at Newark International Airport was killed when she walked into the spinning propeller of a twin-engine aircraft preparing for takeoff.
Page 28.
UNEMPLOYMENT FIGURES RELEASED
New York State's unemployment rate rose to 7.9 percent in October, from 7.1 percent the month before.
It was pushed up by the New York City rate, which rose sharply to 10.8 percent, from 8.7 percent in September.
In New Jersey, the unemployment rate fell to 6.5 percent, from 8.7 percent the month before, according to figures released by the Government.
Page 41.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 27


DeWolfe Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Modern Controls (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Yankee Stadium's Future: New Players, Same Old Game
Rudolph W. Giuliani was a Yankee fan long before he was elected Mayor of New York, and his devotion to the team will alter the public tone, if not the financial dynamics, of efforts to keep the team from leaving the city.
Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman has not been part of New Jersey's efforts to woo the Yankees across the Hudson River, but she has quickly entered the game, saying her state would welcome the Yankees as long as the pursuit does not cost taxpayers a cent.


Review/Fashion; Easy Dresses, Rocky Finish
For five days, the system worked. On the sixth, it broke down.
Yesterday top retailers, including Joseph Cicio, the chairman of I. Magnin, and Rose Marie Bravo, the president of Saks Fifth Avenue, and journalists from publications including The New York Times, The International Herald Tribune, Elle, Vogue, Allure and Vanity Fair, were denied entrance to the Donna Karan show.


Comcoa Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Moscow Still Controls Ukraine's Nuclear Arms
To the Editor:
In "Ukraine's Wasting Nuclear Asset" (editorial, Oct. 26), you target the wrong country and the wrong problem.
Yes, we have more reason to be nervous about Ukrainian intercontinental ballistic missiles targeted on the United States than the Russians, as it is difficult for the Ukrainians to retarget them on Moscow.


Polaris Industries Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Perceptron Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Warns Libya of Oil Boycott Unless It Gives Up Bomb Suspects
The United States warned Libya today that it may face a global boycott of its oil if it does not hand over suspected terrorists.
The warning came after Russia, under Western pressure, dropped its objections to a new set of Security Council sanctions against the North African oil-producing country.
American officials said the Administration would press for a total oil boycott if the new limited trade and financial embargo just worked out between the United States, Britain, France and Russia does not prompt Libya to surrender the two suspects indicted in the bombing of Pan American World Airlines Flight 103, which exploded over Scotland five years ago with the loss of 270 lives.


Kennedy-Wilson Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Impasse Over World Trade Pact Poisons Ties to U.S., France Says
In an unusually somber assessment of relations between France and the United States, Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said today that disagreements in world trade talks were poisoning the alliance between the two countries while sharp differences also persisted over the new role of NATO.
With just over a month remaining until the deadline set by all parties to conclude long-stalled General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade talks, Mr.
Juppe said, "I am not in the least optimistic because the United States is not negotiating at the moment."


Universal Health Services Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Warming Up to Global Warming
President Clinton's new plan to control global warming looks a lot more like something George Bush would dream up than like anything straight from the heart of Al Gore, the environmental conscience of the Administration.
The plan relies heavily on voluntary actions, goes light on regulatory actions and remains silent on the enormously difficult problem of what to do to head off a big increase in greenhouse gas emissions after the turn of the century.
Even so, the plan is a reasonable response to a distant crisis whose dimensions are uncertain.
This is not an issue on which the President should spend much political or economic capital just yet.


An Official New to Post Quits I.B.M.
I.B.M. announced yesterday that its 49-year-old senior vice president for strategy, M. Bernard Puckett, was leaving the company abruptly, after being promoted to the post just four months ago.
He is being replaced by James A. Cannavino, 49, a senior vice president whose management experience at the International Business Machines Corporation runs the gamut from mainframes to personal computers.
Currently, he is the group executive in charge of the company's personal computer, work station and multimedia businesses.
With his new appointment, Mr.
Cannavino joins the inner circle at I.B.M., headed by Louis V. Gerstner Jr., the new chairman.


D'Amato's Brother Sentenced to 5 Months in Prison
Armand P. D'Amato, who was convicted of mail fraud in payments he received from a military contractor to lobby his brother, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, was sentenced today to five months in prison and five months in home detention.
It was the minimum punishment that Mr.
D'Amato could receive under Federal sentencing guidelines, but Mr.
D'Amato's lawyers said that both the conviction and the sentence would be appealed.
In the meantime, Mr.
D'Amato remains free on $10,000 bail.


Classical Music in Review
Jae-Hyuck Cho Pianist Weill Recital Hall


Badgers' Big Game Is Only A Game
The question would have been foolish in the early afternoon of a week ago Saturday, as the Wisconsin Badgers earned the long-sought victory over Michigan that created the highest stakes for a football game here in more than three decades.
But the devastating scene that followed the game last weekend -- the crush of thousands of students in an out-of-control celebration, the hospitalization of 69 fans and the vigil as the critically injured began to recover -- has made the question inevitable:
Is Wisconsin ready to deal with a football game?


Accepting a Dare to Debate, Perot Retakes the Spotlight
Whatever else the White House expects to get out of a mano a mano debate with Ross Perot over the North American Free Trade Agreement, the challenge has already given the gadfly Texan more prime-time publicity than his millions could buy.
Mr. Perot, who opposes Nafta, could not be happier.


Domtar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


MDT Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A caption yesterday with an artist's rendering of the proposed space station misstated the phase of construction depicted.
It was an interim phase, not the completed station.
A rendering of the completed station appears today on page 9.


Arsenal Is Seized In Brooklyn Raid
A small arsenal of handguns, rifles, pipe bombs and thousands of rounds of ammunition was uncovered yesterday by Federal and city authorities in a raid on a house in Canarsie, Brooklyn, the authorities said.
Four men were arrested on Federal explosives and weapons charges.
There was no indication the men were involved in terrorism, said John A. O'Brien, a spokesman for the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.
They appeared rather to be suppliers for street-level criminals, he said.


Tales From Auerbach's Crypt Or Horrors at North Station
Even before the teams came out to the court, one could sense the difference at Boston Garden tonight.
The familiar buzz of expectation was gone.
The fans filled the seats of the old building on Causeway Street, paid a moment of respect for the late Reggie Lewis, and watched a rebuilding Celtics team fight back from 18 points behind but lose to the Knicks, 111-108.
At halftime, acrobatic jugglers performed for people who have never been fed anything but quality basketball.
In the beer-stained corridor was another sign of the times, a new advance ticket window next door to a popcorn stand.


Observer; Mostest Of the Leastest
Inside Edge, a magazine published by and for college students, has rated 300 colleges and universities as most-fun and least-fun schools.
The bottom five (absolute least-fun) are:
296. U.S. Naval Academy


Corrections
An article in Your Money last Saturday about Stuart Kessler, a financial planner, misstated the address of Goldstein Golub Kessler &amp; Company in Manhattan.
It is at 1185 Avenue of the Americas, not on Park Avenue.


Meadowlands Has Full Menu
Bettors in the New York metropolitan area looking for action on the Breeders' Cup races Saturday will find the best menu at the Meadowlands in East Rutherford, N.J.
Fans will be able to bet on as many as 70 races and will be able to shop for odds through two separate Breeders' Cup pools.
Aqueduct, and all of the offtrack-betting sites that feed into the New York Racing Association track, will have one self-contained pool on the Breeders' Cup races and the three live races planned for Aqueduct.


Harsh View of Officer as Shooting Trial Opens
The Newark police officer accused of ambushing and seriously wounding an unarmed teen-age car thief at the height of Newark's stolen-car plague nearly 18 months ago was portrayed in court today as a man so frustrated by the brazenness of the city's young thieves that he used a stolen, unlicensed gun to get even.
"He decided he wanted to stop being a police officer for a period of time," said the prosecutor, Glenn Goldberg, opening the assault and misconduct trial of Officer Kenneth Holloway Jr.
"He decided that what he'd rather do is go pick up a handgun and shoot somebody."


Dianon Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Miltope Group Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fortis Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Opening of 'Perestroika' Is Delayed Until Nov. 23
After canceling several preview performances to allow more rehearsals, the producers of "Perestroika," Part 2 of Tony Kushner's "Angels in America," have postponed the opening until Nov. 23.
The show was to have opened on Nov. 18 at the Walter Kerr Theater.
"The desire is to get in as many performances as we can before we open," said Paul Libin, the producing director of Jujamcyn Theaters, which owns the Kerr and is one of the play's producers.
"It's a beautifully complex play, and the more times we play it, the richer it will become."


Dow Up 18.45 as Market Shakes Fears on Rates
After two sessions of steep declines, the stock market mounted a mild recovery yesterday, as investors appeared to shake off some of their misgivings about rising interest rates.
The Dow Jones industrial average nearly fell through the psychological barrier of 3,600 an hour after the opening bell, but an afternoon rally in tobacco and bank stocks pushed it to a close of 3,643.43, up 18.45 points.


Review/Fashion; From Manolo, Mermaids Disney Didn't Show You
Manolo's mermaids washed up on a sea-green magical boardwalk yesterday after a particularly violent storm.
Their hair was tangled and matted, their faces scarred with flotsam and jetsam from their underwater journey.
And their clothes looked ravaged by coral reefs, spun from seaweed, cut from the fins of sharks and scalloped like the skins of seahorses.


Green Mountain Power Corp. reports earnings for 12mo to Sept 30


MacDermid Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Film; World's Weierdos in Microcosm, Near a Freudian Forest
It's no wonder the residents of the grotesque, unfinished housing development where Alex van Warmerdam has set his surreal comedy, "The Northerners," are an unbalanced lot.
The place is little more than a row of modern houses and a few shops on the edge of a forest somewhere in the Netherlands.
Just to get to church, which is miles away, the residents must line up every Sunday morning to take a bus.
The film, set in 1960, follows the interactions of a group of the townspeople who become progressively more unstrung as the movie goes along.
The local butcher, Jacob (Jack Wouterse), desperately desires his wife, Martha (Annet Malherbe), who finds him repulsive.
Following the instructions of a religious statue, which comes to life when Jacob is not around, she refuses to eat.
And as she wastes away, their home becomes a shrine in front of whose picture window the neighbors gather in a silent prayer vigil.


Arsonist Sought in Wildfire That Took 3 Lives in Malibu
Investigators from several agencies pressed their search today for the person or persons believed to have ignited the devastating wildfire in Malibu that has taken at least three lives.
The investigators said they believed the fire was the result of arson.
Rewards for the arrest of the arsonist now amount to $255,000.
Firefighters said today that the fire, which started Tuesday and burned about 350 buildings, had been 80 percent contained.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Thousands of formerly discouraged job seekers returned to the employment market last month amid expectations of a recovering economy.
Although payrolls expanded by 177,000 jobs, the big jump in the labor force pushed the unemployment rate up a tenth of a point, to 6.8 percent.  [ Page 41. ]
New York State's unemployment rate rose to 7.9 percent from 7.1 percent, pushed higher by New York City, where joblessness rose to 10.8 percent from 8.7 percent.
In New Jersey, the rate improved sharply, to 6.5 percent from 7.7 percent.  [ 41. ]


MRS Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CliniCom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Shield of One's Own


Kirschner Medical Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


No Headline
If we do have a purpose here, then give it to us.
We thought we were actually coming to fight.
We're causing them more problems with our being here. -- CPL.
MICHAEL JONES, a marine in Somalia.  [ 4:1. ]


Russia Warns Ukraine on Decay of Warheads
Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev of Russia said today that the condition of nuclear warheads in Ukraine had sharply deteriorated and that some of them could lead to an incident worse than the accident at Chernobyl.
"This alarm is shared by both the Ukrainian and Russian leadership," Mr.
Kozyrev said after meeting at this Black Sea port for talks on eliminating former Soviet nuclear weapons.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday, about the Nynex Corporation's planned sale of some computer services businesses, misidentified the company in which Nynex invested $1.2 billion.
The investment was in Viacom Inc., not QVC Network Inc.


Goldcorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


No Jordan? No Sweat. Bulls Win Anyway
Bulls 124, Hornets 123
Without Michael Jordan, opening night took a little longer for the Chicago Bulls.
The Bulls, owners of three consecutive National Basketball Association championships, showed that they are still a solid team, even without their superstar, nearly winning in regulation.
A 28-footer by Charlotte's Johnny Newman at the end of regulation forced an extra period before Horace Grant's put-back with two-tenths of a second left in overtime gave the Bulls a 124-123 victory in their season opener last night in Charlotte.


Tanknology Environmental (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


India May Use Clay
Captain TOM GULLIKSON's recruiting mission for the 1994 United States Davis Cup squad, which has a daunting first-round assignment in India next March and could play all its matches in other countries, took another turn yesterday when he learned that India may select clay, not grass, as its surface.
A veteran Indian player, RAMESH KRISHNAN, indicated that clay may replace grass to undermine PETE SAMPRAS, the No. 1-ranked Wimbledon champion.


Pennies From Heaven? Federal Reserve Doesn't Think So
If you have a coffee can full of pennies, there is only one place in New York City you can go that is legally obligated to redeem them: the Federal Reserve Bank.
But it will try your soul if you go there to exchange them for bills.
And if you find a penny, whatever you do, please don't try to turn it in to the Federal Reserve, even if you're trying to help cut the national debt.


Clinton Opposes Amendment Requiring a Balanced Budget
President Clinton informed Congress today that he opposed a proposed constitutional amendment to require a balanced budget, asserting that "it would promote political gridlock and would endanger our economic recovery."


Bridge
Some players like to fool around with freakish hands, spreading confusion around the table.
None of them can hope to achieve the success that came to Clement Peten of France on the diagramed deal.
Almost 40 years ago, sitting West in a rubber bridge game in Megeve in the French Alps, he picked up an 11-card suit for the first time in his life.
His obvious move when South opened one no-trump was to bid four spades, or five spades, or six spades.
Instead he bid four hearts, keeping his spades in reserve.
When this was doubled, he retreated to five diamonds, not four spades, and North doubled again.


Sensormatic Electronics Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Devcon International Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Perot Debate Seen as Way To Try to Save Trade Pact
The White House strategy in challenging Ross Perot to a debate on the North American Free Trade Agreement is based on a calculation that the trade measure is in trouble in Congress and can be rescued if the opposition can be closely identified with Mr.
Perot, President Clinton's advisers said today.
"The more the face of anti-Nafta is Ross Perot, the better off we are," a senior White House official said.
The view in the White House, buttressed by opinion polls, is that Mr.
Perot's public standing has dropped significantly this year.


CSA Management reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


3DO Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Courier Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Regis Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Monaco Coach Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Zulu Vendetta Clouds the South African Election
The red dirt road that twists up the hill to this Zulu village is a route of ambushes, assassinations, flights and funeral processions marking the factional feuds of South Africa's largest tribe.
One massacre in particular put this corner of the mainly Zulu Natal Province, a lush region known as Table Mountain, on the map of horrors.


Giuliani Asks Transition Team For a Conflict-of-Interest Pledge
Trying to avoid conflicts of interest, Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that he would ask anyone serving on his transition team to pledge not to do business with city agencies for six months after the transition.
The ethics rule, Giuliani aides said, was intended to prevent people who serve on the committee advising the Mayor-elect from lobbying the appointees they had helped to select or from otherwise doing business with the new administration.


88 Picassos Sold at Auction, Some Far Beyond Estimates
Sotheby's has always been a company known for taking risks, and its sale of 88 Picassos from the Stanley J. Seeger collection on Thursday night was a risk well taken.
Every lot sold, with some works bringing double their estimates.
One drawing brought five times as much as expected.
This was Sotheby's at its marketing best.
As soon as the auction house announced the sale in late September, the works were sent on tour to prospective collectors and dealers in major art capitals around the world.
The efforts paid off.
The auction house's viewings in the last week were packed with art lovers, and on Thursday night the salesroom was frenetic as dealers and collectors created bidding wars that made it seem the sale would never end.
The auction lasted nearly three hours, with buyers from Zurich, Paris, London, Mexico, Asia and various spots in the United States, fighting hard to make a purchase.


Religion Notes
Party by Religion
The breakdown of religious affiliations within each major political party is pretty close to the breakdown of the nation as a whole, according to an analysis released after the elections this week.
The Democratic Party, often seen as the home of Roman Catholics, is only slightly more Catholic in makeup (28 percent) than the Republican Party (24 percent).
Twenty-six percent of those calling themselves independents are Catholic.
The Republican Party is roughly even with the Democratic Party in the number of people who identify themselves as "born again" Christians (41 percent to 39 percent).


Dial R.E.I.T. Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Glamis Gold Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Borg-Warner Automotive reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Center of Attention: Olajuwon Erases Nets
Before tonight's season opener Nets Coach Chuck Daly confessed that he felt like an expectant father.
"It's a lot like having a baby," Daly said.
"I'd like to see exactly what our denomination is, whether we're fish or fowl. When a baby is born you are always anxious to see what is this baby going to look like."


Galey &amp; Lord Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Senate Votes Looser Rules For Sex Crime Prosecution
Still anxious about the charge that it is insensitive to women, the Senate passed an amendment today to loosen rules concerning the admissibility of evidence in cases of rape and child molesting.
It was the latest sign that Congress intends to put a special focus on issues that affect women as it considers a major anticrime package that appears headed toward enactment in the next few months.
The Senate voted overwhelmingly on Thursday night to pass a separate measure intended to promote the arrests of abusive husbands, establish a special telephone number to report domestic violence and toughen Federal sentences for sex crimes.


Laperriere &amp; Verreault reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


INSIDE
New Sex Crime Legislation
Though largely symbolic, a measure passed by the Senate would loosen rules on the admissibility of evidence in rape and molesting cases.
Page 8.
More Jobs, More Applicants
Payrolls expanded by 177,000 jobs last month, but the rising number of job seekers pushed the unemployment rate up to 6.8 percent.
Page 41.
Media Allies Become Foes
The takeover battle for Paramount Communications is pitting many Hollywood executives -- and their friendships -- against each other.
Page 19.
Suicide Manual's Influence
A popular suicide manual has had a noticeable effect on the methods people use to kill themselves, research has shown.
Page 25.


New N.C.A.A. Director To Continue Changes
Hailed as a man of integrity and vision as he was introduced as the next executive director of the National Collegiate Athletic Association yesterday, CEDRIC DEMPSEY, the University of Arizona athletic director, pledged to continue on the road of change charted by his predecessor, DICK SCHULTZ.
Among other things, Dempsey said he would work to improve the welfare of student athletes, strive for diversity and gender equity in collegiate athletics, promote integrity and re-evaluate the N.C.A.A.'s governing structure.


Thomas Walker, 94, Politician and a Judge
Thomas G. Walker, a former vice president and general counsel for New Jersey Bell Telephone Company and a former Federal judge, died on Thursday at his home in New Vernon, N.J.
He was 94.
The cause was a stroke, according to his son, Thomas G. Walker Jr.


Stevens Graphics Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sports of The Times; Boxing's Longest Count
WHEN a boxing buff was reminded of tonight's heavyweight title fight, he asked, "When's Tyson getting out?"
Not a word or a thought or an opinion about who will be here in the ring at Caesars Palace tonight; instead, a question about the future of Mike Tyson, who won't be here.


Selective Insurance Group Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Correction: Space Station Scheduled for Completion in 2001


Grossman's Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


German Official Denies Starting an AIDS Panic
The German Health Minister today rejected charges from several medical associations that he had contributed to a health panic by urging patients who suspect they have been infected by tainted blood to submit to tests for AIDS.
"To safeguard public health, one must react when there is a probability or possibility of danger," the Minister, Horst Seehofer, said in an interview with the Berliner Zeitung.
"When you are dealing with a deadly disease, it is better to take one preventive measure too many than to take one too few."


Ropak Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Management Firm to Run Schools in Minneapolis
Like a nonprofit corporation hiring a management expert to run its day-to-day operations, the Minneapolis School Board voted this week to hire the president of a consulting firm as its new superintendent of schools.
Peter Hutchinson, the president of a three-employee management consulting firm that gives advice to public organizations, will hold the title of superintendent and will be accountable to the school board.
He will draw his salary from his firm, which will receive payment from the school board, and do the job with the help of its other employees and from outside consultants.


QVC Said to Shift Strategy on Its Bid
At a time when Federal antitrust regulators are already asking for additional information about QVC Network Inc.'s proposed merger with Paramount Communications Inc., QVC seems to be taking a risk in trying to keep its many diverse partners in the deal.
As of Wednesday night, QVC was inclined to allow the BellSouth Corporation, a regional telephone company, to buy Liberty Media's equity interest in QVC for $1 billion and add another $1 billion to QVC's war chest for the Paramount battle.


Holphane Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Criimi Mae Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.98
2.99
2.86
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.04
3.06
3.05
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.24
3.24
3.25
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.33
5.26
6.53
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.20
6.17
7.76
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.30
7.27
8.70
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.65
5.61
6.54
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Parametric Technology (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Effort to Save Haitian Talks Fails As Military Leaders Shun Meeting
An attempt to revive negotiations over Haiti's political future collapsed today when military leaders failed to show up for what was scheduled to be the start of two days of talks aimed at restoring the country's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
With the diplomatic efforts now seemingly at a dead end, there was no immediate indication what further steps the United States and the international community might take, if any, to force the military rulers of Haiti to give up power.
Dante Caputo, the United Nations special envoy here, who organized the abortive meeting, said at a news briefing later that the talks should continue, but there was clearly no timetable for their revival.


Serbia Arrests 18 Leaders Of Opposition Party Militia
The Serbian authorities have arrested 18 leaders of a Serbian militia, charging them with murder, rape, kidnapping and illegal arms possession, the republic's Police Ministry announced late Thursday.
Those arrested were members of the Chetnik Movement, the paramilitary wing of the militant nationalist Serbian Radical Party.
The party, led by Vojislav Seselj, has gained enough popularity over the last two years to challenge the Serbian Socialist Party of President Slobodan Milosevic.


American Ecology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pratt Hotel Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


My Brother the Clone
A man and woman are in the office of a doctor who specializes in in vitro fertilization, facing a screen on which slides of youngsters are being projected.
They hope to choose one who can serve as a prototype for their own child.
The doctor, who is showing the slides, is also delivering a running commentary.
"This one, while otherwise healthy, has several allergies. And if you're looking for height, forget it. On the other hand, this one, though less attractive, has no health problems and is tall enough to model clothes. But it's the next one I want you to take a good look at: good health, long bones and fantastic hair and skin."


Home Beneficial Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-5  HAITI MILITARY REJECTS TALKS  Efforts to revive talks on the crisis in Haiti collapsed when military leaders failed to attend negotiations on restoring the exiled President.  1


ProNet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rates Hint at Last Call For Home Refinancing
HOMEOWNERS and potential home buyers who have delayed taking a new mortgage while waiting for the absolutely lowest rates may be waiting in vain.
Interest rates on home loans remain extraordinarily low compared with the 1980's, but they have ticked up in recent weeks.
The average rate for 30-year loans -- following the lead of the Treasury bond market -- rose to 7.11 percent this week, from 6.86 percent a week earlier.
It is the first time that rate has climbed above 7 percent since August.


Witco Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Knicks and a Tight Rim Hold Off Celtics' Emotion
It was an inspired performance by the Boston Celtics and a fortunate escape by the Knicks.
Withstanding Boston's emotional fourth-quarter rally from an 18-point deficit, the Knicks survived with an opening-night 111-108 victory at Boston Garden.
It was the Celtics' first regular-season game since Reggie Lewis, their former captain, died on July 27 of cardiac arrest.


United Offers Its Machinists An Option to Save 5,000 Jobs
United Airlines offered its machinists' union an option yesterday to preserve more than 5,000 jobs in exchange for cost cuts.
If the offer is accepted, it could revive the apparently fading prospects for the machinists' and pilots' unions to buy a majority stake in the carrier.


Corrections
Articles on Sept. 27 and Oct. 20 about the Virginia Military Institute's plan to settle a sex-discrimination suit misstated the Supreme Court's action on the case.
The Court refused to hear an appeal by the institute; it did not uphold a lower-court ruling, which said the State of Virginia must offer a similar program for women.


Securities Fraud Victims Face a Choice
To the Editor:
The Securities and Exchange Commission's settlement with Prudential Securities, which is accused of cheating hundreds of thousands of customers in the sale of more than $8 billion of limited energy partnerships in the 1980's, is receiving good reviews.


Shuffling Hollywood's Deal Deck
More than any other deal in recent history, the struggle for Paramount Communications Inc. is pitting the Hollywood deal makers against each other and putting their many relationships to the test.
At the offices of Wasserstein, Perella at 31 West 52d Street, Michael Biondi is on the team of investment bankers who have been trying to persuade the BellSouth Corporation to make a pass at Paramount either alone or with QVC Network Inc.


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic Avery Fisher Hall


Review/Fashion; SoHo's Night of the Living Fashion Hounds
On Thursday night, while the empty Bryant Park tents were being swept, unrest was rumbling in SoHo as the cabals that had been forming over the course of fashion week roamed from show to show to show.
If there was change to be found in New York fashion, the unspoken pact went, it would be here.
The area became a giant fashion installation, orchestrated in part by a young designer, Seth Shapiro.
Last season, he wanted to make an association between the street and fashion, and so he showed his designs in an alley out of the back of a truck.
This time, the link was between art and fashion, and his show was in the Dooley Le Cappellaine gallery, at 252 Lafayette Street.


A Defector Defects Back From Nielsen
To the consternation of Nielsen Marketing Research North America, the consumer tracking company, the chief executive it recently lured from its arch-rival, Information Resources Inc., jumped back to I.R.I. today.
The executive, George R. Garrick, was in charge of I.R.I.'s fledgling European operations in June when Nielsen hired him to reverse the slide in its fortunes.


Washington at Work; It Takes a Peacekeeping Nominee To Show the Cold War's Still Burning
Morton H. Halperin, President Clinton's nominee for Assistant Secretary of Defense for peacekeeping issues, was supposed to have spent this year fighting policy battles over Somalia, the former Yugoslavia and Haiti.
Instead, he finds himself under fire on the battlefields of the cold war.
In tones reminiscent of 1950's national security hearings, conservative members of Congress have branded Mr.
Halperin an enemy of American soldiers, a threat to national security and a traitor.


Reports of Elder Abuse Flow in a Tragic Stream
LIKE everything else here, the pathology of nastiness in New York is dynamic.
It needs new terms to identify new strains, new campaigns to point out the problems and advise what can be done about them.
Take the case of elder abuse.
As a concept and practice it must be at least as old as the fifth commandment, the one about honoring thy mother and father.
But as a term connoting a specific pattern of victimization it is relatively recent, following such variants of sin and crime as child abuse, sexual abuse, drug abuse and spouse abuse or battering.


National Western Life Insurance Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Old Dominion Freight reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Airline Worker Preparing Plane Is Killed Walking Into Propeller
An airline ground-crew worker at Newark Airport was killed this afternoon when she walked into the spinning propeller of a twin-engine aircraft preparing for takeoff.
The woman, Margaret Homnick, 22, of Sayreville, had just disconnected a portable generator cable from under the right wing when the accident happened.
The aircraft, Northwest Flight 3758, was scheduled to depart Newark for Richmond.


CHRONICLE
"When ANITA HILL came forward, it gave me so much strength, and I am so grateful for what she's done for me and for other women," said SUZANE DOUCETTE, who is taking on the Federal Bureau of Investigation in court.
She is the F.B.I. agent who has been in the news lately for charging that she was sexually harassed by her superior, then retaliated against.
She got to say her thanks in person yesterday when she and Professor Hill spoke at a luncheon given by People magazine at the Time &amp; Life Building in Manhattan.


QMS Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


John M. van Heusen Jr., Clothier, 96
John M. van Heusen Jr., a member of the family that established the Van Heusen shirt company, died Oct. 19 at his home in Clearwater, Fla.
He was 96.
The cause of death was heart failure, said his daughter, Emily Halsey.


Remodeling: First the Contract, Then the House
After 16 years in their Bethpage, L.I., ranch house, Bob and Maureen Sauer decided to remodel to extend their living space.
The couple did not borrow but carefully budgeted so they could pay for the work as it was completed.
They were concerned about any liability should the general contractor not pay all his bills and looked for one willing to meet their needs.
"The important thing is to read the contract," Mr.
Sauer said, "If the contractor is reliable, he'll work with you."


COMPANY BRIEFS
GENERAL BINDING CORP., New Bedford, Mass., said it would close its U.S.
Ring Binder division because of the loss of a major customer.
As a result, 100 manufacturing jobs will be lost after the first of the year.


Santa Anita Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


POLICE ARREST 23 IN G.M. DRUG CASE
Twenty-three General Motors assembly line workers have been arrested for dealing cocaine and marijuana in two truck assembly plants, and the police are widening their investigation into drug dealing at other G.M. factories, law-enforcement officials said today.
The arrests on Thursday came after a six-month investigation in which an undercover officer, posing as an auto worker, bought drugs from employees as the assembly lines at the two plants rolled by.
The plants, just north of here in Pontiac, Mich., produce sport utility vehicles and pickup trucks.


Sunrise Medical Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Coleman, After Plea, Plans Life After Mets
The firecracker that paralyzed Vince Coleman's baseball career cost $1.50.
"Bought it on the 4th of July in New York," Coleman, a Mets outfielder, said today, sitting on a bench in Superior Court.
"Here is a bizarre situation that occurred over a dollar-fifty."


Suicide Doctor Is Jailed in Detroit Amid a Threat to Starve Himself
For the first time since he embarked three years ago on a campaign of physician-assisted suicide, Dr.
Jack Kevorkian was jailed today.
His lawyer said the 65-year-old retired pathologist would immediately begin carrying out his longstanding threat that he would starve himself to death rather than remain behind bars.


Hastings Manufacturing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


ARC International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hoechst Celanese reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


State Auto Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Giant Group Ldt.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chandler Insurance Ltd.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Low Interest Rates Lift the Bond Group
Most bond fund returns over the last three years have been extraordinary, thanks to a substantial drop in interest rates.
Long-term rates have hit 25-year lows and short-term rates 30-year lows.
Investors should not delude themselves into thinking that this market behavior is the norm.
"It's not at all in the cards that we'll have a similar decline from today's levels that would provide anywhere near the kind of strength in the bond markets which produced those returns in the last three years," said H. Bradlee Perry, senior partner at David L. Babson &amp; Company, Cambridge, Mass.


CHRONICLE
The spotlight will shine tomorrow evening on another woman who rose from obscurity, then receded from public view, ZOE BAIRD.
The American Jewish Congress will honor her with its Louis D. Brandeis Award at a dinner in the Pierre Hotel in Manhattan.
Ms.
Baird withdrew her name from consideration as Attorney General after it was learned that she had hired two illegal immigrants as household help and had not paid taxes on their earnings.
She returned to her job as senior vice president and general counsel at the Aetna Life and Casualty Company in Hartford.
But she did not withdraw from working on public issues.


Republic New York Seeks A Merger With Green Point
The Republic New York Corporation said yesterday that it was making an unsolicited offer to merge with the Green Point Savings Bank of Brooklyn, in a move that would be the first hostile takeover bid for a mutual savings bank.
Green Point, as a mutual savings bank, is nominally owned by its depositors, but it is trying to convert to stock ownership in a $600 million to $800 million offering, the largest such conversion to date.


Methods Used In Suicides Follow Book
A popular suicide manual has had a noticeable effect on the methods people use to kill themselves in New York City and nationally, research has shown.
The book, "Final Exit," recommends that terminally ill people wishing to end their lives rely on asphyxiation, which the book calls "self-deliverance via the plastic bag," combined with drugs for sedation.


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page on Oct. 27, about the 64th annual International Echo Awards competition, sponsored by the Direct Marketing Association, included an erroneous identification of the top agency and an erroneous number for the awards it won, both supplied by the association.
Top honors in the competition went to Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct Worldwide, not just its New York office; it won 12 awards, not 6.


Laurentian Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


European Stocks Plummet After Long Climb
European stock markets plummeted today after a yearlong climb that has taken many exchanges to record levels.
British shares fell more than 2 percent, the French bourse 2.57 percent and the German stock exchange 2.43 percent as shifting outlooks for the United States and European economies prompted many investors to take profits.
The falls capped a week-long retreat, with the London exchange down 2.7 percent, Frankfurt 2.7 percent and Paris 5 percent.


Review/Opera; Honoring Monteverdi Modestly
How enticing the prospect of a Monteverdi year appeared a mere eight years ago, when early musickers and conventional performers alike were tripping over one another to celebrate the big anniversaries of Bach, Handel, Scarlatti and even Heinrich Schutz.
And how paltry and anticlimactic the commemorations of the 350th anniversary of Monteverdi's death have seemed this year, at least in New York.
The problem is not entirely a shortage of talent, and certainly not lack of interest.
In February, Frederick Renz and the Grande Bande traveled to the Hong Kong Festival with three different evenings of Monteverdi.
How much simpler it should have been to repeat the festival in the performers' hometown; money, obviously, was not available.
They did bring a program of madrigals back from Hong Kong and will eke out the 1610 Vespers before the year is out, but their "Orfeo" never made it back to New York.


Review/Jazz; Sonny Rollins, Beyond Context
The saxophonist Sonny Rollins presents what may just be jazz's most complicated puzzle.
While he's one of the greatest improvisers walking this earth, he seems unable, or unwilling, to present himself in a context that would give dignity to his great ability, or even just accommodate it.
Mr.
Rollins, who performed at a sold-out Carnegie Hall on Thursday night, leads an electric band that's closer to being a lounge act than a jazz group.
He plays music that rarely challenges his own historical achievements, and that in its simplicity seems to pander to his audience.
And because this music is performed at a rock volume, Mr.
Rollins's tone, one of the wonders of American music, drowns under the weight.


Developers Diversified Realty Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Northern Border Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Area of Horse Lovers Is Shocked by Neglect
In Westchester County, where there are 10,000 horses and residents spend $68 million a year on them, horse lovers reacted with shock and anger today to reports that nearly 100 Arabian horses were emaciated and living without adequate shelter at the Yorktown Heights stable of Paolo Gucci, the millionaire designer.
"Around here, people regard their horses as family pets," said Anne-Marie Nordgren, a South Salem resident and board member of Lewisboro Horseman's Association.
"We love them, we take them seriously, not only as show animals, but as members of our families. When I saw those horses on TV, looking like skeletons, I was sick to my stomach. My God, a pair of Gucci's loafers could feed one of them for two months."


Disarm Our Citizens
To the Editor:
It seems incredible to me that Bob Herbert could have written an entire column about violence, with shootings, robberies and other horrors of urban life and not once mention guns ("Violence in the State of Denial," Oct. 27).
It is painfully obvious that very little of this violence would occur if every potential robber or domestic disputant was not armed with a deadly weapon.


Jobless Rate Rises to 7.9% In New York
New York State's unemployment rate rose to 7.9 percent in October from 7.1 percent in September, with the anemic New York City economy dragging down the rest of the state, the Government said yesterday.
In New Jersey, the unemployment rate fell sharply, to 6.5 percent from 7.7 percent.
Connecticut is not among the states for which the Government provides monthly figures.


North American Biologicals Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Quality of Older Life; Study Finds Stable Neighborhoods and Local Services Crucial for Aging New Yorkers
Among the rapidly growing population of older people who call New York City home, what home often means is the neighborhood within 10 blocks of where they live.
Even those who drive, take subways or occasionally travel outside the city tend to focus on their immediate community for most daily activities, like marketing, banking, visiting and worshiping.
Many have spent at least 25 years in the same neighborhood, frequently in the same apartment.


Classical Music in Review
Die Zauberflote  Metropolitan Opera


Medaphis Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jose Ramos Lopez, 79, Former Assemblyman
Jose Ramos Lopez, the first Puerto Rican Democrat elected to the New York State Assembly from Manhattan, who went on to serve nearly 20 years as a judge, died on Thursday in a hospital in San Juan, Puerto Rico.
He was 79 and lived in Bellerose, Queens, and Puerto Rico.
His family said he died of cancer.


Bally Gaming International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Capitals Beat Canucks  Peter Bondra scored twice in the third period, including the go-ahead goal with 5 minutes 30 seconds remaining, as the Washington Capitals rallied to beat the Vancouver Canucks, 3-2, last night in Landover, Md. (AP)


Dickenson Mines reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Xscribe Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Pre-Game Line Is Cowboys, by a Sentence and Three Words
For many of the Giants, the day began with a lecture.
Mike Nolan, the defensive coordinator, warned his players about the hazards of talking trash.
Don't give the opposition -- in this case, the Dallas Cowboys -- any additional ammunition.
Don't add fuel to the fire.
No need to help them.
Be smart.
Why all the words of caution from the coaches?
For much of the week, there has been a war before the war.
The Giants and the Cowboys have gone back and forth in print so much it's almost as if the game will pale in comparison.


Penn-America Group Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a proposal to stage joint Russian-United States military exercises in Germany included an incorrect conversion from German marks to dollars in some editions.
The equivalent of 13.4 billion marks, the amount being paid by Germany to Russia to defray the cost of relocating 337,000 Russian troops who had been stationed in eastern Germany, is $7.9 billion, not $788 million.


Bulgarians Take Pride In Rescue of Jews
To the Editor:
"Treatment of Bulgarian Jews Not Untarnished" (letter, Oct. 23) by Yehuda Bauer distorts history.


Back From the Nuclear Brink
For years, the Soviet Union said it would use nuclear arms only in retaliation against a nuclear attack.
But its military posture and practices never corresponded to that stated policy.
Soviet forces stood poised to unleash a devastating strike at a moment's notice.
Now, with its army in disarray and China looming larger on its border, an uneasy Russia this week announced a revised nuclear doctrine; it is abandoning its pledge of no first use of nuclear arms.
But even as its stated position gets more belligerent, its practices are becoming more benign.


U.S. APPROVES USE OF DRUG TO RAISE MILK PRODUCTION
After years of scientific and political conflict, the Federal Food and Drug Administration yesterday approved a genetically engineered drug that is intended to increase the amount of milk produced by dairy cows.
The approval makes milk the first food the Government would allow to be produced using a genetically engineered drug, in this case a synthetic hormone developed by inserting a bovine gene into the genetic code of a common strain of bacteria.


Continental Baking Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Mogadishu Journal; In Desert Camp, G.I.'s Fight Tedium
As American reinforcements continue to land in Somalia, the greatest battle is not against militias but against boredom, anxiety and the blistering heat of the Somali capital.
The newest and starkest foe is Victory Base, home since Monday to 1,100 newly arrived American infantry troops but still not much more than a wide expanse of scrub brush, clouds of sand and dense thorn bushes, about a mile and a half west of the center of Mogadishu.


Some Brokers' Pitches That Raise Red Flags
TRUST us.
That's the message stock brokerage firms convey through millions of dollars of advertising each year.
Now Prudential Securities will spend hundreds of millions of dollars to compensate investors who did just that.
In a huge civil settlement last month, the firm said it would pay investors for losses caused by more than a decade of widespread fraud.


Holyfield and History Converge on Champion
Evander Holyfield, a low-key man who never realized how much he wanted the heavyweight championship of the world until he lost it, fights history and the bigger, younger Riddick Bowe Saturday night.
It is 51 weeks since Bowe, then a 3-2 underdog with a reputation for backing down, decisively won Holyfield's unified title.


Key Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dinkins Considered As an Ambassador
A White House official said today that Mayor David N. Dinkins would be a strong candidate for the ambassadorships to South Africa and to Jamaica, both of which are vacant.
But the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, would not say whether President Clinton had discussed the issue in his telephone call to Mayor Dinkins on Wednesday morning, and said: "I think it's premature to suggest that an offer would have been made 48 hours after his defeat."


Aimee Mott Butler, Philanthropist, 91
Aimee Mott Butler, a philanthropist who was a daughter of a founder of the General Motors Corporation, died on Thursday at her home in St.
Paul.
She was 91.
The cause was complications after a stroke, said a son, Peter Butler of St. Paul.


Price Rises Explain Low Yankee Attendance
To the Editor:
I wonder if all the commentators who talk about the area around Yankee Stadium as unsafe actually buy tickets to see the games.
If they did, they would know that the immediate neighborhood is fine.
The real reason for declining attendance in the last few years is the price of tickets.
That includes general admission, up from $8 in 1989 to $10.50 (which is to say from a price competitive with a movie to one that isn't), and backless bleacher seats, up from $4.50 to $6.50.


Beirut Airport Gets Facelift, Tighter Security
Much of the violent recent history of Lebanon was played out at or near Beirut International Airport.
It was bombarded by rival Lebanese forces during the 15-year civil war.
Next to it was the United States Marine barracks that was blown up in 1983, killing more than 240 people.


Lee L. Prina, Michael R. Washkevich
Lee Lorick Prina, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis E. Prina of Washington, was married there yesterday to Michael Robert Washkevich, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Victor I. Washkevich of Rocky Hill, N.J.
The Rev.
Joseph Lacey, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Navy Chapel.
The bride, the associate editor of Health Affairs, a quarterly health policy journal in Bethesda, Md., graduated from Tulane University.
Her father, a former Washington bureau chief for the Copley News Service, is a military writer in Washington.


Fashion Forward
Council of Fashion Designers honors the press, Nov. 1.


Mystery of Young Politician's Death
Perhaps it was fitting that Nick Wasicsko was laid to rest on Election Day, his casket surrounded by dozens of Westchester County politicians and hundreds of his former constituents.
The general election was to be the first in almost a decade in which his name would not appear on the Yonkers ballot.
Friends said it had been a frustrating time for Mr.
Wasicsko, a City Council member and former mayor, who had failed to capture his party's nomination for the council presidency, the city's second most powerful office.


The Aura of a Miracle Fades From a Cancer Drug
Just a year ago, taxol, a new cancer drug, was on the verge of approval by the Food and Drug Administration.
Expectations were running high among doctors and cancer patients.
The drug was thought to offer salvation to desperate women with ovarian cancer, and possibly to patients with breast or lung cancer, or other tumors.
The clamor for the drug began with exuberant comments by researchers elated by preliminary results.
Their remarks were magnified in the news media and repeated in still more glowing terms by frightened patients suffering from all types of tumors.
At the same time, Wall Street, looking for the next blockbuster drug, seized on taxol and touted its vast potential.


A Veteran's Legacy: Garden of Heroes
THE small room is kept cool, so the crystalline wax of the sculptures stored here will not melt.
Against one wall, a life-size alcoholic with a bottle in his hand comforts a young prostitute carrying a toy bunny.
Nearby, a homeless man's frightened eyes peek out from a cardboard-box shelter.
A Rodin-like figure in cape and hat huddles against the cold, while across the room, a fierce-looking man sticks out his tongue at the passing world.
This is not a museum storeroom but a space in the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Veterans Affairs Hospital, a mainly psychiatric institution spreading over 220 acres near the Hudson River here.
How the sculptures got here is the story of one World War II veteran who found solace at the hospital after decades of mental torment.
He died in August at age 67, but his artistry lives on, not only in his figures of the homeless -- awaiting a benefactor with the money to have them bronzed -- but also in the sculpture garden he created at the hospital while he was an inpatient.


For Golan Heights Winery, Will It Be Stay or Go?
Security against Syrian attack may be Israel's main interest on the Golan Heights, with water sources here running a close second.
But ask Israelis who value a good meal, and they would throw in one more reason why, in the Middle East peace negotiations, they should never give up this vital plateau: its vineyards.


Some Might Call It Plain Profiteering
To the Editor:
The profile of Jane C.I.
Hirsh ("From a Borrowed $500, a $148 Million Reward in Generic Drugs," Oct. 17) reminds me of the questions Hillary Rodham Clinton raised about medical profiteering.
When does a fair return on one's financial investment, talent and energy become profiteering?


'Sheer Boredom': Questions of Existence
HOW do three men, trapped in humdrum jobs that sentence them to lifetime membership in the fraternity of unnoticed people, turn mere subsistence into meaningful existence?
No less a heady question than that is being pondered by John Viscardi in "Sheer Boredom," a new play he has titled with dangerous authenticity.


Twins, Triplets and Other Siblings
IT'S funny how things come together.
A couple of months ago, my friend Joe bought a Geo Prizm and was delighted with it.
Then, a week later, another friend, Jim, bought a Toyota Corolla.
Both talked to me about the shiny new wheels, both bubbling over, each telling me the same sorts of things.
Finally, I told the two of them that they ought to get together because they'd bought cars that were basically identical.


A Case Of Deja Vu
To the Editor:
In 1975, the Arts and Leisure section published an article by me attacking Robert Altman's new movie, "Nashville." The article caused quite a ruckus.
Altman fans were particularly incensed by several paragraphs that I devoted to the director's cruel and dehumanizing portraits of female characters, "a treatment of women," I wrote, "that often borders on celluloid rape."


Penn Is a Lot Mightier Than the Princeton 11 As Stokes Stands Out
It was Penn's Terrance Stokes and not Princeton's heralded Keith Elias who ran free on Franklin Field today.
Stokes, the 165-pound junior tailback, set a single-game Penn rushing record with 272 yards on 42 carries and the Quakers turned back the Tigers, 30-14, before a crowd of 35,810, by far the largest of the season in the Ivy League.
Elias, who had been averaging 184 yards a game, was held to just 59 yards on 15 carries as a series of fumbles shackled the Princeton offense.


An Aging Midtown Hotel That Will Not Go Gently
NOW clad in a spindly web of scaffolding that heralds its imminent demise, the Hotel Diplomat in mid-Manhattan earns a place in civic annals not so much for its eccentric life as for its protracted death.
It has been nearly four years since the owners, the Durst Organization, filed a demolition application for the decrepit single-room-occupancy hotel at 108 West 43d Street.
To create a home for the 31 residents they were displacing, the Dursts renovated Rosoff's Hotel across the street.
Then they had to prod state housing officials to action, sometimes through court orders.
They had to demonstrate that it made economic sense to replace a 13-story building with a one-story commercial "taxpayer" (so called because it pays the property-tax bills).


Debra Richman, Bruce Schoenfeld
Debra Sue Richman, the daughter of Donald and Pearl Richman of Westport, Conn., was married last evening to Bruce David Schoenfeld, a son of Fred Schoenfeld of New York, and the late Judith Lieber.
Rabbi Robert Orkland officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.


Hail the Instant Coursepack!
SOMEWHERE on the academic continuum between lugging thick tomes to class and using a notebook computer to tap into electronic library collections, a new era of textbooks has taken hold: the coursepack.
Where many professors once relied on a principal textbook, hefty, hard-covered and selling for more than $50, more and more now rely on "custom-published" compilations of material that are churned out by the campus print shop, nearby copy shops and sometimes even by a traditional textbook publisher.
These coursepacks, or course packets, as they are called on many campuses, are simply collections of essays, speeches, newspaper and magazine articles and chapters or excerpts from formal textbooks, clipped together or spiral-bound under a flimsy cover.
Average Cost Is $20
Lighter than a hard-cover text, and generally lighter on a student's wallet as well, these bundles average about $20 in cost.
But their greatest virtue is the diversity of voices and the immediate relevance that they add to course readings.


He Who Pays The Piper . . .
To the Editor:
I object to Walter Goodman's essay  [ "What Parson Rather Left Out of His Sermon," Oct. 17 ]  taking Dan Rather to task for his criticism of television management policies made in a speech to the annual convention of the Radio and Television News Directors Association.
Mr.
Goodman's argument is that the generally squalid performance of television in the United States is a result of market researchers' analysis of what viewers really want.
I suggest that the researchers know what those who pay them want.


They Had a Hunch, and Bailey
Arcangues and Jerry Bailey have never been formally introduced.
"Still don't know how to pronounce his name," said Bailey, the New York-based jockey who rode the 133-1 French long shot to the biggest upset in Breeders' Cup history today.
"I'll learn, though. Before that paycheck comes, I'll learn."


Skiers' Strolling Fingers
Looking for a masseuse in Killington or a snowboard shop in Whistler, British Columbia?
Listings that cover these and other whims -- along with hotels, restaurants and, naturally, ski resorts -- are contained in the Yellow Pages of Skiing, published by Activity Directories International.
The book costs $14.95 plus $2.50 postage; to order, call (800) 864-2754.


The Right Number
A phone is a phone is a phone.
At Bryant Park, where the major New York fashion shows were held last week in two tents, courtesy phones backstage allowed models to check in with friends and agents between shows.


Marguerite G. Polk, Craig W. England
Marguerite Gayle Polk, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Polk of Lake Charles, La., was married there yesterday to Craig William England, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl N. England of Columbus, Ohio.
The Rev.
John B. Lipscomb performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of the Good Shepherd.
Mrs.
England, 28, graduated from Fordham University.
She manages accounts at the Osgood Global Group, a public relations concern in New York.
Mr.
England, also 28, graduated from Johns Hopkins University.
He is a vice president of Hunter, Keith, Marshall &amp; Company, an investment banking firm in New York.


Forever '21'
'21' CLUB ** (212) 582-7200; 21 West 52d Street; $$$$; all major cards
This treasured institution fills up nightly with a well-heeled crowd.
The warm, graceful town house with its celebrated barroom is as beguiling as ever.
The American menu carries "21" classics, like chicken hash and steak tartare, and a wide range of contemporary fare, including Maryland crab cakes, grilled shrimp and scallops with pineapple chutney, fried calamari salad with ancho chili dip, peppered-tuna steak, grilled Dover sole with asparagus, and rack of lamb. (Review: 3/29/91; revisited 10/93)


Talk Is Usually Cheap, But Giants Could Pay
Michael Irvin left practice on Friday afternoon and could not help but read once more about the jockeying by the Giants in the past week regarding this afternoon's National Football Conference East clash for first place here at Texas Stadium.
The press clippings were easy to find.
There were the words of Giants linebacker Corey Miller plastered all over the exit, blown up giant size with a picture of a snarling Miller, to boot.


Torn Between Two Exes
HONEY Stories. By Elizabeth Tallent. 207 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $22.


Treating Drugs at School
KARL GONZALES tried alcohol and marijuana at his older brother's urging at age 7.
He got his first tattoo at 11, joined a Latin gang at 12 and was arrested for stealing car parts at 13.
By 14 he was smoking pot regularly, and at 15 he dropped out of school.
Then things got ugly.


Manager's Profile
HEIKO THIEME
Fund: The American Heritage Fund; $130 million in assets.
Manager since 1990. (Sponsor: American Heritage Management, New York City.)  Born: Sept. 16, 1943; Leipzig, Germany.


OCT. 31-NOV. 5: Philadelphia Story; A Mother Convicted Of Killing Her Daughter
Vivian King confessed last March to shooting her daughter in the head, hiding her body in a city park and then, over the next month, brazenly urging police to intensify their search for the missing teenager.
She then recanted the confession, saying it had been coerced, but a jury last week found her guilty of third degree murder and possession of a gun.


Corrections
A listing of cruises on Oct. 10 omitted the sailings of Pearl Cruises.
The company's liner Pearl will cruise to Thailand and Indonesia Dec. 30 and Feb. 8, departing from and returning to Singapore; to Vietnam and Hong Kong from Singapore on Jan. 13; to China, Vietnam, Malaysia, Brunei and Singapore from Hong Kong on Jan. 26; and to Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand from Singapore on Feb. 22.


Figured It Out, Have You, Mr. Hawkins?
To the Editor:
Jeffrey Charles Hawkins ("In The Beginning, the Brain . . .," Sound Bytes, Oct. 24) characterizes his research in neurophysics in terms more appropriate for the newest Silicon Valley startup technology than for the vast and venerable field of brain research.
He dismisses decades of research into how the brain "understands" as having "failed miserably," making a passing reference to the need for a "unified theory" describing the interconnection of "zillions of neurons." Mr.
Hawkins thinks he's figured it out.
I'm sure the legions of research neurophysiologists and neuroanatomists will rest much easier tonight knowing that someone finally has.


Bulls Bid Adieu To Lord Of Rings
One last time, the countdown to Michael Jordan began, as it had for nine memorable years.
The lights dimmed inside Chicago Stadium.
Rock music blared, spotlights searched the cheering crowd, flashbulbs popped and there, in all his championship glory, he appeared from the runway.


The Famous Brands on Death Row
BRYLCREEM. Ovaltine. Lavoris. Good &amp; Plenty. Lifebuoy.
Once best sellers in their fields, advertised constantly and promoted heavily, these products -- and many others that are 40, 50, 60, even 100 years old -- have lost their leadership status, becoming ghosts of their former selves.


Lion's Head Roars On
After a financial near-death experience -- a two-day closing -- the Lion's Head on Christopher Street has reopened under the temporary management of one of its bartenders, Michael Reardon.
Mr.
Reardon and undisclosed partners have bid for the Lion's Head, he said.
If the court accepts their bid, the proceeds would defray the $252,686 tax debt hanging over the restaurant and bar, long popular among writers, performers, politicians and journalists.


THE NATION: Switching Brands; Cranky Voters Fire Everyone In Sight
DAVID STEWART, a professor of marketing at the University of Southern California and an expert on consumer behavior, compares voting to shopping for something you don't particularly want to buy, like toilet paper.
"Where customer satisfaction is not high, you see a lot of switching," he said.
"I'll buy one I haven't tried recently."
He is not alone in thinking that way.
In a world without strong party or ideological identifications, voters do look increasingly like shoppers in the American marketplace.
They become isolated decision-makers whose choices depend essentially on the information and attitudes they pick up from the mass media, especially television.


E = mc   It Isn't
To the Sports Editor:
Joseph D. Keefer and Judson E. Burch ("Straight From the Lab: The Secret Formula That Picks the Series Winner," The Times, Oct. 16) ought to be ashamed of themselves -- and not because their formula picked the Phillies, but rather because it would have picked the Blue Jays if the Phillies' Curt Shilling or Tommy Greene had won one more game during the regular season.


Cranberry Desserts Brighten the Holidays
FRESH cranberries, which come into season in the fall, aren't just for a sauce to go with turkey.
Their tart flavor is also superb in desserts that are particularly colorful and festive on the holiday table.
Daniel Boulud, the celebrated French chef (formerly of Le Cirque and now owner of Daniel restaurant in Manhattan), stuffs whole apples with cranberries and orange peel, sticks a cinnamon stick in each one and bakes them in the oven.
Use large apples that will keep their shape and texture and will have a sweet taste when baked (Rome apples are especially good).
The dessert can be prepared up to four hours ahead of time but should be served warm.


Oncologists and the Thompson Cancer Center
To the Editor:
Regarding "A Father's Dream, a Son's Nightmare" (Oct. 24), I am appalled at your reporting of the facts.
We are concerned that our group has been pulled into a conflict between Fort Sanders Regional Medical Center and B. Ray Thompson Jr., son of the founder of the Thompson Cancer Survival Center.
We are not involved in the debate regarding governance and control of the center.
We are simply trying to provide top-quality care to cancer patients in the region we serve.
There are three points to make:


SUNDAY, November 7, 1993; A MILLION DOLAR BABY, BUT NO FIVE-AND-TEN-CENT STORE
It has to have cosmic significance that Tiffany Trump was born on the same day Woolworth's announced its intention to close almost 1,000 stores and put 13,000 people out of work.
Tiffany is, of course, the daughter of artful dealer Donald Trump and Marla Maples, the victim of the most publicized shoe theft in history.
Woolworth's is, of course, the most famous of the stores known as five and dimes.


Country Fair
The Fresh Air Fund's fall frolic and auction in Manhattan, Nov. 4.


The Best Maigret
To the Editor: In his article concerning the Georges Simenon exhibit (Aug. 15), Frank J. Prial writes that "Jean Gabin was the best Maigret." However, in his introduction to "The Short Cases of Inspector Maigret," Anthony Boucher remarks:
"He has been played on the screen by actors as eminent and diverse as Harry Baur, Charles Laughton and Jean Gabin. (He himself thinks the best, or at least the most nearly like him, was Pierre Renoir.)"


Guess What? The Jets Are Not Taking the Dolphins Game Lightly
The Jets are keenly aware that Miami's Don Shula will enter the record books as the National Football League's winningest coach if his team is victorious at Giants Stadium this afternoon.
They also know that if they are to make a serious run at the playoffs, they must beat the Dolphins (6-1), who lead the American Football Conference East division.
Plus, the Jets are coming off their most emotion-filled game of the season, a 10-6 victory against the Giants.


The Battle to Keep Alexander Hamilton's Home Where It Is
When the National Park Service announced a plan to move Hamilton Grange, the last home of Alexander Hamilton, from 287 Convent Avenue to St.
Nicholas Park, it was met with outrage -- even though the park is only a block away, and a full restoration of the house was part of the deal.
But to many of its neighbors, the stately yellow-and-white building jammed against St.
Luke's Episcopal Church belongs just where it is, lending a sense of grace and history to the collection of brownstones that line Convent Avenue and make up Hamilton Heights.
Last Thursday some of them protested the Park Service plan in a demonstration in front of the Grange.


County Buys New Vans To Carry the Disabled
NEARLY one million passenger trips have been made on the county's Paratransit system for the disabled since service began on Oct. 24, 1983.
In a ceremony recently marking the 10th anniversary of that system at the County Office Building in White Plains, Westchester officials unveiled the first of 30 new vans that will replace existing Paratransit vehicles this month and next.
Thirty-three Paratransit vans now operate in the county, and the number is expected to remain the same for the time being.


New Board Puts Garden Back on Feet
It has been almost a year since New York City seized control of the Queens Botanical Garden Society, revoking its license and ousting its directors amid accusations of mismanagement.
But the nonprofit organization is now back on its feet with new officers and new bylaws that city officials hope will open up the society's decision-making.
The Department of Cultural Affairs has managed the 30-acre garden in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park since December 1992, when it ordered more than 20 directors to resign or be removed.
It was the first time the department had revoked the license of a major cultural organization.


Corrections
A column on Oct. 24, "If You're Thinking of Living in Garden City," misstated the number of Long Island Rail Road stations serving the community, and misidentified one.
There are five L.I.R.R. stations in Garden City.
The station identified in the article as the Seventh Street station is properly called the Garden City station.


Phyllis J. Stitzer, Peter W. Roome
Phyllis Jones Stitzer and Peter Willemse Roome were married yesterday at the First Presbyterian Church in New Vernon, N.J.
The Rev.
George Chorba performed the ceremony.


Mending a Rift Between South Korea and Japan


Tiny Wineries With a Big Impact
SEAN THACKREY is the curator of a small art gallery, Bob Lamborn is a semiretired private investigator and Dick Stark is a former Silicon Valley marketing executive.
But all three would insist they share a single vocation: winemaker.
With production under 2,000 cases a year each, none of their wineries amounts to so much as a rounding error in industry statistics, but they are part of a new breed of independent producers -- microwineries -- with a surprising degree of influence.
As many of the scores of microwineries in the country have earned rave reviews from influential publications like The Wine Advocate and Wine Spectator, they have been able to command high prices and sell out their production year after year.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Education Life: Section 4A


LITTLE BIG PEOPLE
I am 13, in the eighth grade, and I agree with your article that children are being forced to grow up too fast.
I watch my peers trying to regress, in a sense, to the childhood they "missed." They consider it cool to carry a Barney lunch box or to know the words to the "Sesame Street" theme song.
I see my friends acting "less mature" than third-graders.
I don't think they know that people are saying they missed their childhood, but they seem to be having a lot of fun trying to regain it.
LINDSAY RICHARDSON Ann Arbor, Mich.


The Image Is New, and So Is the Menu
WHEN the Roslyn Claremont Hotel opened two years ago, it was impressive.
The sparkling flower-filled lobby, classic English-style library-lounge and pretty garden dining room were captivating.
But good looks are not enough.
That dining room, the Palm Room, harbored sky-high prices, pretentious service and forgettable continental food.
Its replacement, Cafe Europa, is working hard to change that image.
Only the charming surroundings remain.
White lattices, peach-sponged walls, cascading greenery and a three-story atrium ceiling enclose the tiny area, which is filled with flower-bedecked tables.


Anger Over a Proposal to Aid Former Prostitutes
On West 12th Street between Eighth and Greenwich Avenues, trees shade the walks, and some town house values approach $1 million.
But the usually placid street has been stirred up by Dr.
Joyce I. Wallace's proposal to convert her neat four-story brick home and office at No. 266 into New York City's first shelter for former prostitutes.
Although Community Board 2 has no official veto over the proposal, its leaders are stepping in as mediators between the doctor and neighbors bitterly opposed to the shelter, which would be a 16-bed residence.


FASHION NOTES
Seen and heard during Seventh Avenue's week of shows: THE ODD MATCHES: Anthony Kiedis of the Red Hot Chili Peppers at Oscar de la Renta, Tony Curtis at Byron Lars and Russell Simmons at Mary McFadden.


Habitats; Mirrors Out, Fabric In
WITH its mirrored columns, built-in Jacuzzi, black lacquer partitions and marble floors, the apartment in the tall tower was the quintessential apartment for the mid- to late 80's: expensive, sleek and, realtors now say, a bit too individualistic.
While Tom Wolfe's Master of the Universe preferred a more old- world, Park Avenue environment, the apartment at 1991 Broadway between 67th and 68th Streets was a place worthy of at least a Master of the City or a Master of the West Side.


It's Mystery Meat, Not Memory Loss
To the Editor:
In "The Spouse Factor" (Oct. 24), Elizabeth Kaye made this observation about elderly people at a luncheon at St.
Anthony's in Greenwich Vilage: "When you ask 15 of them what they ate, no one remembers. 'Chicken,' one says finally."


Conversations; A Firefighting Flyer Who Prefers Life on Updrafts to Life on Autopilot
THOSE whose homes were saved from the fearsome fires that swept Malibu and Topanga Canyon last week owe thanks to Bill McVicker.
None of them saw him, but he was there, co-piloting Tanker One-Five, one of the silver-and-red tanker planes that flew sortie after sortie over the towers of flame and smoke, dropping 2,000-gallon loads of red fire retardant.
It was a routine working day for the 45-year-old pilot, whose place of work is a war horse of a DC-4 that is older than he is.
Each day at sunrise at Fox Field, a remote airstrip in the high desert here 65 miles north of Los Angeles, he and his pilot, Philip Broadfoot, start the four engines of the World War II-vintage propeller plane, load its eight tanks and head wherever the latest fire flares.


Cranberry Desserts Brighten the Holidays
FRESH cranberries, which come into season in the fall, aren't just for a sauce to go with turkey.
Their tart flavor is also superb in desserts that are particularly colorful and festive on the holiday table.
Daniel Boulud, the celebrated French chef (formerly of Le Cirque and now owner of Daniel restaurant in Manhattan), stuffs whole apples with cranberries and orange peel, sticks a cinnamon stick in each one and bakes them in the oven.
Use large apples that will keep their shape and texture and will have a sweet taste when baked (Rome apples are especially good).
The dessert can be prepared up to four hours ahead of time but should be served warm.


New York's Black Political Leaders Waste No Time in Going Back to Drawing Board
Deeply shaken by last week's defeat of Mayor David N. Dinkins, a group of more than 100 black politicians and community leaders met in a Harlem high school yesterday to assess what went wrong and plan how to resurrect the political power that came with the election of the city's first black mayor.
The speeches were sometimes emotional and the sentiments fierce as many talked of feeling spurned by a Democratic Party to which blacks had long been loyal.
Speakers advocated everything from forming an independent political party to redoubling voter registration efforts in black communities.
But the major theme of the daylong meeting was a pledge to keep a stern eye on Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani and to work to unify and expand the influence of black voters.


If You're Thinking of Living in/Bedford Village; 'New England' 44 Miles From Broadway
DIRT roads may cost three times as much as paved lanes to maintain, but most Bedford residents gladly pay the price to protect their horses' hooves and the ambience of this area of gracious estates and rustic farms 44 miles from Manhattan.
Thirty-two miles of dirt roads, popular with wild turkeys and foxes as well as horses, lace the countryside and pass the stone walls that define the town's character.
Many are in Bedford Village, the 313-year-old historic center of the Town of Bedford, which also includes Bedford Hills and Katonah.


With Rutgers Erased, West Virginia Dreams
With one game remaining before a highly anticipated showdown with Miami, undefeated West Virginia sent the Hurricanes yet another impressive calling card this afternoon with a pulverizing performance against hopelessly outclassed Rutgers.
Playing most of the game without Jake Kelchner, its star quarterback, West Virginia crushed Rutgers, 58-22, in one of the most productive offensive afternoons West Virginia has had in four years.
Kelchner, though, suffered a pulled hamstring in the second quarter and his status for the Nov. 20 showdown against Miami (7-1, 5-0 Big East) was not immediately clear.


A Question of Origin
Under strict rules in the trade agreement, goods could be called North American in origin -- and qualify for duty-free treatment -- only if they were assembled in North America, using materials made there.
Article, page 26.


LITTLE BIG PEOPLE
The sophisticated children's quotations cited by Lucinda Franks are in keeping with the updated words I hear elementary schoolchildren putting to such classics as "A tisket, a tasket, my green and yellow basket." Today, they sing, "A tisket, a tasket, a condom or a casket." ANTHONY M. DEIULIO Chapel Hill, N.C.


In America; The Voting Equation
On Thursday, while Mayor-elect Rudolph Giuliani met with a small group of supporters in the creaking, musty basement of Salem United Methodist Church in Harlem, a young man named Arnold Wattley stood on the sidewalk across the street and lamented Mr.
Giuliani's election.
"It wasn't fair," said Mr.
Wattley.
He jammed his hands into his pockets and shifted from one foot to the other, his body tense against the damp, cool afternoon air.
"They didn't give Dinkins a chance. Now it's going to be hell on us because Giuliani ain't down with no brothers."


POSTINGS: Once the 60th Street Sanitation Transfer Station; An Open-Air Pavilion at the East River
In "Moby-Dick," Herman Melville wrote that "meditation and water are wedded forever." Well, come mid-December, New Yorkers will have another place to ponder the nature of existence.
It sits hard by the East River, near the Manhattan side of the Queensborough Bridge.
It used to be a Sanitation Department transfer station.
But it will open next month as the $2.5 million 60th Street Open Air Pavilion.
"It's the beginning of what we hope will become a very popular gathering space at the river's edge," said Tim Delorm, a senior principal at Hellmuth Obata &amp; Kassabaum, the Manhattan architectural firm that designed the space.


Quiet Ponds and Lakes, A Three-State Guide
THE sport of canoeing means different things to different people.
There are those who revel in the challenge of white water rapids and those who seek out quiet ponds and lakes, where they can paddle in solitude and commune with nature.
It is the latter species who will relish "Quiet Water Canoe Guide: Massachusetts/Connecticut/Rhode Island" by Alex Wilson, published recently by the Appalachian Mountain Club.
Twenty-five of the more than 60 waterways described are in Connecticut.
The aim of this intensely personal book is "to suggest places accessible to families with children and to retired people, places where a half-day jaunt can be enjoyed without the hassle of a car shuttle," Mr.
Wilson said.
"The emphasis is on why you want to go to this place, the birds and wildlife species you are likely to encounter," he added from his office in Brattleboro, Vt., where he publishes "Environmental Building News" a bimonthly newsletter for builders and architects dealing with environmentally sustainable design and construction.
The author, who paddles regularly with his two daughters, ages 4 and 7, is also responsible for last year's "Appalachian Mountain Club Quiet Water Canoe Guide: New Hampshire/Vermont" and is working on a guide for quiet water in Maine, scheduled for publication in the spring of '95.


County Buys New Vans To Carry the Disabled
NEARLY one million passenger trips have been made on the county's Paratransit system for the disabled since service began on Oct. 24, 1983.
In a ceremony recently marking the 10th anniversary of that system at the County Office Building in White Plains, Westchester officials unveiled the first of 30 new vans that will replace existing Paratransit vehicles this month and next.
Thirty-three Paratransit vans now operate in the county, and the number is expected to remain the same for the time being.


Mutual Funds; Value Line Steps Into the Data Ring
VALUE LINE, the renowned equity research organization, is breaking into the mutual fund market this week with a fund data service that competes directly with the nine-year-old service provided by Morningstar Inc., Chicago-based fund researchers.
Value Line is aggressively marketing its new package, but how does it compare with Morningstar's?
Two investment advisers, asked by The New York Times to compare the services, both plan to stay with Morningstar; one may also add Value Line.


Tampa
Tampa is a city of Anglo cool and Latin heat, a city whose cultural combustion gives it potent drive and vivacity.
Perched along blue bays and enjoying a subtropical climate, Tampa has been comfortably bilingual from its founding in 1824 .
The city began when Col.
George Mercer Brooke positioned his Army post adjacent to a small Cuban fishing village at the mouth of the Hillsborough River.
Over the years, it has become a city of sleek high-rises and serious business types who jettison the serious and cut loose after work.


Topics of The Times; Artistic Merit
Graffiti may have been all the rage in avant-garde art circles during the 1970's.
But for many New Yorkers this form of self-expression was unsettling.
Defaced subways and buildings were not just unsightly; they also contributed to a sense that the city was out of control.
But graffiti, it turns out, may have kept New York City's bridges from falling down.
"Any paint was good for the bridges," says Samuel Schwartz, who ought to know.
He was chief engineer and first deputy transportation commissioner for the city until 1990.


Camera Manners
To the Editor: Recent excursions to some exotic corners of the world have given me the impression that people who travel with photographic equipment -- especially those carrying video cameras -- are the most egotistical, inconsiderate, ill-mannered travelers one can encounter.
Carrying a piece of photographic equipment does not give the owner the right to stand in front of the audience, blocking the view of others in order to capture some exciting moment on film.
Travelers want to experience the surroundings, not the back of some camera-toting oaf.
Standing up briefly for a quick snap is one thing, but the video-cam bearer who stands and stands and stands is the epitome of arrogance.


Dana I. Ruben, Gregory T. Rogers
Mrs.
Leon B. Ruben of Bethesda, Md., has announced April wedding plans for her daughter, Dana Ilene Ruben, and Gregory Todd Rogers, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Rogers of Armonk, N.Y.
Miss Ruben, 28, is also the daughter of the late Mr.
Ruben.
She graduated from Emory University and is now the assistant director of the Barbara Mathes Gallery in New York.


THE WORLD: The U.N. and Problem Nations
FROM ancient days to the more modern era of colonialism, big and powerful governments had a variety of tactics to choose from when trying to quiet smaller, uppity and rebellious peoples and maintain order.
They could resort to tribal subventions, which meant bribing people to behave themselves.
They could mount punitive expeditions to cow obstreperous outlanders.
They could even banish local leaders, sending them into exile in some far area of empire.
These days, as tasks of establishing order in imploding countries and suppressing the ambitions of remote satraps and tin-pot tyrants fall more and more to multinational organizations, it is obvious that so far neither the United Nations, nor the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, nor the European Community, nor other regional associations have found ways of doing any such thing.


Clinton Plan Rewards Big Insurers; Tops in Bureaucracy
To the Editor:
Discussion of President Clinton's health care proposal has generated alarm about swollen bureaucracies.
Consider the following statistics:


NAME THAT COLT
The Jockey Club diligently screens the names of thoroughbred horses for vulgarity and obscenity, as noted by William Grimes in "Name That Colt" (Endpaper/Workbook, Oct. 10).
On Feb. 5, 1986, a thoroughbred named Wrecked Em raced at Aqueduct.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
PERSIAN POETRY
Works by the 13th-century Persian poet Jela Luddin Rumi will be read in English translation by the American poet Coleman Barks on Monday at 8 P.M. in the Academic Arts Theater at Westchester Community College in Valhalla.
Mr.
Barks will be accompanied by Paul Halley, Eugene Friesen and Glen Velez, an improvisational piano-cello-percussion trio from the Paul Winter Consort, which has performed with him at the Manhattan Theater Club and elsewhere.


THE WORLD: Playing Dominoes in Central Asia; Why All Eyes Are on a Place Called Tajikistan
SMALL, mountainous and with no oil or nuclear weapons, Tajikistan, one of the new Central Asian nations formed from the old Soviet Union, wouldn't seem to be of much interest to the outside world.
But Russia has 20,000 troops engaged in almost daily combat in the impoverished backwater of five million people, and the United States has an active embassy; diplomats from Turkey, Iran, China and Germany are also here.
The energetic ventures of these great powers brings reminders of the "Great Game," the geopolitical struggle of the 19th century between the Russian and British empires for dominance in Central Asia.
Today's game focuses on Islamic fundamentalism, but it is replete with echoes of the domino theory once invoked for Communism.
Central Asia is, in effect, Russia's Central America, and one can hardly avoid a strange deja vu as the former core of the Soviet Union agonizes over the vision of an ideological insurgency toppling countries in its own backyard.


Navy Says 2 Subs Pose No Hazards
The Navy has disclosed that for decades it performed deep-sea sleuthing to hunt for nuclear leaks from its two lost submarines, Thresher and Scorpion, both of which sank in the 1960's, and has concluded that the shattered hulks pose no apparent danger to the environment or human health.
The investigations are documented in a pair of reports made public on Oct. 25.
But private analysts who are beginning to study the documents are raising questions about the fullness of the disclosure.


Who's Got 'Security'?
New Dealers, back in the 30's, had a lock on the word security.
If any phrase exemplified the yearning of the nation in that Depression era, it was Social Security.
On the international scene, liberals, who were then interventionist, touted Wilsonian collective security.
In another sense of the word, the Securities and Exchange Commission was formed to guard against the predators of Wall Street.
At the end of that decade, the conservatives began taking the word back.
Internal security became the phrase to define the defense against Communist penetration.
In the Eisenhower years, national security became of great concern, and the President was given a national security adviser who had a whole council to go with him.
For a long generation, security connoted national defense and was a hot-button word for righties.


When an Erroneous Credit Report Destroys Your Reputation; Bill Collector's Scam
To the Editor:
While lawmakers are sprucing up the Fair Credit Reporting Act, they might also look at the companion Fair Credit Collections Act because bill collectors have found a hole in it vast enough to drive a truck through.


PIE IN THE SKY?
One bright morning in midseptember, a crowd of American aerospace experts gathered at White Sands Missile Range to watch their latest hope take flight: the McDonnell Douglas Delta Clipper Experimental rocket, or DC-X, which aims to be everything the space shuttle was supposed to be but isn't.
For starters, the full-scale Delta Clipper -- of which the 40-foot-tall DC-X is but a one-third-scale prototype -- would be entirely reusable.
Made of ultra-lightweight materials, it would reach orbit in a single bound, without recourse to the usual, costly array of disposable rocket boosters or upper stages.


IN SHORT: FICTION
ANCIENT ADVENTURES A CHOICE OF MURDER By Peter Vansittart.
Peter Owen/Dufour Editions, paper, $21.


Corrections
A caption last Sunday with a picture of Timothy Calonita, a candidate for Nassau District Attorney, gave the wrong party affiliation.
He was the Democratic candidate.


America Can Save Its City Schools
ROBERT SLAVIN knows America's big-city schools can be saved.
He can do it.
The Johns Hopkins University professor has designed a new way to teach reading that is getting impressive results at 31 inner-city elementary schools in Baltimore, Philadelphia, Charleston, S.C., Memphis, Fort Wayne, Ind., and Montgomery, Ala.
Children using his "Success for All" program are reading a grade level ahead of inner-city children who do not use it.
This is not some academic abstraction.
This has been going on for six years.
You can walk into Dr.
Bernard Harris Elementary in Baltimore, an all-black inner-city public school where 87 percent of thie children get free lunches, and shake the hands of the fifth graders Demetria Boyd, Keith Dickerson and Jamal McNeil, each one a whiz-bang reader.
Demetria, Keith and Jamal all read below grade level as first graders and needed the Johns Hopkins program's daily one-on-one tutoring.
As fifth graders they now read on sixth- to seventh-grade level.Jamal understands why extra help was necessary.
"Because it was very complicated in first grade and it made me get where I am now."


When an Erroneous Credit Report Destroys Your Reputation
To the Editor:
In "What's Wrong With Free Credit Reports" (letter, Oct. 28), C. B. Rogers Jr., chairman of Equifax Inc., overlooks an important point.
Credit-reporting companies like his establish the financial reputation of individuals by compiling credit information supplied by other businesses.
Is it reasonable to expect consumers to pay a fee to find out if their financial reputations are accurate?


Nets Are Finding That Goliath Got Bigger
What the Nets hoped might be a David against Goliath story involving center Dwayne Schintzius -- in terms of contrasting reputations if not physical stature -- has turned into the prospect that Goliath might win two in a row, and win them very big.


How to Streamline Jury Duty: Computers
To the Editor:
I read with great interest the articles about jury duty in your Oct. 10 issue.
I have been called on a regular basis for the last 10 years, and it seems to me that the reason the courts are unable to complete their work in a timely fashion is that their procedures are archaic.
The courts need to move up the technology ladder by expanding their computer operations.


The Odds Are Good The Goods Are Odd
ON Nov. 17, the American Numismatic Society is a celebrating its 135th anniversary with an auction and dinner in New York.
Then, on the next two days, Bowers &amp; Merena, the Wolfeboro, N.H., auction house, will offer a number of counterstamped coins -- that is, coins that have been marred on purpose -- at an auction in New York.
The society will be auctioning donated coins and oddities, and the money it raises will support many of the programs the society holds at its headquarters at 155th Street and Broadway.
Among the items is a very rare and odd British Indian Peace Medal.


Japan's Old Guard Flails At the Talking Heads
WHEN the revolution finally arrived in the Japanese political world last summer, the country's commercial television networks led the charge, and clearly enjoyed their newly discovered power to stir the electorate.
Now the losers are out for revenge, trying to put the genie back in the television tube.
For years the networks had been chipping away at Japan's supposed equivalent of the BBC, the state-dominated NHK television network, by nurturing some superstar newscasters, like Hiroshi Kume, who reported each scandal to hit the Liberal Democratic Party with sarcastic commentary and disbelieving stares.
The public loved it.


Women: Going the Distance and Taking Their Time
About 6,000 women, or more than a fifth of the 26,000 or so starters, will be at the red starting line on Staten Island, and if past experience holds, more than 90 percent of them will make it to the finish line.
With every step, they will be making history as the largest contingent of women in the race's 24-year history.


Getting Licenses for Selling, Storing, Moving
PERHAPS you have decided that it is high time you opened a bingo parlor.
You've got the boards, you've ferreted out those little chips, you've even lined up an expert caller.
That's fine, but don't think you can simply set up shop in a church basement and start calling out numbers.
It takes a license.


Touches of Glory, Reminders of Decay
New York City took over Flushing Meadows-Corona Park in 1967 after the closing of the World's Fair.
Many of its structures were left behind, but deteriorated over years of neglect.
In 1987, an administrator, Arne Abramowitz, was appointed to restore this jewel.
Here are some of the park's focal points and their conditions.
Some are being refurbished; some are still in decay.
RAYMOND HERNANDEZ


The Executive Life; Tethered to the Office Only by Technology
CALL them Perpetual Motion Executives -- or PMX's.
You've seen them: the men and women who in the course of a three-hour plane flight complete six business calls, return three pager messages and use their laptop computers to compose nine memos and wrap up a sales report.
PMX's trot through the terminal and out into a cab without ever taking the cellular phones from their ears.


THE NATION: Gauging a 'Cold Wind' in the Work Force; How the Job Count Is Off
THE Labor Department issued its monthly report on the health of the nation's labor force on Friday, but for millions of Americans, the unemployment rate has lost its meaning as a gauge of their well-being.
For them, it will take some measure not yet invented to accurately capture their experiences.
By the Labor Department's standard, a Harvard graduate who once owned a business and now sells diet formula door-to-door is employed, not unemployed.
So is a technician forced out of I.B.M. and now stacking shopping carts.
The unemployment rate has declined to 6.8 percent in October from 7.8 percent in June 1992, but the sheer fact of holding a job does not mean, as it once did, that a jobholder feels safely ensconced in the economy.


SURFACING


Self-Rule Pact Is Major Challenge To Islamic Militant Group in Gaza
On the day Yitzhak Rabin and Yasir Arafat shook hands in Washington to seal their peace pact, Atef Adwan sat bound and blindfolded in an Israeli Army detention center here as celebrations erupted in the streets.
"I heard singing outside the jail, cheers from pro-Arafat prisoners and cries from the interrogation section," he recalled.


A Narrow Road to the Old Arabia
YEMEN's lure is its Spartan and pristine settings, not unlike those of such other out-of-the-way places as Bhutan, Madagascar, Patagonia or Macedonia.
The monochromatic skyscrapers and nouveau Arabian architecture, which characterize most of the Gulf of Aden, have yet to ruin Yemen.
And not only are the mud-walled dwellings, framed by graceful whitewashed lines, intact, but the Government issues few permits for new buildings over five stories and insures that the ancient architectural style is respected, if not copied.
The country, at the southern tip of the Arabian Peninsula, is a land of lush valleys, sheer jagged cliffs that plunge dramatically into the Arabian Sea, white beaches and the vast, inhospitable stretch of desert known as The Empty Quarter.
The western coastal strip, the Tihama, that hugs the Red Sea, looks like Africa, with its dense tropical forests and conical huts.
In the eastern highlands, smoke drifts up from active volcanoes and hot springs bubble from the ground.


Miss Sunshine, Mr. Hirsch
Deborah Lynn Sunshine, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerry Sunshine of Great Neck, L.I., was married there last evening to David Lawrence Hirsch, a son of Patricia Hirsch of White Plains.
Rabbi Jerome Davidson performed the ceremony at Temple Beth-El.
Mrs.
Hirsch, 26, is a special-events coordinator for the Pubsun Corporation, a motion picture industry marketing and public relations concern in New York.
She graduated from the University of Rochester.


Ohio State Blocks a Kick And a Dream
After a week of overpowering emotions, at the end of an afternoon with twists and turns of fortune, there was an instant silence at Camp Randall Stadium.
Marlon Kerner's block of a 32-yard field-goal attempt by Wisconsin's Rick Schnetzky in the final seconds salvaged a 14-14 tie for Ohio State, preserved an unbeaten Buckeye season and their path to the Rose Bowl and prevented the type of celebration that nearly became a tragedy here last week.
Seven days after hundreds of Wisconsin students were trapped in a rush toward the field after a victory over Michigan, leaving 69 hospitalized, this game ended with no clear resolution and without incident.
This time, at the end of a frigid, occasionally snowy afternoon, the disappointed Badgers were showered with warm applause on their way off the field as the band played "On Wisconsin."


Car-Rental Companies Raise Their Rates
Car-rental companies are raising their rates in major cities throughout the United States and for every category.
The average rise is 12 to 15 percent, but it varies by city.
The companies instituted a price rise a year ago, but pulled back in most places when business slackened this year.
This time the rises appear to be sticking.
First announced for 28 cities by Hertz, the biggest company, at the beginning of October, the increases are in effect by now in 100 cities, and other companies are following suit.
The reason cited by the companies was an increase in the cost of the autos they buy.
David Sparks, vice president for marketing and sales for Budget Rent A Car, said that the expense of buying cars represented 55 to 60 percent of a rental company's costs.


Stepin in It
The face that launched a million dinner-table arguments was nothing if not startling.
One friend of mine was so fascinated by the photograph of Ted Danson in blackface at the Friars Club he rushed out to buy USA Today, hoping to find it in color.
Even then, the image was bizarre, inscrutable, inexplicable.
Ted Danson has not heretofore been known as Mr.
Comic Cutting Edge.
In a game of free-association his name would not follow Lenny Bruce, Eric Bogosian and Karen Finley, but Bob Cummings, Tom Selleck and Wonder bread.
Or such was Danson's persona until he appeared at the now notorious entertainment-industry luncheon roast for his lover, Whoopi Goldberg, and let loose with a string of raunchy jokes punctuated by the word "nigger." By the end of the day, he stood accused of presiding over "a rally for the K.K.K.  and Aryan Nation," in the phrase of Montel Williams, a black talk-show host who stormed out.
By the end of the week, the national consensus hardened into a club that beat him over the head: Danson had no business spewing a racial slur, however ironic or innocuous the same word may sound when used by African-Americans in literature or conversation.
By the end of the month, Danson had defensively pronounced himself "proud of what I did" and taken to attacking "slanted coverage" in the press.
Meanwhile, Goldberg's lonely defense of Danson was universally dismissed as the ravings of a woman who had sacrificed her mind and racial consciousness to her libido.


How to Make an Indoor Tree Feel at Home
NOW that the tree leaves are falling, plant thoughts are moving indoors.
But they need not be treeless thoughts.
There are many indoor trees that can be grown in the home as a sort of substitute for the leafy canopy of summer.
Of course, office buildings, malls and banks are made all the more splendid with these indoors trees, which are used to make tall cold walls fit the human scale.
But many of these same plant species can be utilized in the home.
Exceptionally tall ceilings are not necessary in most cases.
Nor are the fancy pots.
Just choose plants wisely and care for them properly.


Valerie Hodgson, Andrew Callender
Valerie Anne Jacqueline Hodgson, a daughter of Thomas E. S. Hodgson of Port Washington, L.I., and the late Elia Maria de Oliveira Hodgson, was married on Friday to Andrew David Callender, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Callender of Henley-on-Thames, England.
The Rev.
William O'Rourke performed the ceremony at St.
Peter of Alcantara Roman Catholic Church in Port Washington.
Mrs.
Callender graduated from Wheaton College.
Her father retired as a director and the chief general manager of Lloyds Bank International in New York.


'Extreme Conditions'
To the Editor:
As the director of communications for Gov.
Walter J. Hickel of Alaska, I would like to respond to Ann Crittenden's review of "Extreme Conditions: Big Oil and the Transformation of Alaska" (Aug. 8).
I found an accurate sentence in her piece on John Strohmeyer's book: "It is not particularly well written." Ms.
Crittenden's review reflects her notions of Alaska and compounds those of Mr.
Strohmeyer.
Trashing Alaskans as un reconstructed rednecks is a time-honored way of turning pencil lead into gold.
Just consider the fund-raising gold mine unearthed by Friends of Animals' Priscilla Feral and the Fund for Animals' Cleveland Amory, with their silly "howl-ins" and pop-biology hysteria about wolf management in Alaska, the only state that has plenty of wolves (6,000 plus), more than at statehood 34 years ago.


Karen Fullam, Timothy R. Brennan
Karen Patricia Fullam, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene J. Fullam of Lattingtown, L.I., was married yesterday to Timothy Runyon Brennan, a son of Mrs.
James A. Brennan of Old Westbury, L.I., and the late Mr.
Brennan.
The Rev.
John Gordon performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Patrick Church in Glen Cove, L.I.
The bride is the advertising director for Maurice Villency Inc., the furniture company, in New York.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father, an engineer, is the chief executive of Twin County Steel, a structural-steel construction company in St.
James, L.I.


Flying Solo


Technology; Warning of Disasters, Digitally
This is a test of the Emergency Broadcast System. . . .
If this had been an actual emergency, you would have been instructed on where to tune in your area for news and information.
GET ready to kiss another Cold War artifact goodbye.
The weekly test of the Emergency Broadcast System is going the way of the backyard bomb shelter and the schoolroom "duck and cover" nuclear attack drill.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 Why the pianist Krystian Zimerman wouldn't even think of stepping onstage ahead of Ricard de La Rosa.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 The flower business is getting rough, and George Prevezanos is worried.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 14 Remembering Yugoslavia in TriBeCa, Puerto Rico in Mott Haven and Scotland on the Upper West Side.
MOVIE CLOCK 16 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
GOOD EATING 21 The very middle of midtown: reshmi kebab or mulligatawny at Darbar, sturdy mushroom barley at La Bonne Soupe.
SOAPBOX 23 Newer, fewer, less reliable: the bus as stepchild of New York City transit.
Plus, letters and "Eye of the Beholder."


Joanne Kim, Henry Kolowrat
Joanne Kim, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Kyo A. Kim of Greenville, Del., was married yesterday to Henry Francis Kolowrat, the son of Henry Kolowrat of Philadelphia and Elizabeth S. Kolowrat of Swarthmore, Pa.
The Rev.
John Walton officiated at the Westminster Presbyterian Church in Wilmington, Del.
The bride, 29, is the manager of the Delaware Trust Company's branch bank in Bear, Del.
She graduated from Boston College.


New Leader


Business Diary, October 31 - November 5
THE ECONOMY Wall Street's Long Party Gets a Rude Interruption Long rallies in the stock and bond markets survived an often-nasty October, but the first week of November was something else.
Things were going fine as long as the economy was growing steadily and slowly.
But suddenly in the middle of last week the growth seemed perkier, and the alarms went off.
Interest rates, which had been dozing way down below 6 percent, headed straight up, and investors suddenly remembered that there was life -- and possibly better returns -- beyond stocks.
Or, the way these things work, they figured everyone else would think that way.
In any case, the Dow industrials, after notching new records early in the week, did an about-face, losing 73 points in two days.
The Dow steadied on Friday, but most of the market kept retreating.
And it was a busy week, with Big Board volume the second-highest ever.
The only busier week?
The week of the October 1987 crash.


Cranberry Desserts Brighten the Holidays
FRESH cranberries, which come into season in the fall, aren't just for a sauce to go with turkey.
Their tart flavor is also superb in desserts that are particularly colorful and festive on the holiday table.
Daniel Boulud, the celebrated French chef (formerly of Le Cirque and now owner of Daniel restaurant in Manhattan), stuffs whole apples with cranberries and orange peel, sticks a cinnamon stick in each one and bakes them in the oven.
Use large apples that will keep their shape and texture and will have a sweet taste when baked (Rome apples are especially good).
The dessert can be prepared up to four hours ahead of time but should be served warm.


FORBIDDEN SUN, AND SIN, COMMUNIST STYLE
The house Champagne is Moet, the lobby Muzak has a vaguely disco beat, and the topless blonde at the pool is reading Danielle Steele in German.
The scene might be in Sardinia, the Costa Brava or a Club Med in the Seychelles.
But the Spanish-operated Hotel Melia is either much closer to home or much farther, depending on how you look at it.
For this is the glitziest of resorts in Varadero, Cuba's trendiest of beach towns.
It's just a stone's throw from Key West -- yet off limits to American pleasure travelers under what Congress solemnly calls the Trading With the Enemy Act.


Yeltsin Backs Away From Early Presidential Election
Backing off a promise to hold an early presidential election next June, President Boris N. Yeltsin told a group of Russian newspaper editors today that he wanted to stay in office until his term expires in 1996.
The President's statement -- which seems to have taken some close advisers by surprise -- promptly drew fire from some of his chief opponents, who accused him of playing "tricks" with the electorate just as a campaign for Russia's new two-chamber Parliament is getting getting under way.


Beth Sherman, Andrew Edelstein
Beth Jane Sherman, a staff writer, and Andrew Joseph Edelstein, an entertainment editor, both at New York Newsday in Manhattan, were married yesterday evening.
Rabbi Dennis Math officiated at the Westbury Hotel in Manhattan.
Ms.
Sherman, 33, is keeping her name.
She graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is the daughter of Glenda and Victor Sherman of New York.
Her father is the president of Solco Industries, a plumbing supplies company in Manhattan.


In Danbury, Quiet, Romantic and French
THREE small, softly lighted rooms in a white-shingle house with shutters make the perfect setting for a cozy French-style dining establishment, as patrons of Duo's Restaurant in Danbury are discovering.
Duo's has transformed space formerly occupied by a Cuban restaurant, and the once bouncy white and parrot-green decor is now quietly romantic.
The nonsmoking room, with an abbreviated annex in the rear, has pale yellow stucco walls, a bow window, hanging plants, potted palms, a brick fireplace and immaculately groomed tables with white cloths, tiny lights and fresh flowers.
The smoking room has a large picture window fronting on the highway.


Hooverville
To the Editor:
Reading Christopher Gray's Aug. 29 article on the Central Park Hooverville brought back memories of the shantytown in my neighborhood along Riverside Drive.
I lived on West End Avenue as a child in the 30's and 40's and my parents frequently took me walking along the drive overlooking the Hooverville that had grown up between the open cut of the west side New York Central freight tracks and the Hudson River.
We saw men gathered around open fires in empty oil drums much as we see today among the homeless -- especially in my new East Side neighborhood under the Queensborough Bridge on First Avenue.


Karen Porush, Thomas Trowbridge
Karen Hope Porush, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerome G. Porush of New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Thomas Allen Trowbridge, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen Trowbridge of Chicago.
Cantor David Benedict and the Rev.
John Gillham, a Methodist minister, officiated at the Inwood (L.I.) Country Club.
Mrs.
Trowbridge, 31, is the marketing director at Spectrum Educational Services, a distributor of educational materials in Rosedale, L.I.
She graduated from New York University.
Her father is the chief of the division of nephrology and hypertension at the Brookdale Hospital Medical Center and a professor of medicine at the State University Health Science Center, both in Brooklyn.
He is the author of "Renal Disease in the Aged" (Little Brown &amp; Company, 1991).
Her mother, Ruth Porush, works with him as an executive assistant.


Sub Quarterback Puts U.C.L.A. Close to Bowl
U.C.L.A. 40, Washington State 27
Rob Walker, pressed into action when starter Wayne Cook was injured, threw two touchdown passes to J. J. Stokes as U.C.L.A. kept its Rose Bowl hopes alive yesterday with a 40-27 Pac-10 victory over Washington State in Pullman.
Walker, a sophomore, was 14 of 33 passing for 181 yards.
No. 6 in The New York Times computer rankings and No. 12 in The Associated Press poll, U.C.L.A. (7-2, 5-1 Pac-10) can claim the conference championship by beating Arizona State next week and Southern Cal on Nov. 20.
Southern Cal 45, Stanford 20
Johnnie Morton broke a Pac-10 receiving record as Southern Cal kept alive its Rose Bowl hopes in Los Angeles.
Morton caught four passes for 127 yards and two touchdowns from Johnson.
On his first reception, a 30-yard scoring catch from Rob Johnson in the first quarter, Morton surpassed the conference record of 1,124 receiving yards set by Washington State's Mike Levenseller in 1976.
Johnson finished 22 of 35 for 349 yards and 3 touchdowns.
His 23 touchdown passes this season are two more than the U.S.C. record set by Rodney Peete in 1987.
Colorado 31, Oklahoma State 14
Colorado's Charles Johnson caught two of Kordell Stewart's three touchdown passes, and Stewart added a 17-yard scoring run for the Buffaloes, No. 25 according to The New York Times and No. 23 with The Associated Press.
Air Force 25, Army 6
Wayne Young ran for a career-high 103 yards on just nine carries and scored twice, helping Air Force beat its service-academy rival at the Air Force Academy.
The Falcons' defense was led by linebacker Steve Walker's 13 tackles.


Kennedy Museum Reopens in Boston
The museum at the John F. Kennedy Library in Boston reopened on Oct. 30 after a year-long renovation, with new multimedia exhibits designed to give visitors an immediate experience of the Kennedy era.
After watching a short film narrated by President Kennedy on his early career, visitors proceed to four multimedia displays: "The 1960 Campaign," "The Presidency," "Epilogue" and "Legacy." Exhibits include re-creations of the 1960 convention hall in Los Angeles, the White House's red-carpeted corridor, the Oval Office and the Attorney General's Office with Robert F. Kennedy's original desk.
Throughout the museum, original footage from the Kennedy years is shown; President Kennedy is seen and heard on some 20 video screens.
In a dark corridor Walter Cronkite's coverage of the President's assassination plays over and over on a television set.
The museum displays formerly ended with the assassination.
Now, the last exhibit documents President Kennedy and his family's influence on policy -- a 3.5 ton piece of the Berlin Wall is on view, for instance -- and on people, including President Clinton, who taped a video segment about his encounter with President Kennedy for the museum.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Mighty Hicksville Spruce
WHAT Frank Capra could have done with the DiGennaros of Hicksville.
They are a family whose tale cries for a Christmas movie.
Yes, Christmas.
Their holiday tale started last week.
Well, technically it began 42 years ago in the backyard of their original Levitt ranch.


The Peace Deficit
The prospect of peace in the Middle East has everyone giddy.
So many promises, so many dreams, so many inevitable editorial references to walls "tumblin' down" in Jericho.
There are those who have sworn to undermine the agreement between Israel and the P.L.O., but even these extremists seem to cling to a utopian vision of their own -- namely, that the other side will just sort of cheerfully go away, much as future Serbian textbooks will no doubt portray Bosnia's Muslims as having done.
But who speaks for the Middle East status quo?
This is no idle question, for 20th-century history proves one thing: that peace can be a mixed blessing.
After all, what did we gain from the end of World War I?
In the short run we got the Jazz Age, which was much like the 80's, although there were no Armani spats.
In the long run we got the Great Depression, which was much like the 90's, except that the unemployed didn't have automatic weapons.
Ultimately, we got World War II -- the conclusion of which brought on the cold war and such embarrassments as the Bay of Pigs, My Lai and Jason Robards's performance in "The Day After."


Phie K. Dai and Albert A. Chin
Phie K. Dai, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Hsueh-Tai Dai of Union City, N.J., was married yesterday to Albert A. Chin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Chin of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Tracey Robinson Harris, a Unitarian-Universalist minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University in New York.
Ms.
Dai, who is keeping her name, is a program assistant with the Business Council for International Understanding, a nonprofit organization that seeks to foster foreign trade.
She and her husband graduated from Columbia University, and she received a master's degree in international relations from Johns Hopkins University.
Her father, now retired, was an orthopedic surgeon in Jersey City.


How to Make an Indoor Tree Feel at Home
NOW that the tree leaves are falling, plant thoughts are moving indoors.
But they need not be treeless thoughts.
There are many indoor trees that can be grown in the home as a sort of substitute for the leafy canopy of summer.
Of course, office buildings, malls and banks are made all the more splendid with these indoors trees, which are used to make tall cold walls fit the human scale.
But many of these same plant species can be utilized in the home.
Exceptionally tall ceilings are not necessary in most cases.
Nor are the fancy pots.
Just choose plants wisely and care for them properly.


Gabrielle Brown and John Lippert
GUESTS entered Gabrielle Brown and John Lippert's wedding on Oct. 30 through blue curtains, the kind of glittery, gauzy curtains that suggest something very unusual lies on the other side.
They were not disappointed.
Ms.
Brown and Mr.
Lippert, both 26-year-old artists, were married in a TriBeCa loft where her parents live.
Working for months, the young couple transformed half of it into a mystical, almost cartoonish forest.


Debris of Past Failures Impedes Poverty Policy
PRESIDENT CLINTON may be presiding over the first activist government with doubts about activist government.
The Old Executive Office Building is filled with policy planners working overtime.
They are plotting revolutions in health care and welfare, overhauling job-training and child care programs and mapping the "empowerment zones" meant to revive cities.


A B C's; Beating The Dealer: Drug Patrols
Residents of many neighborhoods around New York City have formed community patrols to put pressure on drug dealers.
Here are some suggestions on forming a patrol, from the Citizens Committee for New York City, which helps neighborhood organizations and publishes a wide range of pamphlets with tips on solving local problems.
TAKE A GOOD LOOK Anti-drug patrols don't work everywhere, especially if drugs are sold behind closed doors or if there is drug-related street violence.
A door-to-door survey that asks people about drugs and crime in the neighborhood can provide helpful information and identify people interested in a patrol.
FIND VOLUNTEERS The goal is to bring people to an orientation meeting.
Residents who belong to a community organization could offer to form a committee to start a patrol.
Churches, clubs and Parent-Teacher Associations can help.
Young people should be included in all phases of planning, decision-making and patrolling.
As a security measure, advertise the meeting only by phone calls, word of mouth or announcements at trusted community organizations, and consider meeting outside the neighborhood.
ORIENTATION MEETING Ask a volunteer to keep notes.
Discuss the possibility of an anti-drug patrol.
A patrol leader from another neighborhood could talk about that neighborhood's experience.
Summarize the discussion: the area to be patrolled; policies on street confrontation; cooperation with the police, and security measures.
Choose a temporary group of patrol leaders.
SECURITY PLANNING Do not publicize the names of the patrol leaders.
Maintain close relations with the police and report any threats immediately.
Seek safety in numbers through a large patrol, rallies and community meetings.
Patrol members should never confront a drug dealer alone.
Information on specific dealers should be relayed to a trusted core-group member, but not talked about at open meetings. (For more information, see the Neighborhood Anti-Crime Center sheet on "The Potential for Violence in Anti-Drug Organizing.")  POLICE RELATIONS Get in touch with the community affairs officer or unit assigned to work with the community.
TRAIN AND PREPARE Ask the police for training in recognizing drug-dealing situations and signs of crimes in progress, reporting information in a form useful to the police, making accurate descriptions of suspected dealers, calling for help in an emergency and safety on the street.
Among useful materials are handheld two-way radio sets (FM sets have a wider range than those operating on citizens'-band frequencies); printed forms for recording incidents and logging each patrol; notebooks; clipboards; flashlights; whistles and jackets, T-shirts, armbands or other form of identification.
Set up procedures for joining the patrol: for example, being trained in the principles and procedures of the patrol.
BEGIN PATROLLING The kind of patrol will vary with the size and strengths of your group, the kind of drug problem you face and the neighborhood terrain.
A few rules that apply to all patrols:
Plan a regular schedule (based on the days and times when a patrol is most needed and volunteers are available) and a standard route.
After a while, try different routes or different times to keep the dealers off balance.
Notify the police each time you go out and return.
Maintain contact via walkie-talkie with a home base, an office or building lobby, perhaps.
Home base requires a telephone to call the police.
Go out in a group and appoint a captain.


BELIEFS REPORTED TO SHORTEN LIFE
A large statistical study of Chinese-Americans in California has found evidence that psychosomatic beliefs can shorten a person's life, researchers say.
The researchers, at the University of California at San Diego, said their study examined a traditional belief in Chinese astrology that specific diseases are correlated with the year of birth.
Each birth year is associated with one of five phases, and each phase is linked with an organ of the body and a disease symptom.


Administration Settles on a New Rights Nominee
Senior Administration officials say President Clinton will soon nominate John Payton, a Washington lawyer, to head the Justice Department's civil rights division, despite sharp reservations from some members of the Congressional Black Caucus.
Officials said on Friday that Mr.
Payton, the corporation counsel for the District of Columbia, remained the first choice for the job and that complaints from a handful of black lawmakers would not dissuade the President from announcing the nomination soon.


Seminoles Let Down On Defense
The stage is set.
Let the countdown begin.
Now that Florida State is rid of a final petty distraction, namely the Maryland Terrapins, it can turn its full attention to the Notre Dame game a week away.
Florida State (9-0) beat Maryland, 49-20, in Byrd Stadium today, but for three quarters it wasn't the whitewash to be expected from the top-ranked team in the nation playing a team plummeting in the Atlantic Coast Conference.
Maryland (1-8) exposed one of Florida State's weaknesses -- its secondary.
Surely Lou Holtz, whose Notre Dame team was off this this weekend, will want a tape of this game, and will take another look at his passing attack.


NEWS SUMMARY
The grand jury also recommended Justice Larsen's removal.  22  MILITARY BUDGET APPROVED  Congressional negotiators approved a $261 billion military budget for the 1994 fiscal year, making few big changes in the Administration's first Pentagon spending plan.  25  MIXED MESSAGE FOR G.O.P.
Political Memo: The Republican sweep in elections this week will no doubt boost morale.
The general election was to be the first in almost a decade in which his name would not appear on the Yonkers ballot.  37  ASSESSING WHAT WENT WRONG  Shaken by Mayor David N. Dinkins's defeat, more than 100 black politicians and community leaders met in a Harlem high school to assess what went wrong and plan how to resurrect the political power that came with the election of the city's first black mayor.  40 Obituaries 46  Jeffrey Schmalz, reporter and editor at The Times.


Public &amp; Private; Dumb About Smarts
Mirian Acosta-Sing has a problem.
She's the principal of a New York City public school, a school whose students are almost entirely black and Latino, with income levels low enough to qualify for free lunches, in a neighborhood in which fifth and sixth graders are importuned by dealers to take lucrative work as drug runners.
But Dr.
Acosta-Sing's problem is not what you might imagine.
She runs the Mott Hall School in Washington Heights, whose 450 students, grades four through eight, are all gifted and talented.
And all she has to do is mention those two words to be written off for state funds, grant programs, most kinds of additional aid.


LITTLE BIG PEOPLE
Granted, anything in excess is dangerous, but I'd like to thank my parents who sparked and encouraged interests like gymnastics, French lessons and trips to Europe.
They must have done something right, because, strangely enough, I appreciate it.
JANINE KIETRYS Bloomington, Ind.


An 'Oh, Well' For Wesleyan
For Wesleyan, the setting was perfect: The team was unbeaten through six games with two to play, it was homecoming day at Andrus Field before a crowd of 5,500 -- big by Wesleyan standards -- and a victory over Williams would have given the Cardinals their first outright Little Three championship since 1970.


Health Plan Is Toughest On Doctors Making Most
After a quarter century of surging incomes that made many of them millionaires, the nation's doctors now face the prospect of stable or shrinking pay.
Vulnerable to the biggest declines are specialists whose incomes have soared with the advent of expensive medical procedures -- cardiac surgeons, for example, who make an average of $575,000 in private practice, and radiologists, who make an average of $310,000.
At the same time, family practitioners, who now average about $119,000 a year, may hold their ground or see modest increases in income.


The Image Is New, and So Is the Menu
WHEN the Roslyn Claremont Hotel opened two years ago, it was impressive.
The sparkling flower-filled lobby, classic English-style library-lounge and pretty garden dining room were captivating.
But good looks are not enough.
That dining room, the Palm Room, harbored sky-high prices, pretentious service and forgettable continental food.
Its replacement, Cafe Europa, is working hard to change that image.
Only the charming surroundings remain.
White lattices, peach-sponged walls, cascading greenery and a three-story atrium ceiling enclose the tiny area, which is filled with flower-bedecked tables.


LITTLE BIG PEOPLE
Spoiled kids are nothing new.
So why limit the exploration of this New Wave brattiness to Manhattan apartment buildings with doormen.
Any of us, from any social background, can recall friends with a flair for beating adults at their own game.
Even I, as a shy and obedient boy of 10, would parrot my father's serious stock phrase -- "This is totally unacceptable!" -- when offered food I didn't want.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
NATURAL HISTORY By Maureen Howard.
Harper Perennial, $12.
The lives of this novel's characters revolve around Bridgeport, Conn., a city fading to grim shabbiness.
Beginning with a murder in the 1940's, the book follows the fates of diverse individuals who are somehow touched by this crime.
Last year our reviewer, John Casey, called it a synergy of the author's "meditative social vision and storytelling immediacy, of her highly developed technical skill and of her alert heart."  JFK: Reckless Youth By Nigel Hamilton.
Random House, $15.
The first of a projected three-volume biography, this book covers the years from John F. Kennedy's birth, in 1917, to 1946, when he was first elected to office as a Massachusetts Congressman.
"By the very detail and depth of the revelations, the flashes of brilliance and consistency of insight, 'JFK: Reckless Youth' easily takes its place beside the best of recent Presidential portraits," Roger Morris said here last year.
Random House has also reissued EYEBALL TO EYEBALL: The Inside Story of the Cuban Missile Crisis, by Dino A. Brugioni ($16), the supervisor of aerial reconnaissance photographs at the time.
He demonstrates how important the new surveillance technology was to the denouement of the watershed foreign-policy event of the Kennedy Presidency.
Last year our reviewer, Graham T. Allison, called the book, edited by Robert F. McCort, "an important contribution."


No Headline
The half-million-dollar-a-year doctor, I think, is in trouble now. - DR.
JOHN M. EISENBERG, who advises Congress on payments to physicians.  [ 1:2. ]


Images Show the Heart of a Photographer's Hometown
MARIO GIACOMELLI has been taking photographs for the last 39 of his 68 years.
He has turned his camera on World War II survivors visiting Lourdes and Tibetan monks at their devotions, on starving Ethiopians and butchered animals, and on farm workers and priests.
He has also used it to illustrate the poetry of Giacomo Leopardi.
But the subject that the photographer has returned to over and over again and that is especially prominent in the show now at Paesaggio Gallery in Hartford is Senigallia, the town in the Marches on the Adriatic coast of Italy where he was born, together with the landscape there and farther south in the Abruzzi.


A Life in Pictures
An exhibition honoring Grace Coddington's 25 years with Vogue, Nov. 4.


SUNDAY, November 7, 1993; BIO-CHIC
The newest threat to the world is perfume.
To be specific, three exotic fragrances: DNA, which does not contain DNA; Pheromone, which does not contain pheromones, and Realm, which does contain pheromones.
The names mark yet another example of the disrespect for language, logic and meaning commonly shown by the cosmetology-fashion marketing complex.
Worse, these scents mark the emergence of bio-chic.
One might have thought that everyone was aware of DNA, molecular biology, gene-splicing.
Not so.
Brett Neubig of Bijan Fragrances, the maker of DNA, the perfume, is delighted that DNA, the stuff of life, is a buzzword now.
Six years ago, he says, when the fragrance was being developed, "No one had really heard of DNA."


F.Y.I.
Subway Cars by Colors
Q.
Have you ever noticed that subway cars seem to be color-coded?
On the No. 1 train I rode today, for instance, there was a red bar below the numbers; on a No. 2 train across the platform, the bar was blue with a yellow diamond in the middle.
Curiously, the last car of that train also had a large gray or green circle next to the bar.
What's the purpose of the color codes?


Coming to 119th St., a PAL 'Safe Haven'
Among the swirl of photo ops in the closing days of the mayoral race was a groundbreaking ceremony for an $8 million Police Athletic League center at 119th Street and Manhattan Avenue, across from P.S. 180.
The ground -- a trash-covered lot just east of Morningside Park -- hardly needed breaking, and construction remains months away.
But District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau, Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly and Borough President Ruth W. Messinger held shovels to do the honors.
And even though Mayor Dinkins never did arrive, it appears the center will.


Boulez Relaxes His Grip -- a Bit
Pierre Boulez began his career as a wild man of the avant-garde, a composer who clung to the Serialist faith and lashed out at his enemies without mercy.
Many of those enemies were in France, and during the 1950's and 60's Mr.
Boulez spent most of his time in West Germany, where he actually lived for a while.
But with his rise to prominence as a world-famous conductor, things changed.
During his tenure as music director of the New York Philharmonic in the 70's, he was wooed and won by Georges Pompidou, the president of France.
He quit the Philharmonic in 1977, just in time to take charge of his newly constructed, grandiose contemporary-music center in Paris, the Institute for the Research and Coordination of Acoustics and Music, known as Ircam.


Bushwhacked
HELL OF A RIDE Backstage at the White House Follies, 1989-1993.
By John Podhoretz. 249 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $21.


OCT. 31-NOV. 5: Kollek's Ouster; A New Mayor For the Old City Of Jerusalem
"He's a lion, he's a lion," campaign supporters chanted at Mayor Teddy Kollek of Jerusalem last week.
But at age 82, the lion may have roared his last.
After 28 years of running one of the world's most difficult cities, Mr.
Kollek saw his extraordinary career come to an inglorious end when he was roundly beaten at the polls by Ehud Olmert, 47, a veteran Likud Party lawmaker.
In the end, it mattered little that Mr.
Kollek had been a master builder who transformed the face of a once shabby city and tried (not always successfully) to reduce tensions between Palestinians and Israelis and between secular and Orthodox Jews.
He'd grown old and tired, and Jerusalemites wanted change.


Julie A. Thurer, Steven R. Becker
Julie A. Thurer, a daughter of Dr.
Gerald and Diane Thurer of Dix Hills, L.I., was married last evening to Steven R. Becker, a son of Bruce and Rosalie Becker of Vestal, N.Y.
Rabbi Howard Buechler performed the ceremony at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Mrs.
Becker, a graduate of the University of Michigan, received a master's degree in teaching from Trinity College in Washington.
She teaches at the Gesher Jewish Day School in Alexandria, Va.
Her father is the chairman of the department of anesthesiology at Massapequa (L.I.) General Hospital.
Her mother is a speech therapist for Suffolk County.


Strategist Stayed Calm In the Storm
On Election Night, with the outcome of New Jersey's gubernatorial race far from being settled and the political future of his candidate, Christine Todd Whitman, and perhaps his own on the line, Ed Rollins retired to his hotel room to watch his favorite television show -- the police series, "NYPD Blue."
"When I went back downstairs to see where we were, we had dropped by about 40,000 votes," Mr.
Rollins recalled.
"It didn't upset me too much, because I tend to get calmer in a fight."


Second Graders Write Own Page In Civics Book
Mary McLeod Bethune, a daughter of former slaves who worked to bring education to her people, once wrote: "I leave you a thirst for education. I leave you respect for the use of power. I leave you faith. I leave you racial dignity." A group of more than 20 second graders in Central Harlem has taken that legacy to heart, in a project to name a street after Bethune.
Last September, Syma Solovitch was talking to her class at P.S. 92 about streets in the neighborhood that were named after famous figures like the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., Adam Clayton Powell Jr. and Malcolm X when Rondu Gantt raised his hand.
"Why are there no streets named after African-American women?" he asked.
That spurred the class to action.
"It had to be addressed immediately," Ms.
Solovitch said.
"Everything else just had to be put on hold."


From Garbage Into Gold
GARDENERS have long called compost "brown gold," because it's like money in the bank for their plants.
But compost could also turn into gold for New York City.
As the leaves fall this month, the city's Department of Sanitation has joined with New York's botanical gardens to coordinate a home composting project that could ultimately save the city millions every year.


Protesters Oppose Repeal of Gay Rights Laws


Odd Men Out
STRANGE PILGRIMS Twelve Stories.
By Gabriel Garcia Marquez.
Translated by Edith Grossman. 188 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $21.


OCT. 31-NOV. 5: The Packwood Papers; Senate Demands a Look At the Diaries
"I do not want to go to court," Senator Bob Packwood told the Senate last week.
"I do not want to have to pay several hundred thousand dollars or a million to test this in the courts. I would like this to be over with."
No argument there, least of all from the Oregon Republican's fellow lawmakers.
In two days of debate, they played trapper to Mr.
Packwood's trapped animal, rebuffing his ever more anguished pleas to limit an inquiry into embarrassing allegations of sexual misbehavior, intimidation and influence-peddling.
In the end, they voted 94 to 6 to force him to give investigators 3,000 pages of private diaries that may or may not bear on the charges.


Sides Clash at Rally in Pennsylvania


SUNDAY, November 7, 1993; DOWNSIZING
Miniature golf may finally be getting some respect.
This summer the Clintons played while they were on vacation.
And an exhibit called "Putt-Modernism," mounted by the Artists Space gallery to raise funds, is now on display at the South Street Seaport in lower Manhattan as part of a nationwide tour.
Artists created 18 holes for the exhibit, ranging from the grim (a river of neon blood flowing out of a White House of AIDS drug bottles) to the fanciful (a metal topiary garden).
This course is a bit more hard-hitting than your average mini-golf experience, but like its antecedents it is fairly cheap ($5), full of interesting cultural content (no Mickey Mouse, but an Elvis) and you carry your own club.


The Local Florist: An Endangered Species?
FOR all of New York's pollution, pestilence and squalor, Peter Prevezanos says he sees no menace greater than a grocer down the block who is selling a dozen roses for $14.
"Most of their flowers are sprayed with chemicals, and they have exposed food," said Mr.
Prevezanos, co-owner for the last 18 years of G. P. Florist on Second Avenue near 48th Street.
His bushy eyebrows arched with indignation; a dozen roses at G. P. Florist go for $65.
"And the same guy who handles the flowers handles the food," he continued.
"You never see the health inspector there."


Ms. Donovan, Mr. Lowe
Catherine Anne Donovan, a daughter of Ellen Smith of Langstone, Havant, Hampshire, England, and the late Daniel F. Donovan Jr., was married yesterday to Robert Reed Lowe, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John B. Lowe Jr. of Greenwich, Conn.
Msgr.
Thomas P. Guinan performed the ceremony at St.
James Church in Johnson City, N.Y.
Mrs.
Lowe, 26, graduated from Hamilton College.
She is a senior legal assistant at the New York law firm of White &amp; Case.
Her father was a mechanical engineer for the State of New York.
Her stepfather, Ronald L. Smith, is an engineering manager with International Business Machines in Portsmouth, England.


OCT. 31-NOV. 5: Philadelphia Story; A Mother Convicted Of Killing Her Daughter
Vivian King confessed last March to shooting her daughter in the head, hiding her body in a city park and then, over the next month, brazenly urging police to intensify their search for the missing teenager.
She then recanted the confession, saying it had been coerced, but a jury last week found her guilty of third degree murder and possession of a gun.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 17 about the Beaujolais region of France misstated the name and title of the estate supervisor who oversees wine production at Chateau de La Chaize.
She is the Marquise de Roussy de Sales.


Morris Hamburg, Professor, 80
Morris Hamburg, a retired professor of educational administration at Brooklyn College, died on Wednesday at his home in San Diego.
He was 80.
The cause of death was a brain tumor, according to his wife, Marian Hamburg.
Mr.
Hamburg taught at Brooklyn College from 1964 to 1979.
He also served as an an umpire with the United States Tennis Association from 1954 to 1980.


Wall Street; Is Paramount Really Worth That Price?
IT'S the sort of rationale every mother uses when buying the hopelessly oversized winter coat for her kid: He'll grow into it.
That, apparently, is the implicit wish of the optimistic bidders for Paramount Communications Inc., the acquisition target of both Viacom (the friendly suitor) and QVC Inc. (the unwanted one).
Paramount, by most traditional measures of value, is already going at too fat a price, given the roughly $80-a-share offers on the table.
And higher bets are in the works.


Rusty Hinge?
To the Editor:
In the article "A New Masterpiece for the Verdi Canon?"  [ Oct. 17 ] , about the Metropolitan Opera production of Verdi's "Stiffelio," Will Crutchfield writes that the opera may be "better suited to the age that has rediscovered it than to the one of its birth." Mr.
Crutchfield then goes on to recount a plot that hinges on hopelessly dated sexist assumptions.
SHERMAN L. GREENE  New York


High School Football Report
New Jersey  SECOND-HALF SURGE: Rickey Poteete scored three second-half touchdowns as PASSAIC (6-0-1) rallied to defeat PATERSON-KENNEDY (3-4), 20-14.
Going into the second half, Passaic coach Ray McCrann had reason to be concerned.
His Indians, generally regarded as one of New Jersey's top 10 teams, trailed its Northern New Jersey Interscholastic League rival by 7-0 and was in enemy territory once.
"The first half was stinko, but the second half was super," McCrann said.
Fortunately for McCrann and company, Poteete got Passaic going on the second half's first play, returning the kickoff 90 yards for the tying touchdown.
On Passaic's next possession, it marched 72 yards on 12 plays and took the lead when Poteete ran in from 3 yards out.
Kennedy didn't go down easily though.
Halfway through the fourth period, Kennedy drove 64 yards on 9 plays and tied the score when fullback Marion Smallwood ran in from 3 yards out.
It only took Passaic two plays from scrimmage to take the lead back.
On a second-and-10, Poteete took the ball off tackle and raced 64 yards for the winning score.
Also helping the Indians was fullback Raymond Santos, who rushed for 94 yards and kicked two extra points.
GREEN KNIGHTS STUFF 'EM: Ian Leffler (9 tackles, 2 sacks) and Pat Destro (2 interceptions, 1 blocked punt, 6 tackles) helped ST.
JOSEPH-MONTVALE (7-0) hold PARAMUS CATHOLIC (1-6) to 60 total yards in its 43-0 thrashing of Paramus Catholic.
The Green Knights had 4 interceptions, 4 sacks, 3 fumble recoveries and 2 blocked punts.
Joe Ward (16 of 26 for 236 yards, 3 touchdowns) and A.J.
Samonte (14 carries for 59 carries, 3 touchdowns) led St.
Joseph.
SHORT-YARD SPECIALIST: Roger Alexander ran for three 1-yard touchdowns as PATERSON-EASTSIDE walloped BLOOMFIELD , 32-6.
Quarterback Michael Franklin ran for a team-high 117 yards and a score.
Alexander chipped in with 108 rushing yards.
RAMAPO RAMPAGE: Dan Milazzo scored four touchdowns as RAMAPO (7-0) crushed previously unbeaten WAYNE HILLS (6-1), 44-6, Friday night in a battle of the two top teams in New Jersey's Section I, Group III.
Milazzo also rushed for scores of 1, 64 and 44 yards and returned an interception 25 yards for a score.
SENSATIONAL STOLZ: Jim Stolz scored four touchdowns as LODI whipped PATERSON CATHOLIC , 42-12.
Stolz's scores came off a 45-yard fake punt, a 15-yard fumble return, runs of 2 yards and 1 yard.
RIFLE-ARM RYAN: Ryan Crane threw for 181 yards and 3 touchdowns as DELBARTON (8-0) downed ESSEX CATHOLIC, 19-13.
Crane hooked up with Charles Minervino for scores of 27 and 25 yards.
Another score came when Crane hit Damon Ferrara with a 9-yard scoring toss.
Long Island  DEFENSIVE STUDS: Linebacker Tim Moran had an interception and 21 tackles on his way to breaking CARLE PLACE'S career mark of 120 tackles set by Kevin Koch in 1987, as the Frogs routed FRIENDS ACADEMY (1-6), 31-0.
Moran has 127 career tackles with one game left to play.
Moran (12 carries for 127 yards, 1 touchdown) also combined with Greg Petrizzo (7 carries for 72 yards, 2 touchdowns) and quarterback Kyle Inserra (5 carries for 91 yards, 1 touchdown) to help Carle Place romp for 375 yards. . . .
Adam Brown had 18 tackles and Dave Lombardo raced for 151 yards and 2 touchdowns, including the winning score with 3 minutes and 12 seconds to play as DEER PARK (5-2) edged HAUPPAUGE (4-3), 21-17.
Lombardo's 2-yard run capped a 12 play, 74-yard drive. . . .
Dusty Amodio had 14 tackles and Will Goode had 2 interceptions to help FARMINGDALE (6-1) pound LONG BEACH (5-2), 35-19.
Goode also had a touchdown run for 5 yards and caught a 47-yard scoring strike from Peter Nazario (7 of 15 for 144 yards, 2 touchdowns) to lead the Dalers. . . .
GARDEN CITY (7-0) notched its sixth shutout and held MACARTHUR (4-2-1), to three first downs as the Trojans rocked MacArthur, 28-0.
Quarterback Matt Fischer (7 of 17 for 113 yards, 1 touchdown) and Kevin McLaughlin (17 carries for 93 yards, 2 touchdowns) led the Trojans.
THREE TIMES CHARMED: Lou Santorella (11 of 30 for 156 yards) threw three touchdowns, including a 12-yard strike to Phil Montera with 4 seconds to play to catapult LYNBROOK (5-2) over MINEOLA (4-3), 20-18.
Santorella also hit Montera with a 19-yard scoring strike and hooked up with Mike Donohue with 12-yard touchdown pass. . . .
Brian Herbert (5 carries for 119 yards) rushed for 3 touchdowns and quarterback Roddy McCoy threw one touchdown pass and rushed for another as BETHPAGE (7-0), routed OYSTER BAY (3-4), 43-6.
RUNNING AWAY WITH VICTORY: Lloyd Harrison rushed 17 times for 140 yards and 2 touchdowns to propel SEWANHAKA (5-2) to a 21-6 pounding of GREAT NECK SOUTH (3-4). . . .
John Luisi had a 54-yard scamper and rushed for 161 yards on 16 carries to help WEST ISLIP (6-1) manhandle NEWFIELD (0-7), 42-8.
PASS-GO: Pete O'Leary connected with Michael Brantley for a touchdown and Sean Brennan scored on a 1-yard run as SACHEM (4-3) cruised to a 16-6 victory over LINDENHURST (5-2).
Preps  TWO-TIME SCORER: Graham Geisler scored twice on 4- and 6-yard scampers and Tom Dellacamera hit Dale Smith and Ryan Rondina for two touchdowns (12 and 27 yards) as GUNNERY dominated CANTERBURY , 28-0. . . .
Quarterback Chris Goettlemann passed for two touchdowns and rushed 65 yards for another, leading HOTCHKISS to a 34-22 victory over KENT .
THE RUNNING MAN: Kevin Berlandi cashed in on 24 and 27-yard runs, paving the way for LOOMIS'S (4-1-2), 27-22 victory over TAFT (3-4).
FOUR OF KIND: Rory Callagy threw two of his four touchdown passes to Junior Lord as BRUNSWICK (6-2) punished FIELDSTON (2-6), 32-6.
Connecticut  SWITCH-PLAYER: Jamie Hanford played aggressively on both sides of the ball as DARIEN (5-3) obliterated RIDGEFIELD (0-8), 30-2.
Hanford rushed 12 times for 85 yards and a touchdown and had 10 tackles.
THREES ARE WILD: Jason Senior (7 of 16 for 100 yards) hooked up with Richard Abend (4 receptions for 84 yards) for three scores as LONG ISLAND LUTHERAN (2-5) sneaked past HORACE MANN (1-6), 24-20. . . .
Quarterback Kwesi Rollins (4 of 10 for 138 yards) threw three touchdowns to Duane Self as MIDDLETOWN (7-1) routed AVON (4-4), 51-34.
Larry Locks (17 carries for 172 yards) scored three times for Avon.


Two Cultural Tours Of Tunisia
Two tours with a focus on Tunisian culture are being offered in December.
Old Ways Preservation and Exchange Trust, a not-for-profit organization that focuses on dietary issues and offers travel-study tours, is leading a weeklong gastronomic and educational trip through southwest Tunisia.
The tour starts on the island of Djerba on Dec. 4 and ends in Tunis on Dec. 11.


June Mellies Reno, Magazine Writer, 72
June Mellies Reno, a nationally known magazine writer about family and health issues, died on Thursday at the Linda Manor Nursing Home in Northampton, Mass.
Mrs.
Reno, who lived in Amherst, Mass., was 72.
The cause was liver failure, said a daughter, Penny Robbins.


Naomi Korn, Richard Steinberg
Naomi Judith Korn, a daughter of Brenda and Morton Korn of Boca Raton, Fla., was married last evening to Richard David Steinberg, the son of Norman and Tonyia Steinberg of Framingham, Mass.
Rabbi Mayer Abramowitz performed the ceremony at Temple Beth Shmuel in Miami Beach.


Europe Is Cool To Home Theater
"We still like music without pictures." That's how Bob Stuart, president and chief engineer of Meridian, an English hi-fi company, explains the cool reception Europe has just given the idea of a home theater, which has been eagerly embraced in the United States.
The notion of combining audio and video in a home entertainment system stirred little interest at the big electronics exhibitions held this fall in London, Berlin and Vienna.
This attitude came as a shock to the electronics industry, which had assumed that America's enthusiasm for home theaters (big-screen video linked with surround-sound systems) would spread quickly across the Atlantic.
Long-range planners in electronics are puzzled by Europe's reluctance to follow the lead of the United States.
And multimillion-dollar marketing strategies are being questioned as industry executives grope for explanations.


After a Small Respite, Murders Soar in the 75th
On a recent chilly morning, Allan Bouser was keeping warm in his red Toyota Corolla parked at a curb near Alabama and Cozine Avenues when six gunshots rang out.
Two bullets shattered the car's rear window and tore through Mr.
Bouser's back and left arm.
He died a couple of hours later.
The motive is unknown, according to the police.
An hour and 15 minutes later, as the same chill hung in the air and not far away, Freddie Furpie was talking to his girlfriend at a pay phone on the corner of Sutter and Crescent Avenues when more gunfire rang out.


Corrections
A chart in the Neighborhood Report on Oct. 24 giving crime statistics for the 68th Precinct, and a corrected version last Sunday, referred incorrectly to the section of Brooklyn covered by the precinct.
The section, Bay Ridge, is in southern Brooklyn; South Brooklyn is generally considered to encompass Cobble Hill, Red Hook and Carroll Gardens.


'Such a Bunch Of Losers'
To the Editor:
Since almost every character in "Short Cuts" is a mess, I couldn't empathize with any of them and therefore quickly tired of their story.
Who wants to watch three hours of lives of such a bunch of losers or, worse, people with no moral core?
I think Robert Coles is right -- this movie shows a lot about Robert Altman's incredibly bleak view of humanity (and his unflagging way of seeing women) and little about Raymond Carver.
CAROLE B. HAMLIN  Baltimore


Sondheim and Sarasate
A READER recently wrote that many music lovers prefer not to go out at night.
With that in mind, here are some afternoon events worth attending, starting today at 2 P.M.
That is when the Westchester Brass Quintet gives a free concert at Lehman College in the Bronx.
Also today, at 3 o'clock, Stephen Sondheim's "Into the Woods" will be offered by the Concordia College Players on the college's Bronxville campus.


A Tax Debate Focuses on Destruction Science
With his proposal this week to levy enormous taxes on the latest in highly destructive hollow-point handgun ammunition, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan focused the gun-control debate on the chilling, precise world of physics, terminal-wound ballistics and penetration factors.
Saying high-performance bullets, which mushroom upon impact, "have no purpose other than to cause the greatest possible destruction of human life," the Senator proposed raising the tax on them by up to 10,000 percent.


Linda D. Unger, H. J. Cohen
Linda Darlene Unger, a daughter of Marjorie L. Unger and Robert L. Unger, both of Panama City, Fla., was married there yesterday to H. Jonathan Cohen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mark Cohen of Armonk, N.Y.
The Rev.
Norman Carr performed the ceremony at the Forest Park United Methodist Church.
Mrs.
Cohen, a graduate of Florida State University, is an account executive for Georgia Trend magazine in Atlanta.
Her father is a physicist for the United States Department of Defense in Panama City.


Election of Giuliani Reveals a Delicate Balance
Four years ago, David N. Dinkins narrowly won the mayoralty of New York City on a platform of racial healing, and he lost it at least in part because of criticism that he failed to manage the city effectively.
Last week Rudolph W. Giuliani won on a promise of smooth management, but within hours of his own narrow victory he was talking to blacks in Harlem, making clear that his ultimate success or failure will greatly depend on his ability to reach out to the city's racial and ethnic minorities.


Artist Descending a Staircase
MARCEL DUCHAMP Work and Life.
Edited by Pontus Hulten.
Texts by Jennifer Gough-Cooper and Jacques Caumont.
Illustrated.
Unpaged.
Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press. $60 until Dec. 31; $75 thereafter.


New London's Larger World in a School
THE school on Bulkeley Place, near New London's business district, is made of granite blocks and vaulted towers, a reminder of a time when public buildings were constructed with style and not simply as rectangular boxes.
Inside, however, the school is very much of the present, complete with computers in the classroom, and more importantly it may offer a look at the future of public education in Connecticut.


Life in the Fashion Lane
A NATTY white-haired gentleman, Henry Mellen looked out of place in his tie and jacket on Monday night at the Supper Club, where Label, a Los Angeles fashion house, and Tommy Boy Music sponsored a fashion show of hip-hop clothing for male rappers and the women who love them.
"I was dragged here by my wife," Mr.
Mellen, a retired printing company executive, said as he looked lovingly at his white-haired mate.


U.N. to Study if Iraq Used Poison Gas in Its South
The United Nations is planning to send investigators to Iran next week to search for evidence that Iraqi forces have been using poison gas and other chemical weapons against Shiite Muslim dissidents in the southern marshlands of Iraq.
The investigators are being sent by the special commission charged by the Security Council with eliminating Iraq's most dangerous weapons under terms of the cease-fire that ended the Persian Gulf war in 1991.
They want to interview a small group of Iraqi refugees in Iran who report that have witnessed such attacks, officials here say.


No Time to Hesitate on Haiti
Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras and his military cronies are feeling pretty bold these days, having wrecked the Governors Island agreement that would have returned President Jean-Bertrand Aristide to Haiti on Oct. 30.
So what if they are isolated internationally and domestically, abandoned even by some of the local economic oligarchs who welcomed them to power?
Haiti's rulers now feel free to intimidate their domestic opponents with impunity.
And they contemptuously boycott U.N. peace talks, having reasonably concluded that the outside world isn't prepared to apply maximum diplomatic and economic pressure.


One Size Fits One


World Markets; Ties to China Lift Hong Kong Index
THE stock market here has soared to a series of record highs recently, largely because of this colony's tantalizing connections to mainland China.
Clive Weedon, head of research at the Nomura Research Institute, said the Hong Kong index -- which has grown more than 70 percent in 1993 -- "will probably end the year as the best performing market in the world."


Key West
To the Editor: I read with interest "What's Doing in Key West." However, I must take issue with the author's statement that "Very little remains of the salvaging industry that was Key West's economic lifeblood in the 1800's," as our Wrecker's Museum/ Oldest House, at 322 Duval Street, exhibits old documents, ship models, undersea and maritime artifacts and paintings and prints that tell the story of the early wreckers (salvagers) in the Florida Keys.
The museum is open daily from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. and is staffed entirely by volunteers.
SAM MAXWELL  President, Old Island Restoration Foundation Key West, Fla.


Watch Those COLA Interpretations
To the Editor:
In "No Inflation, but Hold the Cheers" (Business Diary, Oct. 17), it is noted that this year's modest increase in consumer prices will lead to Social Security recipients getting the "second-smallest ever" cost of living adjustment (COLA).
Surprisingly, the 2.6 percent COLA is referred to as a "cost" of low inflation.
The purpose of the COLA is to keep the value of Social Security benefits constant in real, not nominal, terms.
When inflation is high, the COLA is high; low inflation means a low COLA.
To argue that a low COLA is a "cost" is to commit an act of what economists call "money illusion." Presumably no one believes that senior citizens were better off in real terms with COLAs of roughly 10 to 12 percent in the inflationary late 1970's.
PHILIP ROTHMAN  Greenville, N.C., Oct. 18  The writer is an assistant professor of economics at East Carolina University.


Watch What They Pay, Not What They Say
RISING interest rates threw a bucket of cold water on Wall Street last week, but didn't come close to extinguishing the speculative fires.
These days, the fastest way to get a small stock moving is to tell a bullish story on television, especially cable television.
Quote an unnamed money manager or two about how a company has excellent prospects, and the stock will leap.
An hour later, a report will note that the stock is moving, and refer to the earlier report, bringing in more buyers and provoking more reports.
This can go on for days.


The Vigil At the Viper Room
To the list that includes the Chateau Marmont and the Chelsea Hotel, establishments made notorious by the untimely deaths of John Belushi and Sid Vicious, there now might be added another name: the Viper Room, the Hollywood club outside which the actor River Phoenix collapsed in convulsions and died early last Sunday morning.
Since the small Sunset Strip club opened in August, it has become a magnet for an under-25 crowd of actors and rock musicians.
Many of them were friends of the actor Johnny Depp, a co-owner.
When the Viper Room opened, Mr.
Depp said he hoped it would be a spot where famous people "won't feel like they're on display."


INTO THE PIT
From the outside, it looks like a riot, a street fight, a battle in a war we didn't even know was going on.
Several hundred scruffy teen-agers, dressed in a weird hybrid of Pacific Coast Lumberjack and Early Heroin Addict, are crushed together in a fleshy, roiling mass in front of a stage.
They are attending a concert; they are also, it seems, trying to kill one another.
Granted, they're doing it gracefully, without Uzis or broken bottles.
It's strictly skin on skin: torsos slam into one another, chests collide, heads recoil, noses bleed; clothing is ripped off, trampled underfoot, forgotten; bodies fall and disappear, sucked into the sweaty undertow.
Occasionally a warrior is tossed above the crush and passed along from hand to hand.
It's unspeakably hot, often painful, certainly claustrophobic -- all in all, just another night in the mosh pit.
I'm not exactly the kind of person you'd expect to find in the pit; I'm more one of those mid-20's, New York Review of Books-subscribing, relationship-discussing, National Public Radio-listening guys.
You know the type.
Concert-going for my generation was an exercise in bigness, all flash pots and laser shows and speakers the size of apartment buildings.
We were told that these events were about community -- that as we stood in Row 478 and sang along to "Born in the U.S.A.," we were somehow spiritually joined to the 50,000 others by our sides, each holding a lighter aloft, squinting at our far-off icons.


AIDS Care On the East End
"Agencies Respond to Call for Social Services on East End"  [ Oct. 31 ]  failed to adequately explore services available on the East End, especially those offered by the Long Island Association for AIDS Care.
Since 1986, Liaac, Long Island's oldest and most comprehensive AIDS service provider, has diligently struggled to meet the growing needs of East Enders touched by, and at risk for, H.I.V.-AIDS.
Until recently that struggle was a lonely one, and for many years we carried the ball alone, with little support from many East End communities that remained locked in ignorance.
Those seasonal residents committed to seeing an end to the AIDS epidemic frequently channeled their energies and dollars into New York City organizations, while the calls for help in our own suburban community went unanswered.


The Executive Computer; Wordperfect 6.0 Has the Muscle, but What of Dexterity?
THE Wordperfect Corporation's new Wordperfect 6.0 for Windows is an impressive program that tries to be everything to everybody.
One of the surprising things about it is that, by and large, it appears to succeed -- if, of course, you have enough desktop horsepower.
Wordperfect 6.0 offers tools and special features that go beyond word processing, including advanced spreadsheet functions, drawing and charting tools, clip art and special effects.
In essence, it crosses the line into the realm normally associated with integrated software packages and so-called office suites.


Atlanta Airport Prohibits Smoking
More good news and bad news for travelers who smoke: Hartsfield International Airport in Atlanta has banned smoking in all public areas, becoming the latest in a growing list of airports to do so.
But in a first, Philip Morris plans to contribute $250,000 to help build 10 smokers' lounges throughout the airport that have separate ventilation systems.
Philip Morris said that it simply diverted some funds it had set aside to advertise its products in the airport.
In return, the cigarette manufacturer will be the exclusive advertiser in the lounges.


On Top of a Bad Day, His Cat Bit the Dust
HAVING a bad day does not begin to describe the New Year's Eve suffered by Jimmy Zoole, the main character in "P.S. Your Cat Is Dead."
The screwball comedy by James Kirkwood, at the Studio Theater in Lindenhurst through Nov. 20, compresses the misery of a rotten year and serves it on a holiday plate, along with some New Year's Eve celebratory bottles of Champagne.


Congratulations Are in Order
To the Editor:
Walter Goodman condemns Dan Rather's criticism of the nature of television news and suggests that it is viewers' tastes that have dictated the glitz and glitter, the sex and violence that permeate the news programs in America.
Perhaps this is so -- but isn't Mr.
Rather to be congratulated for bringing the matter to the attention of the decision-makers, i.e., advertisers, corporate executives, news directors and television executives?


Delahoussaye Drops Whip, But Hangs Onto Lead
Eddie Delahoussaye won a $1 million race today with his bare hands.
His victorious horse, Hollywood Wildcat, made it start-to-finish, but Delahoussaye's whip did not.
It may still be lying in the dirt.
With approximately 70 yards left in this afternoon's Breeder's Cup Distaff run, Delahoussaye fumbled.
His filly had been neck and neck with Paseana, and -- to induce victory -- he pulled his whip the way he had pulled it a thousand times.


How to Make an Indoor Tree Feel at Home
NOW that the tree leaves are falling, plant thoughts are moving indoors.
But they need not be treeless thoughts.
There are many indoor trees that can be grown in the home as a sort of substitute for the leafy canopy of summer.
Of course, office buildings, malls and banks are made all the more splendid with these indoors trees, which are used to make tall cold walls fit the human scale.
But many of these same plant species can be utilized in the home.
Exceptionally tall ceilings are not necessary in most cases.
Nor are the fancy pots.
Just choose plants wisely and care for them properly.


Voice of Authority


Waistlines Rediscovered
A few women are giving their fall jackets and coats a new look by buckling a narrow leather belt around them.
It's been years since fashion highlighted the belted waistline.
Could this be an early signal that the reconstruction of fashion has begun after decades of loose layers and the recent deconstruction of dressing?
The 3/8-inch leather belt is cinching jackets that are worn over pants or ankle-length skirts.
The idea for the narrow-belt revival sprouted last March in the Paris collections of Martin Margiela and Jean-Paul Gaultier.
It was a simple idea that breathed new life into everyday jackets.


Smooth Ways to Repair Wallboard
MINOR damage to gypsum wallboard, or drywall, can be easy to repair.
With all such repairs, the difficult part is hiding the repair.
Accomplishing that requires care to keep the surface as smooth as possible.
Even so, extensive repainting is usually necessary, especially if the paint has faded and new paint does not match.
To repair fine cracks, dents and holes like those from nails, first use a whisk broom or another stiff brush to clean the area.
Fill the spot with spackling or joint compound, using a flexible-blade putty knife.
After the compound hardens, sand the area with fine or extrafine sandpaper and paint over the spot.


Japan Bribe Scandal Snares a Top Aide
The top strategist of Japan's new reform-minded Government has been implicated in a bribery scandal that has claimed several dozen local politicians and construction company executives, casting a shadow over the future of the governing coalition and of Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa.
The strategist, Ichiro Ozawa, whose defection from the Liberal Democratic Party in June helped end 38 years of one-party rule in Japan, confirmed reports that he had accepted a cash contribution equal to $46,000 from a construction company late last year.
The reports said Mr.
Ozawa had been paid the sum twice a year for several years, but he confirmed receiving the money only once.


Swords to Plowshares on Brooklyn Piers
BENJAMIN HAMALIAN was fed up.
Pantrac, his company, was in a storefront space in East New York, a rather downtrodden section of Brooklyn.
He had been robbed four times in eight years, and enough was enough.
Mr.
Hamalian looked around Brooklyn, but all he found were expensive storefronts in unsafe neighborhoods.
Then he moved Pantrac, which exports trucks and tractors, into 1,700 square feet of upstairs space at the Brooklyn Navy Yard.


Lisa B. Feinsilver, Brent T. Weintraub
Lisa Beth Feinsilver, a daughter of Judith and Irving Feinsilver of Melville, L.I., was married there last evening to Brent Todd Weintraub, the son of Prentise and Howard Weintraub of Rye Brook, N.Y.
Rabbi Morris Shapiro officiated at the South Huntington Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Weintraub, 27, a graduate of the University of Maryland, is an associate director of research at Hearst Magazines in New York.


Jennifer Gersten, Barry S. Price
Jennifer Sloane Gersten, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Neal Gersten of New York, was married Thursday to Barry Scott Price, the son of Barbara Z. Monohan of Hartsdale, N.Y., and Melvin A. Price of Somers, N.Y.
Rabbi Joseph Rudavsky officiated at the Rainbow Room in New York.
Mrs.
Price, 27, is the general counsel at the New York accounting firm of Gersten, Slater &amp; Company.
Her father is a founding partner in the firm.
The bride graduated cum laude from Tufts University and received a law degree from Fordham University.
Her mother, Judy Gersten, is an art consultant in New York.


Moving Up From Middle Distance
For the first time, a past world-record holder in the men's 10,000-meter race will compete in the New York City Marathon, adding intrigue to the question of how 10K and cross-country running translates to success at the 26.2-mile distance.
In 1989, Arturo Barrios of Mexico ran the 10,000 (6.2 miles) in 27 minutes 8.23 seconds, a record that stood until Yobes Ondieki ran in 26:58.38 last summer.


The Killing Never Ends
UNFINISHED CONQUEST The Guatemalan Tragedy.
By Victor Perera.
Illustrated. 382 pp.
Berkeley: University of California Press. $27.


An Architect Who Rethought The Modern City
This is an overdue tribute to the English architect Alison Smithson, who died in August at the age of 65.
The example set by her work could not be more timely.
With her husband, Peter Smithson, she was instrumental in redefining the architect's role in the shaping of the public realm.
For years, she was also the only internationally prominent woman architect in a field dominated by men.
The Smithsons had not been professionally active for some time before Alison Smithson's death in August.
But 25 years ago, when I arrived in England to study architecture, there were four buildings every foreign student rushed to see, and the Smithsons had designed two of them. (The others were by James Stirling.)


Managing Your Feelings 101
ROLL-CALL.
Fifteen students sit in a circle on the floor.
Jo-An Vargo, the teacher, calls their names: "Rachel, Oliver, Patrick, Nicole, Sean . . ."
Instead of the vacant "Here" response typical of school roll-calls, the students answer with an index of how they are feeling on a scale of 1 to 10; "1" is low energy and spirits, and "10" is flying high.
Today morale soars:


Regina Della Ratta and Brian Flood
Regina Hope Della Ratta, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Della Ratta of Manhasset, L.I., was married there yesterday to Brian Gerard Flood, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerard Flood of Muttontown, L.I.
The Rev.
Robert J. Coyle officiated at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church.
Ms.
Della Ratta, 27, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Fordham University.
She is the senior assistant director of production and manufacturing at John Wiley &amp; Sons, a publisher in New York.


Who Slashed The Budgets?
To the Editor:
Walter Goodman claims that television network news is simply cater ing to the taste of its audience when it does not devote more time to foreign and economic news and other substantive subjects.
What he fails to realize is that it was corporate executives -- not the mass audience -- who slashed the budgets of the news divisions at the networks and drastically reduced their ability to cover foreign news.
In the last five years, for example, NBC has closed bureaus in Paris, Rome, Amman, Cairo, Frankfurt and Johannesburg.
And when was the last time Mr.
Goodman saw a story from Asia on any network?
Similar cuts in domestic coverage have prevented a thinned line of correspondents and producers from spending more time on in-depth reportage.
Were corporate executives looking at the bottom line or at ratings books and audience surveys when foreign and domestic staffing was reduced?
As for a lack of economic stories, I am sure that Stephen Aug at ABC, Ray Brady at CBS and Mike Jensen and Irving R. Levine at NBC would dispute Mr.
Goodman's contention that the mass audience has no interest in their field.
EDWARD PLANER  Glencoe, Ill.
The writer, a retired vice president of NBC News, teaches broadcast journalism at the Medill School of Journalism at Northwestern University.


Recalling The Lowlights
THERE WERE plenty of lowlights in my 18-odd years in the American education system, but somehow nothing, nothing was as bad as freshman gym class in high school.
Actually, all learning is mined with moments of discomfort or embarrassment or humiliation.
But here is one former student who believes both that a good teacher can significantly minimize the damage, and that what often happens instead is that the inept teacher piles it on and makes it worse.
I went to a Dewey high school in Chicago, founded by that great American pragmatist John Dewey and by Francis Parker, whose motto "True education frees the human spirit" was emblazoned in stone on the school.
Together, Dewey and Parker revolutionized American education in the early part of the 20th century.
Physical education, evidently stuck somewhere back in the fifth century, missed out on the reform.


Harlem Landlord Sees Dream of Affordable Housing Vanish
A disheveled man stumbled into the abandoned tenement building, hardly noticing the woman at the doorway.
He mumbled something about having to go to the toilet.
"That kind of sums it up," said Harley Brooke-Hitching.
"The drug dealers go in to urinate."


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tuesday
Producer prices, October, percent change
0.2
0.3
*4*Wholesale sales, Sept., percent change
1.1
0.5
Wednesday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
338
340
*4*Consumer prices, October, percent change
0.0
0.4
Friday
Retail sales, October, percent change
0.1
0.8
This Week's Developments
Monday
G-10 central bank governors meet
Tuesday
3-year Treasury note auction
Wednesday
10-year Treasury note auction
Thursday
Veterans Day holiday


Sports of The Times; 'I Thought About That Tennis Lady'
ON his way into the ring last night, Evander Holyfield said, "Excuse me." The parachutist didn't.
The what?


A Word of Praise
To the Editor: We live in an age that has time to criticize when something goes wrong, but rarely recognizes good deeds.


Islanders Win Ugly Over Nonwinning Whalers
The Islanders proved tonight that they are at least slightly better than the Hartford Whalers by outlasting them, 5-3, at the Coliseum.
The Islanders came into the game ranked 23d in the 26-team National Hockey League; the Whalers were 25th.
Only 9,648 fans attended the game, down from the season average of 11,575.
This one had the tedium of major league baseball, taking three hours to play.
The result ended the Islanders' latest losing streak at two and extended Hartford's streak without a victory this season to 10.


THE CORONATION OF KING RONNIE
As a Kenyan, I found the tone of Alex Shoumatoff's article "The Coronation of King Ronnie" (Oct. 17) offensive.
I doubt that he would have described the coronation of a European monarch, even of the beleaguered House of Windsor, in such belittling tones.
Shoumatoff was glad to accept the kabaka's hospitality and to speak with him personally at a cocktail party.
But this former squash champion of Zaire was nonetheless miffed because the kabaka, in the week of his coronation, did not have time to play squash with him.
Did Bill Clinton make time to go jogging with Shoumatoff during his inaugural week?


Poverty Is No Excuse, But It Doesn't Help
To the Editor:
Bravo to Michael Meyers.
As he says, just because kids are poor or immigrants does not mean they are dumb.
Educational success is in the expectation of the beholder.


Corrections
A report in the F.Y.I. column on Oct. 24 about devices for the hearing-impaired at movie theaters misstated the theaters' discretion under the Americans with Disabilities Act.
The Federal law indeed states that places of public accommodation, including theaters, must provide listening systems for people with impaired hearing.


Viacom Sweetens Its Takeover Bid for Paramount
In a move that pre-empted a bid from its rival, Viacom Inc. sweetened its takeover offer yesterday for Paramount Communications Inc.
Viacom, Paramount's handpicked merger partner, increased its bid by 6 percent, to $10.1 billion.
The new offer amounts to $85 a share, up from $80.


Rangers Are Flying on Automatic Pilot
General Manager Neil Smith believes that by signing Jeff Beukeboom on Thursday, he took care of the last piece of unfinished business for the Rangers, at least temporarily.
He went to Las Vegas, Nev., this weekend, to watch a junior league hockey game -- and, rumor has it, the heavyweight championship fight -- and left his Rangers in Quebec to play in peace.
Today, the Rangers gave him no reason to rethink his moves.
With Beukeboom playing alongside Brian Leetch on defense, the Rangers extended their winning streak to four games, and their unbeaten streak to six, with a 4-2 triumph over the Nordiques at Le Colisee.


O'Rourke Savors His Victory, While Awaiting Recount
ANDREW P. O'ROURKE, a narrow winner in his bid for four more years as the county executive, said last week that he was fortunate to have avoided the fate of most other incumbents in the New York City area and claimed that "questionable tactics" by his opponent opened the way for his victory.
"Most of the undecided votes went to the challengers, but Richard's personal attacks," he said, referring to the six-term Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky, his Democratic opponent, "never did him a bit of good, largely because he wasn't well known enough."


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
FOOTBALL  3RD DOWN AND FOREVER  Joe Don Looney and the Rise and Fall of an American Hero.
By J. Brent Clark.
St.
Martin's, $21.95.


Give Presidents Benefit of a Doubt
To the Editor:
Many of those in Congress, along with pundits in the press and on the weekly television talk programs, seem to agree:


At Work; Attitudes Clash on Jobs and AIDS
WHEN the National Leadership Coalition on AIDS asked working Americans how their employers would treat a person who is H.I.V.-positive, 78 percent said he or she would be treated like any other person with a serious disability or illness.
Even more -- 89 percent -- said someone who is H.I.V.-positive should be treated like any other employee.
But when the coalition asked those polled if their co-workers would feel comfortable working near someone who is H.I.V.-positive, two-thirds predicted they would not, and a quarter said they should not feel comfortable.
A third said the person would be dismissed or put on disability at the first sign of illness, and a quarter said he or she should be dismissedor put on disability.


Softening A Move's Tax Bite
ANYONE moving from a more expensive home to a less expensive one is probably aware that such a move could trigger a capital gains tax.
That is why most people go out of their way to make sure they are buying a home that costs as much as or more than the one they are selling.
But there are times when this is not practical or possible: when an older person no longer needs as much space, when an employee is relocating from a high-priced area like New York City to a lower-cost community in the Midwest, or after a divorce.


BOSNIANS DISBAND SARAJEVO CROATS
The Muslim-led Bosnian Army mounted a raid before dawn today to disband the Croatian militia force that had helped defend Sarajevo, Bosnia's besieged capital, from Serbian attacks for the last 19 months.
The crackdown on the Croatian Defense Council, as the militia is known, had been expected for weeks and came after months of bitter fighting across much of central and western Bosnia between other elements of the Croatian militia and Bosnian Army forces.


After a Suit, Moving to a New Life
ONCE she navigates past the smoke-scarred lobby downstairs, the litter in the hallways and the three dead-bolt locks at her front door, Carol Giddins finally enters a private oasis -- her tidy two-bedroom, plant-filled apartment that belies the squalor below.
But the sixth-floor apartment on this city's west side has also become a fortress that Ms.
Giddins and her two children -- Lacrecia, 9, and Michael, 20 -- leave warily these days.
The streets below are scattered with the detritus of drug users, and the threat of crime and violence pervades, she said.
Ms.
Giddins can recall only two times in nine years when she allowed Lacrecia to play outside.


THE WORLD: Urger to Splurge; Mexico's Hunger for U.S. Goods Is Helping to Sell the Trade Pact
PITCHMEN for the North American Free Trade Agreement always focus on the consumer paradise presented by Mexico's young and growing population: 85 million people, more than half of them under 25 years old, with slowly rising wages but a seemingly insatiable appetite for things made in the U.S.A.
In fact, trade with Mexico already is big business.
Mexico imports more than $42 billion in goods and services from the United States, more than three times what it was in 1986, when the Government began lowering tariffs on imports so that some American goods could compete with their less desirable Mexican imitations.
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen, an old Mexico hand, says that with Nafta, trade with Mexico will grow by another $10 billion in three years.


Susan Brody, Stephen Thomas
Susan Elizabeth Brody, a reporter for Sports Illustrated magazine, and Stephen Vail Thomas, a reporter for Sports Illustrated for Kids magazine, both in New York, were married last evening.
Rabbi Harvey S. Goldman performed the ceremony at Temple Sharey Tefilo-Israel in South Orange, N.J.
Ms.
Brody, 27, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.
She is a daughter of Robert M. Brody of Roseland, N.J., and Sonia B. Brody of Summit, N.J.


The Politics of Fat
To the Editor:
In her review of "Unbearable Weight: Feminism, Western Culture, and the Body," by Susan Bordo (Sept. 26), Maud Ellmann describes Barbara Bush's popularity as an example of a more healthy acceptance of a "plump maternal form," and an example of thinness not always being the cultural ideal.
However, Ms.
Bordo's work, according to Ms.
Ellmann, suggests that "the widespread fear of women's fat . . . is a symptom of the fear of women's power," and as women take up space and roles formerly reserved for men, "their bodies dwindle."


Hip-Hopping The Runway
Tommy Boy and Label's fashion show at the Supper Club, Nov. 1.


Marian Tanofsky, Michael Blum
Marian Beth Tanofsky, a daughter of Barbara K. Tanofsky of Larchmont, N.Y., and the late Dr.
Robert Tanofsky, was married last evening to Dr.
Michael Scott Blum, a son of Dr.
Stuart F. Blum of Cherry Hill, N.J., and Joyce A. Sarshik of Moorestown, N.J.
Rabbi Jeffrey Sirkman officiated at the Stouffer Westchester Hotel in White Plains.
Mrs.
Blum, 28, graduated from the University of Rochester.
She is a research associate at the Yale Center for Eating and Weight Disorders at Yale University in New Haven.
Her father was a professor of psychology at Baruch College.
Her mother is a special-education teacher in the Bronx for the New York City public school system.


The Non-Runners' Lament: 26.2 Miles of Excuses, Excuses, Excuses
THIS is a sad time of year for me, and I suspect for many others.
This is the time when we stand at the side of the road and watch time pass us by.
I am not referring to the sadness of the falling leaves, the terminal onrushing of another year.
I am talking about standing on the sidewalk, watching more than 20,000 people, of extremely diverse body types and ages, run or jog or plod past us in the New York City Marathon, and telling ourselves we could have done it.
But we didn't, and some of us suspect we never will.


Vienna
To the Editor: Art Nouveau in all its many forms was the focus of our third trip to Vienna in July.
Using a map published by the tourist bureau, we selected sites designed by Otto Wagner, Josef Hoffmann and Adolf Loos, then hired a driver-guide to ferret out those in the suburbs.
His commentary, anecdotes and strong feelings about buildings destroyed during World War II made a memorable morning.


Out of the Woods
Carved out of a stand of soaring pines and elms just inland from the Atlantic coast, nestled in an industrial park complete with shimmering ponds on which plump ducks glide like lazy clouds, the world headquarters of the Timberland Company befits its image as one of the most successful producers of rugged outdoor wear on the planet.
Yet, despite all the earthy imagery projected by the company's environs 10 miles south of Portsmouth and by its corporate home, which resembles a very, very large log cabin, Timberland is wrestling with a sort of, uh, concrete success it has never sought.


I. E. Press, 87, Head Of Clothing Company
Irving E. Press, the retired chairman of the J. Press clothing company, which was a pioneer in upscale men's fashion, died on Friday at the Texas Heart Institute.
He was 87 and lived in Palm Beach, Fla., after many years in Manhattan.
The cause was complications following surgery, said a son, Michael Press.


Woman Jailed for Refusing Visitation
In an unusual step, a Suffolk County judge has ordered a Ronkonkoma mother jailed for contempt for refusing to allow her estranged husband to visit the couple's two young children.
The woman, Karen Miller Brown, 42, has accused her husband, Bradford J. Brown, 44, of abusing the children for more than a year.
As Mrs.
Brown spent a fifth day in the county jail here today, her husband, a suspended lawyer from the Bronx now self-employed as a private detective, was engaged in a search for the children.


30 Years in Stitches
A celebration of the designer Geoffrey Beene's anniversary, Nov. 3.


Curious Behavior Of the Dog, Watson
IF the shade of Harold Sterling Vanderbilt could return to view the American bridge scene almost six decades after the famous cruise through the Panama Canal on which he presented his "new" game of contract, he would find that his rubber-bridge code had virtually disappeared.
In the 50's, the rubber game started to lose ground to Chicago, or four-deal bridge, and is now a rarity in in North America.
Rubber bridge is still common on other continents.
In Paris, they add spice by playing goulashes, fancy dealing to create wild distributions.
In North America, the goulash is common in commuter-train games, but rare otherwise.
In some parts of the world, like Scandinavia, playing for money is virtually unknown; duplicate is the only game.


A Journalist's Torch Lies Fallen
On a small plot of trees and shrubs at the border of Jackson Heights and Elmhurst in Queens, seven neighborhood residents were scattered recently on benches in Manuel de Dios Unanue Triangle.
Asked if they knew who Manuel de Dios Unanue was, four of the seven said they did not, explaining they were new to the area.
The three others said they knew that Mr. de Dios was a journalist killed a year and a half ago in a restaurant across the street by the "cartel de Cali," as one put it, referring to a Colombian cocaine cartel.
But they would not give their names for publication.


G.O.P. Still Seeking Vision
The Republican sweep in elections last week may well boost morale.
But many Republicans say the victories did little to help the party.
Page 24.


Robert Bushel and Geraldine Grant
Geraldine H. Grant, a daughter of Meedia Grant of Brooklyn and the late Garnet H. Grant, was married yesterday to Robert P. Bushel, a son of Charles and Gloria Bushel, also of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Horace Allen performed the ceremony at the East End Baptist Church in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
Bushel, 28, is a research assistant at Market Systems Research Inc., a stock-market research concern in New York.
She graduated from the State University at Brockport, N.Y.
Her mother is an administrative assistant for the the City of New York Protective Services for Adults in Manhattan.
Her father was a mason in Manhattan.





Enlightenment On the Harbor
IT'S A LITTLE unreal, this place called Battery Park City.
Laid out in 1979, the 92-acre office and residential development on lower Manhattan was designed to re-create the look of an earlier day.
The neatly aligned facades of the masonry apartment buildings, the tidy streets and the old-fashioned lampposts lining them recall New York in palmier times, before the postwar suburban e3xodus had transformed the work "urban" inito a prefix for "decline."
Stuyvesant High School, the most recent addition to the neighborhood, also looks too good to be true.
Designed by Cooper, Robertson &amp; Partners inassociation with Gruzen Samton Steinglass, the new school stands in benignly defiant contrast ot the dark images of poverty, illiteracy, violence and drugs often associated with big-city public schools.
Instead, the building's sturdy masonry walls, devoid of graffiti, refresh the idea that the public school is among the finest flowers of America's Englightenment roots.


THE DOUBLE-BED PRINCIPLE
Graff's article about not hiding her homosexuality made me think of a walk I took recently in my hometown, Montgomery, Ala.
I was cutting through a park on the way to a movie when I noticed two figures walking together, holding hands.
As they came closer, I realized they were two men in their late 40's, not a man and a woman as I had assumed.
They looked at me, as we passed, and I looked away.
I didn't glare at them, but I didn't smile, as I would have at a straight couple.


BEST SELLERS: November 7, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
65
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
1
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
3
2
4
NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.) Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.
4
3
6
LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) A sequel to "The Witching Hour."
5
4
11
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
6
8
2
THE FIRES OF HEAVEN, by Robert Jordan. (Tor/Doherty, $24.95.) The fifth volume of a fantasy saga.
7
11
2
DECIDER, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $22.95.) An architect-engineer gets caught between the warring factions of a clan that owns an English racecourse.
8
6
3
A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A young student's mysterious drowning has repercussions in Victorian England's high society.
9
7
30
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
10*
5
6
SACRED CLOWNS, by Tony Hillerman. (HarperCollins, $23.) Two Navajo tribal policemen undertake to unravel a web of politics and murder.
11
9
9
THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) A sequel to "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
12
10
34
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
13
3
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's mysterious death.
14
1
FINNEGAN'S WEEK, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Morrow, $22.) A San Diego cop tracks a crime that results in horror and death south of the border.
15
14
42
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through illustrated cards and letters.
16*
13
13
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A New York couple's young son is abducted.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
3
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
2
2
9
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
3
3
26
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
4
4
5
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
5
11
5
A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ...
OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Reflections on 43 years of marriage.
6
5
11
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
7
6
5
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem, relationships and spiritual growth.
8
8
3
STAR TREK MEMORIES, by William Shatner with Chris Kreski. (HarperCollins, $22.) Reminiscences from the man who played Capt.
James Tiberius Kirk.
9
7
17
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A psychiatrist discusses mood-changing medications and their effects on a person's self.
10
9
65
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
11
12
22
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
12
13
12
MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Essays suggesting that inspiration can be found in most unexpected ways and places.
13*
10
6
THE FOUNTAIN OF AGE, by Betty Friedan. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A call for men and women to regard life after age 60 as an exciting adventure.
14
14
3
BLACK HOLES AND BABY UNIVERSES, by Stephen Hawking. (Bantam, $21.95.) The Cambridge physicist ruminates on his life and the cosmos.
15
46
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
4
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological health and fitness.
2
2
25
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.
3
4
19
EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Counsel from a physician about diet and nutrition.
4
3
15
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 23, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
BEFORE NIGHT FALLS, by Reinaldo Arenas. (Viking, $25.) Arenas, a Cuban writer and exile who suffered from AIDS, killed himself in New York in 1990.
His passionate autobiography turns the usual circumstances -- persecution, betrayal, coerced confessions, forced labor, attempts to "reform" him -- into something exalted.
THE BEGINNING OF THE JOURNEY: The Marriage of Diana and Lionel Trilling, by Diana Trilling. (Harcourt Brace, $24.95.) A conversational, direct, dignified memoir that perforates the hygienic Trilling package; the Trillings, once revered for their reasonableness, also deserve high marks for coping with the irrational.
BERTRAND RUSSELL: A Life, by Caroline Moorehead. (Viking, $30.) With the benefit of newly available material -- including the diaries of Russell's wives and lovers -- Ms.
Moorehead plumbs the character, ideas and dubious morals of the British philosopher.
THE COLUMBIA ENCYCLOPEDIA: Fifth Edition, edited by Barbara A. Chernow and George A. Vallasi. (Columbia University/Houghton Mifflin, $125.) A 3,000-page foot-high volume that gracefully succeeds the 1975 edition.
THE GIRL WHO TROD ON A LOAF, by Kathryn Davis. (Knopf, $23.) A heated, dramatic novel narrated by Francie, an underachieving composer who finds redemption by completing an inherited unfinished opera.
A HISTORY OF RUSSIAN ARCHITECTURE, by William Craft Brumfield. (Cambridge University, $95.) A beautiful history, covering everything from the medievalism of the 11th century to the functionalism of the 1980's.
KAFKA WAS THE RAGE: A Greenwich Village Memoir, by Anatole Broyard. (Carol Southern/Crown, $18.) A nostalgic portrait of New York's bohemian life in 1946 and 1947, written by a book reviewer for The New York Times who died in 1990.
MARGUERITE YOURCENAR: Inventing a Life, by Josyane Savigneau. (University of Chicago, $25.) Yourcenar (1903-87), author of "Memoirs of Hadrian," intense, cerebral, fascinated by sexual ambiguity, has found a perfect biographer in the patient, wise, industrious Ms.
Savigneau.
OPERATION EPSILON: The Farm Hall Transcripts.
Introduction by Sir Charles Frank. (University of California, $30.) Eavesdropping on the private and unremorseful conversations of 10 German scientists during their internment by the Allies in 1945.
PRESIDENT KENNEDY: Profile of Power, by Richard Reeves. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A journalist's judicious appraisal that casts Kennedy as a pragmatic cold-war power broker and a manager of international confrontation.
THE ROBBER BRIDE, by Margaret Atwood. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $23.50.) Ms.
Atwood's funniest novel in years concerns three women who are friends and the mini-skirted Iago who worms her way into their lives.


Wall Street; Two Dow Measurements Taking a Familiar Course
WHEN the utilities quake, the industrials can tremble.
Last week, the Dow Jones utility average plunged 13.51 points, or 5.6 percent, to 227.26.
It was the sharpest weekly fall for the utilities since the summer of 1991 and left the index at its lowest level since January.


Unfair to Stoneham And O'Malley
To the Sports Editor:
Horace Stoneham and Walter O'Malley were treated unfairly in an otherwise valid case presented by John Underwood ("From Baseball and Apple Pie, to Greed and Sky Boxes," The Times, Oct. 31) against wanton pro sports franchise shifts.


U.S. Can't Feel Proud About Role in Haiti; Who Pays the Bribes?
To the Editor:
Representative Robert G. Torricelli defends the Central Intelligence Agency's covert payments to Haitian public figures (front page, Nov. 1) by telling us the practice is widespread:


Venice's Trove of Ties to the Sea
EVERYONE who comes to Venice knows immediately that this city is indeed wedded to the sea: its foundations sunk deep into a lagoon, its myriad canals serving as streets and back alleys, and its faded palaces recalling a past as a great naval power.
But not everyone knows that Venice's long relationship with the sea is recorded in a vast and easily accessible museum.


The Amazing Growth of 'Joseph'
A 15-minute contribution to an end-of-school-term concert has become a $5 million Broadway show, for if you're Andrew Lloyd Webber, why let the possibility of a good thing lie fallow?
"Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat," the composer's first significant collaboration with the lyricist Tim Rice, began life in March 1968 as a small-scale oratorio written for the Colet Court School in west London.
It opens for a limited run on Broadway on Wednesday at the Minskoff Theater (after a tour that has included Los Angeles and San Francisco) as a glossy two-hour extravaganza that marries the Bible to Busby Berkeley.
This is the third "Joseph" to be seen in New York and the second to play Broadway after a much smaller-scale production at the Minskoff's neighboring Royale in 1982.
Its affectionate pastiche of Genesis, Joseph and his 11 brothers notwithstanding, size is the true subject.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
TRIBECA Art and Music Offered In Tribute to Yugoslavia
As part of an exhibition entitled "Remember Yugoslavia," Art in General, a gallery in TriBeCa, will present on Wednesday a concert of Yugoslav music ranging from mod ern experimental works to ancient Balkan compositions.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York Senate
1.
Subpoena: Vote on a Republican-sponsored proposal that would narrow the scope of a Senate Ethics Committee subpoena for the diaries of Senator Bob Packwood.
Rejected 77 to 23, Tuesday.
2.
Subpoena: Vote to approve the Senate Ethics Committee's request to authorize legal moves to force Senator Packwood to comply with a subpoena.
Approved 94 to 6, Tuesday.
3.
Hate Crimes: Vote on an amendment to a major anticrime measure that would lengthen Federal sentences by an average of one-third for those convicted of "hate crimes." Approved 95 to 4, Thursday.
4.
Crime: Vote on an amendment to a major anticrime measure that would set up a $22 billion trust fund to provide localities with 100,000 new police officers over five years and money to build regional prisons to house the nation's most violent inmates.
Approved 94 to 4, Thursday.
5.
Juveniles: Vote on an amendment to a major anticrime measure that would try juveniles 13 years or older as adults if they use a firearm in a murder, assault or robbery.
Approved 64 to 23, Friday.
Connecticut Dodd (D) . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
N  Lieberman (D) . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y  New Jersey Bradley (D) . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y  Lautenberg (D) . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y New York D'Amato (R) . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y  Moynihan (D) . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.
House
There were no House votes last week.


Sicily Pensione
To the Editor: In April 1992, you ran an article by Mary Taylor Simeti, "In an Ancient Monastery, Family Fare," on the Tornabene family's remarkable monastery restaurant in Sicily's Madonie mountain town of Gangivecchio.
Now the enterprising Tornabenes have opened a delightful nine-room pensione where we spent an evening recently.
The Tenuta Gangivecchio, which is in the province of Palermo, costs 85,000 lire per person, including bed, breakfast, dinner and locally produced red wine.
The food is superb.
Three of the guest rooms open onto a terrace with views of the monastery garden, the monastery and the resident donkey.
All rooms are decorated with hand-woven Sicilian rugs, crochet work and provincial print bedspreads.


The Very Middle Of Midtown
AQUAVIT ** (212) 307-7311; 13 West 54th Street; $$$$; all major credit cards
This Scandinavian restaurant is housed in the former John D. Rockefeller town house.
Upstairs is a sleek little bar and cafe where patrons can sample a variety of flavored aquavits along with light meals, including a smorgasbord plate with herring and savory Danish open-faced sandwiches, with fillings like smoked salmon with horseradish cream on rye-pumpernickel bread.


For Night People in Need
NEW YORK has many services to meet the nocturnal needs of the sick and harried.
Here are a few.
Key: B (will go to Brooklyn); Q (to Queens); Bx (to the Bronx).


Snuffing Out Secondhand Smoke
Only 10 years ago, the Smoke-Free Environment Act of 1993, introduced last week by Senator Frank Lautenberg and Representative Henry Waxman, would have seemed unthinkable.
Now, as evidence about the health risks involved in inhaling somebody else's cigarette continues to mount, it just seems common-sensical.
Certainly millions of Americans will find it so.
New or increased restrictions on smoking have been adopted by 214 local jurisdictions this year alone, and are pending in 147 more.


Melissa S. Glaser, Scott Schiller
Melissa Sue Glaser, an editorial assistant at Bantam Doubleday Dell Audio Publishing, was married last evening to Scott Schiller, an account director of advertising sales at the MTV Networks.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi David Seed officiated at the Oakwood Club in Cleveland.
Mrs.
Schiller, 29, graduated from Tulane University and received a master's degree in elementary education from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Donald and Helen Glaser of Cleveland.


Years of Neglect Raise Cost Of Restoring a High School
Six years after it was hailed as the start of a symbolic regeneration of the New York City school system, the reconstruction of the city's oldest high school has become the latest symbol of the Board of Education's troubled maintenance operations with costs ballooning from $22 million to $78 million.
Work crews at Erasmus Hall High School in Flatbush, Brooklyn, have discovered that the school's exterior masonry is so eroded after years of neglect that its terra cotta facade is peeling away from the sprawling four-story structure.
Contractors were recently forced to take emergency measures to keep its Gothic towers from crashing down onto Flatbush Avenue, and workers have begun dismantling the towers brick by brick.


Without Illusions
WHAT The modern prenuptial or premarital agreement, circa 1993.
Sought by those who vow that this time they won't be fools for love.
WHY To protect financial assets just in case divorce comes knocking.


'Altman Has Hit A Nerve'
To the Editor:
Apparently Robert Coles wants to punish Robert Altman for interpreting Raymond Carver's stories in his own unique way.
Mr.
Coles refers to the "mean and bitter attitudes toward women" and labels the film a discussion of "tormented women." However, upon close inspection, everyone in "Short Cuts" -- male and female -- is troubled.
Neither gender is victorious over the other.
Mr.
Altman has hit a nerve, displaying a hard-hitting view of sexual tension between heterosexual men and women.


Knicks Get a Lesson Without Paying for It
Victories on the road are precious, even when they are precarious.
So the Knicks gladly accepted their opening-night triumph in Boston, practiced here today, then looked ahead to Sunday night's game against the Cleveland Cavaliers.


County Buys New Vans To Carry the Disabled
NEARLY one million passenger trips have been made on the county's Paratransit system for the disabled since service began on Oct. 24, 1983.
In a ceremony recently marking the 10th anniversary of that system at the County Office Building in White Plains, Westchester officials unveiled the first of 30 new vans that will replace existing Paratransit vehicles this month and next.
Thirty-three Paratransit vans now operate in the county, and the number is expected to remain the same for the time being.


POSTINGS: For Condo and Co-op Owners; Two Conferences, Myriad Topics
People may bemoan the state of the New York co-op and condominium market, but that doesn't mean there's not a lot going on.
Indeed, there are enough new developments -- and enough confusion about old ones -- to warrant two conferences on the subject, a couple of weeks apart.
The first, the Council of New York Cooperatives' 13th Annual Cooperative Housing Conference, will be held next Sunday.
It will offer 85 workshops on a potpourri of topics, from refinancing a mortgage to current legal issues to dealing with graffiti (the "visual virus," as the brochure colorfully calls it).


A la Carte; In Case Fish Happens to Be a Favorite Eat In or Carryout Dish
RESTAURANTS come in many forms.
Fish on the Run in Huntington Village is the latest of a number of small informal restaurants that combine carryout, markets and fancy-food stores to open there in recent years.
The new venture at 55B Wall Street (385-8269), a seafood market and eat-in or carryout establishment, follows the lead of the Tortilla Grill, Jonathan's and Jhoola.
Although none them are primarily sitdown restaurants, they all offer tables and chairs at which diners can enjoy interesting food at honest prices.


Sound Bytes; She Defines Autodesk And Women's Issues, Too
Carol Bartz is well known as president, chairman and chief executive of Autodesk Inc., the sixth-largest personal computer software company and maker of desktop computer-aided design software.
Before joining Autodesk 18 months ago, and after stints with 3M and Digital Equipment, she had been vice president of worldwide field operations for Sun Microsystems, which she joined in 1983.
What she is less well known for is her advocacy of women's issues, including service on the board of the National Breast Cancer Research Foundation.


Bank Agrees to Remodel in Basic Brick
Republic National Bank's plans for a $40 million tower and a $2.6 million restoration of its landmark Knox Building at Fifth Avenue and 40th Street have been approved by the Landmarks Preservation Commission, after slight modification.
Laurie Beckelman, who heads the commission, said the architects had agreed to clad the new 16-story tower with brick rather than limestone so it would be more in keeping with the public library across the street and three other landmark buildings on the block.


Alice Kornfeld, Gordon Osinoff
Alice D. Kornfeld, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Monroe W. Kornfeld of Scarsdale, N.Y. was married last evening to Gordon Osinoff, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Raymond Osinoff, also of Scarsdale.
Rabbi Steven Klein officiated at the Harmonie Club in New York.
Ms.
Kornfeld, 26, is keeping her name.
She is an associate at Rosen &amp; Livingston, a New York law firm.
She graduated from Barnard College and received a law degree from Syracuse University.
Her father is a dentist in the Bronx.
Her mother, Edna Kornfeld, is a speech pathologist in the Bronx for the New York City Board of Education.


'Miracle' on 49th Street


1 Evening, 2 Plays, 2 Languages
THE Pregones Theater, which offers bilingual performances in the Bronx, begins its 15th season this week with a two-play presentation.
The English-language half will be "The Wedding March," adapted from the book "Silent Dancing: A Partial Remembrance of Growing Up Puerto Rican," by Judith Ortiz Cofer.
Three generations of women recall important moments in their lives, including their romances and weddings.


'Promises, Promises' In Goodspeed Revival
IT has been facetiously said that nostalgia is a thing of the past, but the Goodspeed Opera House's "Promises, Promises" is bringing it closer to the present.
The 1968 musical by Burt Bacharach, Hal David and Neil Simon is Goodspeed's most contemporary revival yet.
It doesn't take an old-timer to remember this one; we're talking a mere 25 years.
"Promises, Promises," adapted from the 1960 Oscar-winning film "The Apartment" was the quintessential expense account musical, going at an unprecedented $15 top ticket.
The story is about cheating middle-aged insurance executives who borrow, once or twice a week, the key to a young company clerk's apartment (the rent is $86.50 a month) for an hour's dalliance with their secretaries.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association  ATLANTA HAWKS -- Signed Ricky Grace, guard.
Waived Todd Mundt, center.
Hockey  National Hockey League  VANCOUVER CANUCKS -- Recalled Neil Eisenhut, center, from Hamilton of the American Hockey League.


OCT. 31-NOV. 5: Taxing Ammunition; Reviving a Twist On Gun Control
For a decade, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan has argued that the way to attack the gun problem is by controlling ammunition.
Handguns can last centuries, but bullets cannot be reused.
He estimates that there is only a four-year supply.
Now that the New York Democrat is chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, people are starting to pay attention.
To help cover the $4 billion in medical costs that gunshot wounds cause annually, Mr.
Moynihan proposed last week to raise some $200 million by increasing the tax on ammunition as part of the President's health care legislation.


Two for Time
Two ultra-thin, beautifully designed travel clocks from the Museum of Modern Art gift shop will take up little space in luggage or briefcase.


How the Unemployed Are Facing Changes in the Workplace
ECONOMISTS would say Eugene J. Cribbin and Catherine Devito are "meeting the challenge of change." Mr.
Cribbin and Mrs.
Devito, unemployed as a result of company staff reductions, say, however, that they are enrolled in the occupational-training center run by the Board of Cooperative Educational Services in Yorktown Heights because they need jobs.
Mr.
Cribbin, 48, married and the father of four, spent 30 years in the banking industry.
For the last seven years, he was data-center manager for Chase Manhattan Bank.
Now he is studying to become a licensed practical nurse.


Corrections
A headline on Oct. 24 with a review of "Evita" misidentified the theater.
The musical was at the Bayway Arts Center in East Islip, not the Gateway Theater.


LITTLE BIG PEOPLE
As a historian, I study 15th-century Milan and cannot help noticing the age at which people in that culture take on responsible positions in society.
Young men of 17 or 18 sit on the duke's advisory council; people marry at 15 and shoulder family responsibilities; wisdom is exhibited, in those who have it, in late adolescence.
Mathematics and music, in other words, are not the only areas in which precocity can play a role.


Does Industrial Policy Work? Lessons From Sematech
THE world has changed for Sematech, the Government-subsidized consortium of semiconductor manufacturers formed amid much criticism in 1987 to rescue an industry faltering against Japan.
When its president and chief executive, William J. Spencer, goes to Washington these days, it is not so much to ask as to bask.
Politicians of many stripes give Sematech a lot of the credit for the recent turnaround in the United States chip industry.
President Clinton last February called Sematech "a model for Federal consortiums funded to advance other critical technologies." A Congressional hearing on the consortium last summer was more love feast than inquiry: Everyone from Gov.
Ann Richards of Texas to the House majority leader, Richard A. Gephardt, heaped praise on Sematech.


Columbia's Best Efforts Doomed by Dartmouth's Fiedler
Entering yesterday's fourth quarter at Baker Field's Wien Stadium, Columbia found itself in a thoroughly unfamiliar position: holding the lead.
Behind a one-two tandem at quarterback installed specifically for the game, the Lions had rallied from an 8-point halftime deficit to take a 25-21 advantage over Dartmouth and began the final 15 minutes in front for only the third time this season.


Paula L. Lockamy, Craig F. Stout
Paula Lyn Lockamy, the daughter of Mrs.
Nubron D. Whitley of Tarboro, N.C., and Dr.
Thomas B. Lockamy Jr. of Virginia Beach, Va., was married yesterday to Craig Fitzhugh Stout, a son of Julie J. Stout and Anthony C. Stout, both of Washington.
The Rev.
Mark H. Mullin officiated at St.
Alban's Episcopal Church in Washington.
Mrs.
Stout graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Her father is an associate superintendent of the Norfolk (Va.) schools system.
Her mother is an administrator for the public schools system in Tarboro.


Data Bank/November 7, 1993


How to Make an Indoor Tree Feel at Home
NOW that the tree leaves are falling, plant thoughts are moving indoors.
But they need not be treeless thoughts.
There are many indoor trees that can be grown in the home as a sort of substitute for the leafy canopy of summer.
Of course, office buildings, malls and banks are made all the more splendid with these indoors trees, which are used to make tall cold walls fit the human scale.
But many of these same plant species can be utilized in the home.
Exceptionally tall ceilings are not necessary in most cases.
Nor are the fancy pots.
Just choose plants wisely and care for them properly.


County Buys New Vans To Carry the Disabled
NEARLY one million passenger trips have been made on the county's Paratransit system for the disabled since service began on Oct. 24, 1983.
In a ceremony recently marking the 10th anniversary of that system at the County Office Building in White Plains, Westchester officials unveiled the first of 30 new vans that will replace existing Paratransit vehicles this month and next.
Thirty-three Paratransit vans now operate in the county, and the number is expected to remain the same for the time being.


Forget Designer Dogs; Mutts Are the Best Pets
To the Editor:
After reading your article, I feel compelled as a dog owner to write to you about the situation in Riverside Park between 79th and 94th Streets.


ABOUT BOOKS
Advice, for a Price, On Starting a Business
CALL it chutzpah or just plain indifference to competitive pricing, but when Nancy DeProspo Gluck ventured into self-publishing two years ago, she decided to list her very first book -- "Affairs of the Heart: How to Start and Operate a Successful Special Event Planning Service" -- for $69.


Head Injuries: the Long Road Back
FROM her wheelchair Jessica Bogin, 17, spoke about the accident two years ago that left her paralyzed from the waist down.
She told about piling eight people into a car, sitting on a friend's lap and being thrown when the car was broadsided.
Mostly she spoke about how her life had changed, how she can no longer walk or dance, how she used to wake up at the last minute to rush off to school but now she needs three hours to get ready, how it feels to be at a party trying to join in conversation when everyone else is standing while she sits in her wheelchair.


The 'Miracle' at St. Malachy's
One of Broadway's oldest institutions, St.
Malachy's, known as the Actors' Chapel, is celebrating its revival today with the completion of a $2 million restoration.
The dark, decrepit neo-Gothic church, built in 1903, has been transformed into a bright and welcoming sanctuary.
In the 1930's and 40's, stars like Spencer Tracy, Irene Dunne and Rosalind Russell worshiped in the Roman Catholic church, on West 49th Street between Broadway and Eighth Avenue.
This was where the 1944 movie "Going My Way," starring Bing Crosby, was filmed and where Douglas Fairbanks Jr. married Joan Crawford in 1929.


Sidewalks, Too, Have A Pedigree
Park Slope residents have won a temporary victory in their fight to preserve bluestone, the slabs of dark gray pavement that distinguish many brownstone neighborhoods around the city.
After Community Board 6 in Brooklyn passed a resolution last month calling for a moratorium on sidewalk repaving, city officials postponed until April their plans to replace all the Park Slope bluestone walks that have been identified as "trip hazards." The delay gives residents more than the usual 45 days to reset or replace their bluestone sidewalks before the city sends contractors in to pour cement.


Deborah Novick, Todd Goldberg
Deborah Ruth Novick, the daughter of Susan and Jeffrey Novick of Syosset, L.I., was married last evening to Todd Alan Goldberg, a son of Phyllis and Marshall Goldberg of West Orange, N.J.
Rabbi Daniel Fogel performed the ceremony at the Pine Hollow Country Club in East Norwich, L.I.


Angelic Verses for Rushdie


Friends and Foes


Alisa Pines, Ronald Emanuel
Alisa Pines, a daughter of Doreen and Ira Pines of Glen Cove, L.I., was married last evening to Ronald Bruce Emanuel, a son of Carole Goldstein and Barry Emanuel, both of New York.
Rabbi Laurence Kotok officiated at the Shelter Rock Jewish Center in Searingtown, L.I.


Gotbaum, a Recent Appointee, Plans to Leave School Board
Victor H. Gotbaum, who was appointed to New York City's Board of Education by Mayor David N. Dinkins less than six months ago, announced yesterday that he would step down from the board by early next year, saying the newly elected Mayor should have the opportunity to choose an appointee.
Mr.
Gotbaum's decision to step aside before his term expires next June is the first move in what could prove to be a considerable reshuffling of the board as a consequence of Rudolph W. Giuliani's election.


Barbara Barsa, James Jamison
Barbara Anne Barsa, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert S. Barsa of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to James Kennedy Jamison, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rushton M. Jamison of Belfast, Northern Ireland.
The Rev.
Vance Polley performed the ceremony at the Rye Presbyterian Church.


Vienna
To the Editor: I always enjoy Paul Hofmann's reports, being myself a native of Vienna.
In "Vienna Debates Its New Look" (Sept. 12), Mr.
Hofmann mentions that the Karl Marx Hof has been declared a historic monument.
This brought back memories of February 1934, when it was one of the command posts during the Social Democratic militia's uprising against the authoritarian rule of Chancellor Engelbert Dollfuss.
The revolt was crushed by the combined strength of the Austrian Army and the Fascist militia.
I still remember the gaping holes in the building from bombardment by heavy artillery.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Finding Necktie Patterns In Tiles, Tombs and Armor
Park Lane, a New York-based manufacturer of neckwear, has entered into a licensing agreement with the Metropolitan Museum of Art to reproduce some of the museum's works as patterns on ties.


L.S.U. Stuns Bama To Cut String at 31
L.S.U. 17, Alabama 13
The nation's longest unbeaten streak ended at 31 games yesterday as Louisiana State capitalized on Alabama mistakes to upset the Crimson Tide, 17-13, in Tuscaloosa.


One Person Made a Difference
NEVER STOP RUNNING Allard Lowenstein and the Struggle to Save American Liberalism.
By William H. Chafe.
Illustrated. 556 pp.
New York: Basic Books. $28.


Jeffrey Schmalz, 39, Times Writer On Politics and Then AIDS, Dies
Jeffrey Schmalz, a journalist who wrote with passion and insight about the determination and despair of AIDS sufferers, died of complications of the disease yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 39.
When his illness was discovered three years ago, Mr.
Schmalz, who spent his entire two-decade career as a reporter and editor at The New York Times, saw his situation not only as a patient but as a journalist.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: November 7, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
45
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-American women and their mothers.
2
6
THE AGE OF INNOCENCE, by Edith Wharton. (Collier/Macmillan, $5.95.) The 1920 novel about New York society life in the 1870's.
3
1
KEEPER OF THE HEART, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A woman flees yet yearns for a man chosen to be her mate on a distant planet.
4
2
THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $6.50.) The investigation of the murder of an officer, a general's daughter.
5
3
THE KILLER ANGELS, by Michael Shaara. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A 1974 novel about the Battle of Gettysburg.
6
38
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
7
4
LORD OF HAWKFELL ISLAND, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) Romantic passions and feminist feelings at play in 10th-century Britain.
8
8
THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) "The Vampire Chronicles," continued.
9
2
INADMISSIBLE EVIDENCE, by Philip Friedman. (Ivy, $5.99.) A prosecutor struggles to convict a real estate tycoon of murder.
10
2
DEVIL'S WALTZ, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $6.50.) A psychologist-detective investigates a small child's strange illnesses.
11
6
MITIGATING CIRCUMSTANCES, by Nancy Taylor Rosenberg. (Signet, $5.99.) A woman's revenge after she and a daughter are attacked.
12
82
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
13
1
THE COPPER BEECH, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $5.99.) The romances, plots and crimes that go on behind closed doors in an Irish village.
14
7
THE SECRET HISTORY, by Donna Tartt. (Ivy, $6.99.) Close friends at a small college must deal with the consequences of a crime.
15
11
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
522
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
2
8
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes, opinions.
3
5
THE PRESIDENT'S HEALTH SECURITY PLAN. (Times Books/Random House, $8.)
4
38
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) Memoir.
5
1
RARE AIR, by Michael Jordan. (Collins, $25.) Photographs and observations.
6
108
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
7
28
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
8*
2
SUBMARINE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $14.95.) A tour through a nuclear warship.
9
6
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Bantam, $6.99.) The autobiography of the general.
10
12
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on life's commonplaces.
11
2
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $10.95.) A forest fire.
12
10
PRINCESS, by Jean P. Sasson. (Avon, $5.50.) The life of a member of the Saudi royal family.
13
129
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) Communicating.
14
17
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $6.99.) The veterinarian's memoirs.
15
139
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Patient care.
16*
35
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
17*
8
SAVE YOUR JOB, SAVE OUR COUNTRY, by Ross Perot with Pat Choate. (Hyperion, $6.95.) Arguments against the ratification of Nafta.
18*
16
A WORLD LIT ONLY BY FIRE, by William Manchester. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) History.
19*
1
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Back Bay/Little, Brown, $11.95.) Government debt.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
6
THE DAYS ARE JUST PACKED, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Cartoons.
2
142
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
3
158
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
18
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
5*
1
THE FAR SIDE GALLERY 4, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A new collection of cartoons.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 23, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
BEEKMAN PLACE AREA  $272,000
420 East 51st Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,350-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, south exposure; maintenance $1,255, 35% tax-deductible, listed at $299,000, 4 months on market (Broker: Sarit Inc.)  CHELSEA  $1.425 million
357 West 20th Street  3-family, 5-story, Greek Revival town house; 4 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room, 2 powder rooms in owner's triplex; 1 bedroom, 1 1/2 baths in other duplex units; rear garden, historic district; taxes $8,275, listed at $1.5 million, 1 year on market (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)  EAST MIDTOWN  $565,000
425 East 58th Street  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,900-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; windowed kitchen, dining area, 3 exposures, East River view; maintenance $1,878, 69% tax-deductible, listed at $595,000, 2 months on market (Brokers: Corcoran Group; Charles H. Greenthal)  TRIBECA  $368,000
366 Broadway (Franklin St.) 2-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. loft-co-op; elevator, eat-in kitchen, 11-ft. ceilings, original molding and detail; maintenance $1,170, 55% tax-deductible, listed at $395,000, 3 months on market (Broker: Tabak Real Estate)  UPPER WEST SIDE  $485,000
101 West 79th Street  (Park Belvedere)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,213-sq.-ft. condo in an 8-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, 2 exposures; common charge $700, taxes $6,000, listed at $570,000, 1 month on market (Broker: Susan D. Fine Enterprises)  BRONX
RIVERDALE  $137,000
3720 Independence Avenue  (Bonnie House)  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; elevator, dining room, terrace; maintenance $721, 59% tax-deductible, listed at $150,000, 2 months on market (Broker: ERA/Susan Goldy &amp; Co. Realtors)  WAKEFIELD  $142,000
4633 Bronx Boulevard  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 68-year-old detached frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished attic, enclosed porch, 2-car garage; taxes $1,020, listed at $149,000, 2 months on market (Brokers: J.A.V. Realty Corp; Fasons Realty Corp)  BROOKLYN
COBBLE HILL  $164,500
157 Kane Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. co-op in prewar brick town house; dining area, fireplace, roof deck; maintenance $480, 60% tax-deductible, listed at $169,500, 5 weeks on market (Broker: Harborview Realty)  MIDWOOD PARK  $255,000
679 East 18th Street  7-bedroom, 3-bath, 83-year-old detached Victorian; dining room, stained-glass windows, antique oak fixtures, 1-car garage; taxes $1,728, listed at $299,000, 2 weeks on market (Broker: J. Shayovitz Real Estate Corp.)  STATEN ISLAND
HUGUENOT  $253,000
27 East Ashland Avenue  2-family, 19-year-old high ranch; 3 bedrooms, dining room, sunken living room, eat-in kitchen in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, family room in other; 1 bath in each; 1-car garage; taxes $2,000, listed at $269,900, 5 months on market (Broker: Linda Nasta, Ltd. Real Estate)  WEST BRIGHTON  $161,000
93 North Mada Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 60-year-old colonial; dining room, beamed ceilings, semi-finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $1,300, listed at $169,000, 4 months on market (Brokers: Vitali-Sunshine; Richmond Homes)  QUEENS
FOREST HILLS GARDENS  $492,000
66 Beechknoll Road 4-bedroom, 2-bath, center-hall Tudor; fireplace, pantry, 1-car garage; taxes $3,900, listed at $595,000, 5 months on market (Broker: Terrace Realty)  KEW GARDENS  $196,000
147-47 76th Road 3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 40-year-old attached town house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $1,850, listed at $215,000, 2 weeks on market (Broker: F.H. Realty Executives) NEW JERSEY
Ewing  $203,000
33 Windybush Way
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 13-year-old center hall colonial; h/w floors, remodeled kitchen, new roof; taxes $3,998, listed at $224,900, 27 weeks on market (Broker: Richard A. Weidel Realtors)  Middle Township  $80,500
27 Fourth Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 14-year-old ranch; patio, fenced yard; taxes $1,259, listed at $84,900, 21 weeks on market (Broker: DeMusz Real Estate)  Rockaway  $235,000
86 Jacobs Road
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 14-year-old bi-level; fireplace, family room, inground pool, over 1 acre; taxes $4,937, listed at $244,000, 40 weeks on market (Brokers: Prudential NJ Realty)  Vernon  $151,700
4 Baker Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 28-year-old ranch; screened porch, walk-in closets, overlooks stream; taxes $2,550, listed at $159,450, 27 weeks on market (Broker: Weichert Realtors)
WESTCHESTER
Chappaqua  $372,500
14 Garey Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 36-year-old split level; flagstone patio, fireplace, den; 1.2 acres; taxes $7,214, listed at $395,000, 8 weeks on market (Brokers: Holmes &amp; Kennedy; Randolph Properties).
New Rochelle  $247,500
44 Wilmot Circle  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 41-year-old ranch; sunroom, deck, maid's room; taxes $9,676, listed at $269,000, 75 weeks on market (Brokers: Claire D. Leone Associates; and Wykagyl Agency).
Pelham Manor  $360,000
128 Manor Lane  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 68-year-old colonial; family room, fireplace, 2 car garage; taxes $8,592, listed at $375,000, 10 weeks on market (Broker: McClellan &amp; Company).
Yorktown  $224,000
860 Salem Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 17-year-old raised ranch; skylight, deck; taxes $5,881, listed at $229,900, 7 weeks on market (Brokers: Coldwell Banker; Prudential Fanelli Real Estate).
CONNECTICUT
MADISON  $250,000
115 Island Avenue  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 73-year-old colonial; dining room with butler's pantry, new furnace, wrap-around porch, fireplace, 2-car garage, 50- by 120-ft. lot; taxes $3,833, listed at $278,000, 1 year on market (Broker: Prudential Connecticut Realty)  NEW FAIRFIELD  $206,000
22 Saw Mill Road 4-bedroom, 3-bath, 8-year-old contemporary; dining room, full basement, 0.75 acre; taxes $4,680, listed at $214,000, 7 weeks on market (Broker: William Pitt Real Estate)
NORWALK  $174,500
11 Nelson Avenue 3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 83-year-old colonial; new roof, refinished floors, 1-car garage, .17-acre lot; taxes $2,856, listed at $184,500, 8 months on market (Brokers: William Pitt Real Estate; Prudential Connecticut Realty)
WILTON  $662,000
38 Belden Hill Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 203-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, terrace, 2-car garage, 2.4-acre lot; taxes $5,343, listed at $675,000, 3 months on market (Broker: William Pitt Real Estate)  LONG ISLAND Islip  $145,000
63 Smith Avenue 3-bedroom, 1-bath, 28-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $5,055, listed at $155,000, 8 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential Long Island Realty).
Roslyn Heights  $350,000
54 Glenwood Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 117-year-old Victorian; dining room, parlor, 3 fireplaces, 1 acre; taxes $4,300, listed at $500,000, 10 weeks on market (Broker: Coldwell Banker Sammis).
Smithtown  $106,000
175 Maple Avenue 3-bedroom, 2-bath, 55-year-old Cape Cod; basement, 0.5 acre; taxes $2,600, listed at $129,900, 6 weeks on market (Broker: Straub Resales).
Syosset  $417,000
149 Split Rock Road  6-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 74-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, 1 acre, garage w/ one-bedroom guest apartment; taxes $8,000, listed at $525,000, 32 weeks on market (Broker: Daniel Gale Associates).


Correction
A summary of the Clinton health care plan last Sunday incorrectly included a cost-control measure that the Administration has abandoned.
The Administration is no longer seeking establishment of a national health board to set national and regional health budgets.


Clinton Calls Trade Debate World Issue
As President Clinton has thrown himself into the campaign to win approval for the free-trade agreement with Mexico and Canada, he has shifted away from emphasizing its impact on jobs and begun to stress a different argument -- that failure to pass the accord will undermine American foreign policy.
The shift in emphasis is in part a campaign tactic.
White House polling experts are convinced that the public and Congress tend to defer more to the President on foreign policy issues than they do on domestic or economic ones.
So Mr.
Clinton has made a conscious effort, they say, to cast the debate on the North American Free Trade Agreement as a virtual foreign policy crisis.


LITTLE BIG PEOPLE
These parents should be commended for raising forthright and honest children, as my own parents did.
With our precociousness comes a thirst for knowledge and a disdain for mediocrity.
Leaving children in "dreamlike states" is precisely the type of mumbo jumbo that is keeping America behind in this competitive world.
SUJATHA MURALI Englewood Cliffs, N.J.


Professionals Sent Back to Class
IN EDUCATION circles, what's sauce for the goose is sauce for an increasingly old and wise gander.
Like secondary-school teachers who must submit to periodic competency testing, a wide variety of professionals, from dentists to financial planners, are being pressed to recertify their skills.
A nationwide movement is growing among state legislatures, prodded by the public, to compel professionals back to school to keep up with developments in their fields, in order to retain their licenses.
Even occupations that are self-regulating, like estate appraisers, are conducting similar programs.
Demonstrating Rigor
The movement, which began with the health-related professions, like doctors and nurses, has spread to lawyers and occupations that provide a wide spectrum of services to the public, such as real estate agents, accountants and social workers.
"Professions of every stripe are trying to demonstrate rigor," said Robert S. Lapiner, dean of continuing education at U.C.L.A.
Extension, the largest continuing-education school in the country, a division of the University of California at Los Angeles.


Public Access for the Literate
WELCOME to the highly irregular world of zines, the magazine equivalent of public-access television.
Typically the effort of one person or a small group of like-minded friends operating on an evanescent budget, zines are invariably too singular in theme or too idiosyncratic in style to have mainstream appeal.
While zine purists argue that only those publications of the most modest production values and meager circulations should be considered zines, others identify them by their contents.
"I can't say there's an agenda that connects them," said Terry Morello, the special-projects director at Exit Art/The First World, a SoHo arts center that sells zines.
"Many have a kind of esthetic that's an anti-esthetic, a vague, unfocused anger. But others are simply informative, like the one about preserving eight-track tapes."


When People See a Need to Do More Than Just Care
Natalie Cuchel and Maureen Harrison have done what they can to ease the pain of dozens of homeless children in Hunts Point, taking them on field trips to places like the Cloisters, helping them with homework and listening to their stories of fear and neglect.
But the two women believe they can do much more; they believe, in fact, that they should start a school of their own.


Resurrecting A Rail Yard: A New Hitch
For decades, the Harlem River Rail Yard has been abandoned, a forlorn stretch of rickety tracks in Port Morris that once teemed with freight cars transporting coal, lumber and other cargo.
A proposal to resurrect the yard would create jobs and revitalize the sagging neighborhood, supporters say.
Critics of the plan say it doesn't go far enough to reduce dependence on trucks.
The State Department of Transportation expects to release its final environmental study next month on a plan to convert 28 acres of the sprawling rail yard into a revitalized hub for transporting freight.


Third Try at Global Balloon Flight Ends in Failure at Launching Site
The third attempted launching of the round-the-world Earthwinds Hilton Balloon in two years was canceled yesterday, this time because of an accident that could have had serious consequences for two men aboard the craft.
An Earthwinds spokesman said the men were not injured, but several vital components of the complicated balloon assembly were damaged.
Project officials could not immediately estimate how long it would take to rebuild the system, assuming that its sponsors decided to try again to get the $5 million craft into the air.


Charles Feit, 68, Dies; A Retired Executive
Charles Feit, a former executive of Weight Watchers International, died on Wednesday at the Princeton Medical Center.
He was 68.
The cause of death was a heart attack, according to his wife, Hedwig Feit.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 17 about the New Jersey Coastal Heritage Trail misstated the location of the trail's northern welcome center.
The center, at the entrance to Cheesequake State Park, is in Old Bridge Township, in Middlesex County, not in Matawan, in Monmouth County.


Broadway Romp


How to Watch a Marathon, Let Us Count the Ways
I've never run the New York City Marathon and I hope I am never forced to as penance for any sin.
In my years of dashing for buses, bolting for half-closed elevators and sprinting to the Mister Softee truck, I doubt I've run 26.2 miles in my life.
This doesn't make me a bad person.
Just a lazy one.
This is not said to discuss my athletic ineptitude or my percentage of body fat but to illustrate that while I don't willingly or rapidly put one foot in front of the other, I relish watching others shvitz their way through the marathon.


Streetscapes/1040 Park Avenue; A 1924 Apartment House That Repays Careful Study
THEY really should leave one patch dirty, because without seeing the facade of 1040 Park Avenue midway through its current cleaning it is hard to imagine how profoundly a layer of soot has obscured the delicate invention of this sophisticated 1924 apartment house.
Apartment development on Park Avenue above 86th Street took off after World War I and every year brought two or three new apartment houses.
In 1923 Joseph L. B. Mayer, a developer, began one at the northwest corner of 86th.
Although Mayer had used commercial architects on other projects, he retained Delano &amp; Aldrich, better known for upper-class town houses and clubs.


At Truck Stop, a Chapel on Wheels
AT first glance, nothing looks out of the ordinary about the 45-foot blue and white trailer parked at the truck stop off Route 78 here.
The trailer blends in with the 700 or so that stop each day at the Garden State Truck Plaza.
The interior of the trailer is a far different story, however.
It is equipped with an organ, carpeting, wood paneling, cushioned seats and even a chandelier.


THE RELUCTANT STAR
In "The Reluctant Star" (Oct. 17), Janet Maslin focuses on the aspect of Jeff Bridges's acting that I admire the most -- his chameleonlike ability to disappear into his roles.
It is a rare talent and the hallmark of a true actor.
One goes from asking "Who was that guy?" to saying, "That must have been Jeff Bridges because I couldn't tell who it was." CAROL S. LINDQUIST Stony Brook, L.I.


The Answers
1. West.
2. East.
3. Idaho.
4.
South -- Hawaii; north, east and west -- Alaska, part of which crosses 180 degrees longitude, which separates measurements east of Greenwich, England, from those west.
5. Pensacola.
6. One time zone. All of China is on Beijing time.
7. Chicago.
8. Denmark, with its two dependencies, Greenland and the Faeroe Islands.
9.
Fairview, 66 municipalities; Midway, 52; Oak Grove, 44; Franklin, 40; Jefferson, 28; Lincoln, 27; Washington, 27.
10. Guyana, Suriname and French Guiana.
11. All of them.
12.
Florida.
St.
Augustine was founded in 1565, but in 1539 de Soto encountered an Indian settlement that grew into modern Tallahassee.
13.
Zimbabwe, dollar; Guinea-Bissau, peso; the Sudan, pound; Tunisia, dinar; Turkey, lira; Djibouti, franc; Uganda, shilling.
Seventh-grade answers:
1.
Portuguese is an official language in Angola, Brazil, Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Portugal, Macao and Sao Tome and Principe.
2.
North America -- United States, Canada; South America -- Trinidad and Tobago, Falkland Islands, Guyana; Europe -- Britain; Africa -- South Africa, Namibia and other former British colonies like Botswana, Kenya, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe; Asia -- India, Hong Kong, the Philippines; Oceania -- Australia, New Zealand.
3.
Among the biggest are Algeria, Bangladesh, Brunei, Egypt, Ethiopia, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syria, Turkey.
4.
Here are only a few: in North America, the Painted Desert in Arizona and the Mojave Desert in California; in South America, the Atacama in Chile; in Africa, the Sahara throughout the north, the Kalahari in South Africa and the Sinai in Egypt; in Asia, the Gobi Desert in Mongolia and the Arabian Desert in Saudi Arabia; in Oceania, the Great Australian Desert.
5.
Rain forests: in South America -- Brazil; in Central America -- Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Panama; in Africa -- Nigeria, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Zaire, Congo; off Africa -- Madagascar; in Asia -- India, Bangladesh, Myanmar, Thailand, Vietnam, Malaysia, Indonesia, the Philippines.
David J. Smith


Carolina Crafts
To the Editor: I read Suzanne Carmichael's article "An Appalachian Trail for Carolina Crafts Seekers" (Oct. 17) and thought that your readers might also like to know that an exhibition called "North Carolina in New York," displaying the works of over 100 North Carolina fine arts and crafts artists, will be on view at the National Arts Club on Gramercy Park in New York through Nov. 23.
KRISTEN L. MORAN  New York, N.Y.


China Lacks Water to Meet Its Mighty Thirst
Heaven River dried up 20 years ago.
Canals no longer bring water from Beijing's reservoirs.
And it has been more than a decade since anyone could afford to fill a rice paddy.
But 53-year-old Xing Shuqin gestured over her donkey to the wheat field beyond and said: "We don't have a water problem, because we have a well. See, the wheat is growing just fine."


Jefferson on Race
To the Editor:
It appears that Willard Sterne Randall, whose "Thomas Jefferson: A Life" was reviewed on Sept. 26, fell victim to the reviewer's ideas about Jefferson.
Peter S. Onuf's sorry opinion of Jefferson spilled over into his review.


Penn State Shuts Down Indiana's Rose Bowl Hopes
Penn State 38, Indiana 31
Kerry Collins hit Bobby Engram with a 45-yard touchdown pass with 6 minutes 25 seconds left, lifting Penn State to a 38-31 victory over Indiana yesterday in State College, Pa., to crush the Hoosiers' Rose Bowl hopes.


Gretchen Tibbets, Stewart Mader
Gretchen Marie Tibbets, the daughter of Dr.
Stephen Tibbets and Christine T. Tibbets of Hilton Head Island, S.C., was married yesterday to Stewart Walter Mader, the son of Wolfgang and Hannelore Mader of Succasunna, N.J.
The Rev.
Robert Chabak performed the ceremony at SS.
Peter and Paul Roman Catholic Church in Hoboken, N.J.
Ms.
Tibbets, 26, is keeping her name.
She is the business manager of Inc. magazine in New York.
She graduated from the University of Virginia.
Her father is the executive vice president of Chris Construction Inc., a construction company in Hilton Head.
Her mother is an agent at Sea Pines Real Estate there.


Yearning for the Familiar, From Far Away
AS anyone who has suffered from it knows, there are two strains of homesickness: the first half-comic and easily cured, the second much more virulent and harder to shake.
I speak with some authority, since at various times in my traveling career I have suffered from both versions, to the point where, at worst, I've cut trips short and hightailed it home, and where, at best, this oddly nostalgic, bittersweet longing for things familiar has furrowed even the happiest of my travels with some deep sloughs of despond.
"Homesickness?" people are apt to say incredulously when the subject comes up.
"Sick of home is more like it for me." And indeed, for many, longing for home is the very last thing on their minds when they are off traveling.
But there are others for whom homesickness is a crippling problem, the equal of seasickness, fear of flying, culture shock or any of those other maladies of the traveling life.
I suspect if you were to examine the hesitations of that larger-than-you-might-think population who, having the time, money and health to travel, never venture more than a few miles from home, homesickness would be at the root of their timidity.
A stint in the army where all you wanted was to get home once again, a spell working in a strange city where no one knew you and no friends were made -- these are the experiences people flee from, so terrifying that the condition of awayness is never risked again.


Giuliani Names a Banker to Head Transition
Richard D. Parsons, who was named by Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday to head a transition advisory council to search for talent for his administration, is chairman of the Dime Savings Bank, a former aide to Nelson A. Rockefeller and President Gerald R. Ford, and one of the Mayor-elect's most prominent black supporters.
A Rockefeller Republican with the credentials of a fiscal conservative and a social liberal, the 45-year-old Mr.
Parsons is a friend and former law partner of Mr.
Giuliani's.
He supported Mr.
Giuliani's mayoral candidacy four years ago and was a highly visible member of the inner circle in this year's campaign.


Imagination Runs Wild at Las Vegas Resorts
Motifs from ancient Egypt, Robert Louis Stevenson and Hollywood are the inspiration for three new Las Vegas resorts, all of which offer visitors considerably more than a comfortable room and a weekend of gambling.
Luxor Las Vegas, which opened on Oct. 15, is a 30-story pyramid encased in 11 acres of glass.
The hotel's Egyptian theme is reflected in the decor of its 2,526 rooms and 100,000 square foot casino.
Guests travel by boat along the River Nile from the registration desk to the elevators, which climb the pyramid at a 39-degree angle.
Other features include an obelisk that projects a laser light show in the pyramid's central atrium; seven themed restaurants, and an entertainment complex offering high tech interactive "adventures" into the past, present and future.
Double rooms at the Luxor, 3900 Las Vegas Boulevard South, are $59 to $99.
Reservations, (800) 288-1000.


In the Wings
A chicken glaze requires slightly less time to make than a beef glaze, but it offers a similar challenge.
The cook must remain vigilant and unobtrusive throughout the simmering, only to become resourceful and imaginative when using the resulting elixir.
Unlike a chicken broth, a glaze has a suppleness that enables it to replace cream in some sauces, and to moisten pasta, rice or roasted winter vegetables without cooking oil.
But for all its body and rich caramel undertones, a roasted-chicken glaze is a chameleon.
While a meat glaze will always taste stridently and irrevocably beefy (which makes it the perfect dramatic counterpoint to seafood), a chicken glaze is more mutable, more influenced by the aromatic vegetables and herbs around it.


FOCUS OF A TRIAL SHIFTS TO A TAPE
Once again a seemingly damning tape has become the focus of a high-profile trial here, this time an audiotape of a psychiatric session in which two brothers, Lyle and Erik Menendez, admit to killing their wealthy parents.
After vigorous efforts by the defense failed to bar its use in court, the tape may be played to jurors next week in what has become something of a local soap opera involving violence, incest, bizarre behavior, ostentatious wealth and courtroom tears.


Anthony Saccomano, Grace Clark
Grace deForest Clark, a daughter of Grenville Clark Jr. of Brookline, Mass., and Frances K. Clark of Cambridge, Mass., was married yesterday to Anthony Saccomano, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Aldo Saccomano of Hermitage, Pa.
The Rev.
Joseph Zorawick performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ and St.
Stephen's Church in Manhattan.
Ms.
Clark, 44, is keeping her name.
A graduate of Sarah Lawrence College, she is a painter in New York.
Her father, a lawyer, is the president of Grenville Clark Jr.
Associates, investment counselors in Boston.
Mr.
Clark's father, who died in 1967, was a planner of the New Deal in the Administration of President Franklin D. Roosevelt and the author of the draft law for World War II, among numerous public service activities.


Leaders of the Packs at the Spring Shows
Two cliques dominated the circuslike proceedings at last week's spring collections.
The International Group is made up of three models who've become celebrities -- Naomi Campbell, Kate Moss and Christy Turlington -- and two movie stars, Christian Slater and Jaye Davidson, both shown below left.


A Modigliani Showboat Shoves Off From Venice
The lines at the entrance to the Palazzo Grassi on the Grand Canal are substantial, the reason readily apparent.
The big banner draped from the graceful balcony trumpets "Modigliani," mimicking the signature of one of modernism's best loved artists.
A more mysterious figure emerges in the banner's subtitle: "From the Collection of Dr. Paul Alexandre."
Although often embroidered, Modigliani's brief life of wine, women, drugs, art and poverty is the epitome of the romantic, self-destructive bohemian artist.
His art, characterized by a sweet buoyancy that gives little hint of suffering, enhances his popularity.
More modernistic than modern, Modigliani's viewer-friendly nudes and portraits and sculpture heads reduce the human form to smooth, attenuated, yet slightly pneumatic volumes without any loss of comforting recognizability.
It's not surprising that his story, which began in Livorno, Italy, in 1884 and ended 36 years later in Paris, was translated into a play in the early 80's.
Forget that he didn't actually drink himself to death but succumbed to tuberculosis that he contracted as a teen-ager -- his name has drawing power.


Cheerleader Rights
To the Editor:
The Hempstead, Tex., Board of Education apparently learned its lesson in equal rights -- banning a student from the cheerleading squad because she is pregnant is against the law.
But from your Nov. 3 report, it looks as if Hempstead school officials need a lesson on the First Amendment.
They have imposed a gag rule on cheerleaders, who will be kicked off the squad for talking to the press.


The Exquisite Corpse Rises From the Dead
That sound you hear is the thump of curators everywhere kicking themselves for not having come up with "The Return of the Cadavre Exquis." The exhibition, at the Drawing Center in SoHo, is the sort of no-brainer that's a stroke of genius.
Three years ago, Ingrid Schaffner, an independent curator, along with the artists Kim Jones and Lenny Titzer, made the center a proposal it could hardly refuse: Why not revive the Surrealist parlor game called le cadavre exquis, or the exquisite corpse, with contemporary artists as the players?


Clinton Plan Rewards Big Insurers
To the Editor:
Hillary Rodham Clinton describes the Clinton health plan as "very threatening to those who currently control the insurance market" (front page, Nov. 2).
While she may be right to stand up to the smaller insurance companies responsible for misleading television ads, she gives the impression that the Clinton plan takes care of the problem of the private health insurance industry.


This Artist's Palette Contains Only African Mud
Black-and-white textiles, mud-dyed in the West African nation of Mali, have been seen in Manhattan for a decade -- enlivening apartments decorated by Parish Hadley, stocked at Bloomingdale's and sold by African sidewalk vendors.
So popular is the mud-dyed look that Claude Montana recently adapted it on bed sheets.
Now some of Mali's most sophisticated fabrics -- patterned with minimal stripes or innovative mixes of geometric motifs -- are exhibited in "Nakunte Diarra: Bogolanfini Artist of the Beledougou," at the Fashion Institute of Technology Museum, through Jan. 8.


Head of Police at Kennedy Is Reassigned
The head of the police force at Kennedy International Airport is being reassigned after he sent two officers to check on his boss at the hospital and then authorized overtime for them, a Port Authority spokesman said yesterday.
As of Monday, Deputy Inspector Frank Fox of the Port Authority Police Department will be working at the police force's headquarters as head of labor relations, said William Cahill of the Port Authority.
Mr.
Cahill said the authority's executive staff made the decision after Sept. 26, when Inspector Fox sent two police officers to check on the condition of Richard L. Rowe, the general manager of the airport, who was in a car accident that night.


Tinkering With the Ivories
WARNING: do not try this at home.
The inside of a piano is no place for an amateur, and the danger is not so much to the instrument as to the tinkerer's psyche.
Even Ricard de La Rosa, an expert technician, remembers his initiation as harrowing.
"The first time you tune a piano, it's about a seven- or eight-hour ordeal," Mr. de La Rosa said.
"Everything you do is basically detrimental to what needs to be done. Every step you make is just counterproductive. And of course, you have no way of knowing this. You walk for a day, so to speak, but you're still back there. Your first tuning is so ridiculous, so out of tune, you couldn't believe it."


A Promotion For Mr. Chips
"ANYBODY who believes that all you have to do to be a good teacher is to love to teach also has to believe that all you have to do to be a good surgeon is to love to cut."
-- Adam Urbanski, president of the Rochester, N.Y., Teachers Association.
Several years ago a small number of American school districts embarked on experiments based on the premise that successful teaching requires high-level skills, and that many bright people with the ability to develop such skills don't want to stay in school systems once they get there.


Making a Difference
New York is a city where only those who make the most noise get things done, and it sometimes seems that no matter how much noise one makes nothing gets done.
In the impoverished Queens neighborhood of South Jamaica, Solomon Goodrich, a kinetic community organizer, makes a lot of noise and has got some things done.
Plus, a guide to getting community action.
The City, section 13, distributed in most of New York City.


Smooth Ways to Repair Wallboard
MINOR damage to gypsum wallboard, or drywall, can be easy to repair.
With all such repairs, the difficult part is hiding the repair.
Accomplishing that requires care to keep the surface as smooth as possible.
Even so, extensive repainting is usually necessary, especially if the paint has faded and new paint does not match.
To repair fine cracks, dents and holes like those from nails, first use a whisk broom or another stiff brush to clean the area.
Fill the spot with spackling or joint compound, using a flexible-blade putty knife.
After the compound hardens, sand the area with fine or extrafine sandpaper and paint over the spot.


Helen Mazuryk, Thomas M. Mashek
Dr.
Helen Mazuryk, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dmytro Mazuryk of Wayne, N.J., was married yesterday to Thomas Meyer Mashek, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Mashek of Washington.
The Rev.
Uriy Markewych performed the ceremony at the St.
Nicholas Ukrainian Catholic Church in Passaic, N.J.
The bride, 29, is a dermatology resident at the State University at Buffalo.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received an M.D. from the New Jersey Medical School of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey.
Her father, now retired, was a machinist at Modern Hydraulics, a manufacturer of hydraulic presses in Clifton, N.J.


Fellini's World Was So Real It Was Bizarre
In a section of New York where an old Italian neighborhood intersected art galleries and chi-chi restaurants, I once turned a corner and walked into the middle of a religious procession.
Altar boys in red-and-white costumes were heading toward me carrying large candles; behind them men carried a large statue of the Blessed Virgin on their shoulders; on this gentrified street people were singing in Latin.
The one word that came to mind was Felliniesque.
Very few film makers have created a landscape so distinct that the director's name has become a generic term.
But even people who have never sat through an entire film by Federico Fellini, who died last week at the age of 73, know the meaning of Felliniesque.
It describes that moment when you walk headlong into a scene so strange you think you're hallucinating; then it turns out to be real.


Community Groups: Call the Roll
COMMUNITY organizing seems nearly always to begin with anger.
Frustration, often escalating into rage, is common when you see a drug dealer selling his stuff on your street corner each night, or an overpriced grocery store selling rotten vegetables, or a landlord repeatedly refusing to fix whatever is leaking, dripping or malfunctioning.


The Breath Test and Its Accuracy
IN New Jersey, as in most states, the vast majority of convictions for drunken driving are underpinned by the results of breath tests the police administer to determine the blood-alcohol content of drivers suspected of being intoxicated.
In New Jersey, the breath test is administered with the Breathalyzer 900 or 900A, two models of a machine that was invented in the 1950's and is now manufactured by National Draeger Inc. of Pittsburgh.
The driver blows into a tube attached to the machine, which mixes the breath sample with a chemical added to the machine for each new test.


Finding Ticket Bargains
Just because you can afford to live in New York City doesn't mean you can afford the amenities of city life.
The theater is one of them.
With the top ticket price at $65, Broadway might seem to be the province of splurging tourists and executives with expense accounts.


Fight's Over, Everyone Wins
A manufacturer's fight with the city over a plot of land at Chestnut and Atlantic Avenues is over, and for once, the peace dividends seem equitably divided.
A desperately needed replacement for Intermediate School 171 planned for the site will be constructed on schedule, Brooklyn's third largest manufacturer will get the site it needs to expand, and East New York will retain an employer with an annual payroll of $18 million.
But according to the owner of the manufacturing company, Blue Ridge Farms, it was a close call.


Forget Designer Dogs; Mutts Are the Best Pets
To the Editor:
Shame on you!
You do an entire article talking about purebred dogs without one mention of the great need in this city to find homes for all the stray mutts that have to be killed every day in our animal shelters ("My Dog, My Self," Oct. 17).


Embracing The Four F's
To the Editor:
Concerning your article "Pages of Their Own?" (Oct. 3) by Betsy Israel: If I understand her argument, women's pages, which in the past included food, fashion, and social matters (characterized by Ms. Israel as "casseroles and brides"), are to be discouraged today because, in the words of Pete Hamill, you may be "re-creating the ghetto."
In other words, the consideration governing pages designed to be attractive to women is less actual readership than it is the perception that The New York Times and similar publications have about what "smart women" want to read, and the preference of women reporters who put together such sections.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
FREEDOM AND EXTREMISTS
"Keely and Du," opening with previews at the Hartford Stage Company this week, addresses the open warfare that often exists between individuals seeking personal freedom and campaigns of social extremists organized to promulgate a cause.
The author, Jane Martin, has chosen abortion as the arena for her thesis.


Color Relationships in Valhalla, Family Ties in White Plains
WITH its prettily landscaped campus, Westchester Community College here is an exhibition in itself.
This was especially true last week when trees like blazing beacons were busy upstaging "Color Options," the show on view in the college's Fine Arts Gallery.
Unfortunately, the contest between nature and man lasts only until Nov. 10 -- or the end of fall incandescence, whichever comes first -- and in this review it is paired with another short-lived display, "Family Ties," on view at the Krasdale Foods Gallery in White Plains through Friday.


Remembering


For Information About Cancer Trials
"Some Clinical Trials of Cancer Treatments"  [ Sept. 26 ]  was a very valuable service.
We were pleased to have some of our many research protocols represented.
However, unlike all the other hospitals in the listing, the Long Island Jewish Medical Center telephone number was not included.
We would appreciate your correcting this oversight.
By calling (718) 470-8690 your readers would have prompt access to the center's specialized programs dealing with the latest protocols in treating cancer.
ITZHAK D. GOLDBERG, M.D.
Long Island Jewish Medical Center New Hyde Park


Youths Speak Out Before County Board
SHANAE ADDISON leaned over Jennifer Borger's shoulder and read the older girl a speech she had just written.
"We need to get kids to stay off the streets," said 8-year-old Shanae, who, with 116 other children, was waiting at the County Office Building here for a meeting of the Board of Legislators to begin.
Jameel Sams, who sat nearby, nodded in agreement.
"We need games," said 10-year-old Jameel, who, like Shanae, attends the Port Chester Carver Center every day after school.
"We need things for our summer camp."


Climber Likes His Mountains High and Clean
It is safe to say that climbing Mount Everest alone and without supplemental oxygen is beyond the reach of most mortals.
But for Reinhold Messner, a legendary mountaineer, it is part of being normal.
A soulful man with a full beard and a mass of curly dark brown hair, Messner developed his sure-footedness in the mountainous South Tyrol region of Italy.
"For me, adventure is so logical," he said in an interview here yesterday.
"From the time I was 10, I was dreaming of the life I have now. It is very successful because I do what I like."


On Sunday; Reflections Of a Crusader In Bay Ridge
ROSEMARIE O'KEEFE is answerable for the clubhouse politics of Bay Ridge, Brooklyn.
"Can you believe it?" said Ms.
O'Keefe, angry but grateful for this final sign from the borough Fates that her long crusade for Mr.
Giuliani could not have been better timed.
"Right under our noses while Rudy was speaking inside!"


Curbside Cars
Travelers arriving at Los Angeles International Airport can now pick up a rental car without a long hike or a bus ride.
Valet Cars International will meet passengers with a car at the curb of the arrival area.
Prices range from $149 a week for a Ford Escort to $500 a day for a Rolls-Royce.
Call (800) 358-2538.


Arithmetic of the Avenues
Hunting for an address on an avenue in Manhattan without knowing the cross street does not have to be difficult.
Just drop the last figure, divide by 2 and add or subtract as indicated below.
The answer is the nearest numbered cross street.
This key does not apply to Broadway below Eighth Street because of the many street with names rather than numbers.


Chester's Many Gifts Of History
THE city of Chester, in northern England, is an enormous gift box, overflowing with nearly 2,000 years of history.
Holding it all together is its wall, unique in Britain and two miles in length, which encircles the city like a ribbon.
A leisurely stroll of an hour or two will take you around the top of the wall, but several days are necessary to explore the city.
Much of the historic center of Chester, a bustling Cheshire town of 120,000, is limited to pedestrians, and its Tourist Information Center, in the main square roughly opposite the cathedral, is the point of departure for several organized walking tours.
It is there that my husband, Tom, and I join a handful of other, mostly British, tourists, to set off with a Roman legionary, kitted out in helmet and articulated armor and carrying javelin and spear, to investigate one of Chester's earliest incarnations, the Roman fortress of Deva.


In Twist, Protectionism Is Used to Sell Trade Pact
Increasingly desperate to win support in Congress for the North American Free Trade Agreement, the Clinton Administration has resorted to the odd tactic of selling a free-trade pact by highlighting its protectionist provisions.
These provisions, highly technical and buried in annexes, are designed to insure that the agreement eliminates taxes and other trade barriers for Canadian, American and Mexican factories, but not for goods produced by their foreign rivals.
The provisions not only require that goods be assembled in North America but also that many manufactured products, ranging from cars and television sets to clothing and shoes, be made from North American materials.


Gretchen Craft, James Rubin
Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Craft of Kansas City, Mo., have announced the engagement of their daughter Gretchen Anne Craft to James Samuel Rubin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Rubin of New York and Washington.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Craft, 27, graduated from Yale University, where she is a third-year law student.
Her father is a partner in Craft, Fridkin &amp; Rhyne, a Kansas City law firm.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
108.25
108.55
123.44
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6944
1.6870
1.5423
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2916
1.3204
1.2388
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.4834
1.4817
1.5565
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold$376.75
$368.50
$335.80
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Attention, All Bargain Hunters
The place to be on the Upper West Side last week was 79th and Broadway.
More than 50 people huddled outside the discount store Filene's Basement at 7:45 Thursday morning, and their numbers swelled as the store's grand opening drew closer.
"Do you think they'll have good stuff?" Ruth Leonard asked her friend Eileen Katz as they waited for the 8 A.M. opening.
"They better let us in soon."


Computer Games With Principles
"LET early education be a sort of amusement," Plato wrote.
But as many educators say, this fine line is not easily walked.
If a lesson is too playful, the need for thinking falls away; too book-intensive, and the current generation of so-called visual learners quickly loses interest.
But this fine line has proved something of a cakewalk for Maxis, a California computer game company that started out with no intention of serving the educational market.
The founder of Maxis, Jeff Braun, set out with a much more self-interested mission in the mid-1980's.
He had been experimenting with video games, but found most too trivial -- "So what if you shoot up a spaceship?" But he saw a business and education opportunity in developing games "that a yuppie adult like me would enjoy," he said.
He nicknamed his venture "Games for Jeff."


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Ivanisevic Tops Edberg Goran Ivanisevic and Andrei Medvedev gained the final of the $2.1 million Paris Open yesterday with contrasting victories.
Ivanisevic's power performance included 23 aces in beating Stefan Edberg, 4-6, 7-6 (7-4), 7-6 (7-3).
Ivanisevic had defeated the world's No. 1-ranked player, Pete Sampras, in the quarterfinals.
Medvedev rallied to beat Arnaud Boetsch, 2-6, 7-6 (7-3), 7-5. (AP)


Taxi Panel Sets Hearing On Possible Fare Increase
The Taxi and Limousine Commission is planning to hold a hearing this month on whether to impose a fare increase by early next year, a commission official said yesterday.
The hearing, scheduled for Nov. 30, will consider the possibility of raising fares for the first time since January 1990, said Bruce Schaller, director of policy development for the commission.


Topics of The Times; Hating New York -- and Loving It
New Yorkers complained loudly about their city during the recent mayoral campaign -- and they found plenty to be unhappy about in responding to a recent New York Times/CBS News Poll.
Sixty-five percent viewed the economy as bad; 59 percent found the city less safe than four years ago; 67 percent said race relations were poor; 70 percent didn't like the schools.
The litany goes on and on, until finally the reader asks: Then why does anyone live here?


Is 'Rusalka' A Fairy Tale? Yes. And No.
Be honest now.
You hear that a piece that can be billed as Beloved National Opera is coming to town.
Does your pulse quicken?
Are you immediately impelled to storm the box office?
In fact, those might be entirely appropriate responses in the case of Dvorak's "Rusalka," which has its Metropolitan Opera premiere on Thursday evening, in a production from the Vienna State Opera, designed by Gunther Schneider-Siemssen and directed by Otto Schenk.


A Raucous Assessment Hearing
IT was billed as a town meeting.
Less than a week before election day, Alfred Del Vecchio, Mayor of White Plains, convened a panel to discuss reassessment in the city.
In front of an audience of about 250 people and with live cable coverage, Mr.
Del Vecchio, who lost re-election last week to the office he held for 18 years, told residents that if the state forced the city to reassess, their taxes would likely double.
"If we follow the state's rules, a lot of people are going to be hurt," Mr.
Del Vecchio shouted.
"We will be going back to living two or three families in an apartment. You are not going to be able to afford your own homes, your own apartments!"


A Playwright Shoots a Film (In Its Heart)
The theater and the cinema are not necessarily mortal enemies, but you wouldn't know it if you listen to playwrights on the subject of movie making.
Playwrights can get pretty riled up when they write about Hollywood -- land of the ruthless, the craven, the pea-brained, the face-lifted.
Just think of such scathing works as David Mamet's "Speed-the-Plow," Arthur Kopit's "Road to Nirvana" and David Rabe's "Hurly-Burly." For that matter, back up a few decades to Kaufman and Hart's giddy "Once in a Lifetime," in which three vaudevillians head west to try their hand at the talkies, make every mistake possible on the set and turn out a blockbuster anyway.


Anne M. Lafave, Andrew T. Mauck
Anne Marie Lafave, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur J. Lafave Jr. of Shaker Heights, Ohio, was married yesterday to Andrew Todd Mauck, a son of Ward L. Mauck of New York and Louise G. Moore of Somers, N.Y.
The Rev.
John G. Hughes 2d performed the ceremony at the First Parish Congregational Church in Manchester, Mass.
Mrs.
Mauck, a graduate of Kenyon College, is a tour-marketing director in Boston for the International Management Group, a Cleveland sports management company.
Her father is the company's chief financial officer.


A Journalist's Legacy Is Left Unclaimed


Forget Designer Dogs; Mutts Are the Best Pets
To the Editor:
You say that no dogs are allowed on Roosevelt Island, and I wondered how residents there feel about not being able to see their children own dogs.
You say that the rule exists because the developers want it "fastidiously clean." One detects a lack of sensitivity among people who dislike dogs so much and who are so ignorant about the positive contribution made by pets to the well-being of the elderly, the invalids and the singles whose lives are enlivened by the love given by their pets.
LILLIAN L. SHAPIRO Manhattan


Deborah Kaplan, Neal Beylus
Judy and Stanley Kaplan of Brooklyn have announced March wedding plans for their daughter, Deborah Kaplan, and Neal Beylus, the son of Rena and Leon Beylus of Miami Beach.
Ms.
Kaplan, 26, is an associate in securities research at Lehman Brothers, the investment bank in New York.
She graduated from Barnard College.
Her father is a systems director at The New York Times.


String Quartets, Beethoven to Bartok
FOUR string quartets and three orchestras lead the way to another busy musical week.
Battell House Recital Hall in Norfolk is the site of the finale of the "Autumn Leaves" chamber series in which the Winston Quartet will perform Beethoven's F minor Quartet and, with the pianist Marc Ryser, Cesar Franck's Quintet.
For reservations or directions to the 2 P.M. program, call 432-1966.
Members of the Muir Quartet, alumni of Wardwell Fellowship at Yale, play Haydn, Bartok and Dvorak on their return visit to New Haven, at 8 P.M. on Tuesday in Sprague Memorial Hall (432-4158).
On Wednesday at 8 the Orion Quartet performs Beethoven and Schubert as well as Fritz Kreisler's only string quartet at Jorgensen Auditorium in Storrs (486-4226).
On Friday at 8 the Laurentian String Quartet offers Beethoven, Barber and Ravel at the Meeting House in Chester (526-4671).


Smooth Ways to Repair Wallboard
MINOR damage to gypsum wallboard, or drywall, can be easy to repair.
With all such repairs, the difficult part is hiding the repair.
Accomplishing that requires care to keep the surface as smooth as possible.
Even so, extensive repainting is usually necessary, especially if the paint has faded and new paint does not match.
To repair fine cracks, dents and holes like those from nails, first use a whisk broom or another stiff brush to clean the area.
Fill the spot with spackling or joint compound, using a flexible-blade putty knife.
After the compound hardens, sand the area with fine or extrafine sandpaper and paint over the spot.


Enter Bellhop, Stage Right
PROBLEM at the Paramount hotel: The front desk clerk just left for Europe on a modeling assignment.
The food and beverage waiter ran off with a part in a Broadway show.
Where to advertise for new help?
Playbill and Variety.
"Ian tends to stay away from hiring people who have hotel experience," said Nancy Assuncao, the publicity agent for Ian Schrager.
Mr.
Schrager owns the Paramount, 235 West 46th Street in Manhattan, and its sister hotels, the Royalton in New York and the Delano in Miami Beach.
"Ian says that people with hotel experience are too cynical. They have too many ideas."


Chapel of Love
To the Editor:
Paul Horgan's three-page mockery of the chapel tomb hand-built for D. H. Lawrence by his widow and her third husband ("Adventures of a Funerary Urn: How the Sun Finally Set on D. H. Lawrence," Sept. 26) reminds me of the fable of the clown who performed his act before the altar.
Some thought it blasphemy; the aware knew it was the greatest act of love of which he was capable.
RICHARD T. TENCH  Portland, Ore.


Profile: Laura S. Scher; She Took One Look At the Age of Greed And Made a Quick Left
LAURA S. SCHER graduated from Harvard Business School near the top of her class in 1985, smack in the middle of the Decade of Greed.
Most of her classmates were seduced by the gaudy salaries and vainglorious life style of Wall Street.
But not Ms.
Scher, who was "put off by the idea of making so much money, by the insane hours, the New York life and the cultishness of it" and whose career goals included "wanting to do something I could believe in."


Excuse Me; I Must Have Missed Part of the Movie
SOMETIMES cultural events conspire.
First there was the "60 Minutes" expose of the contemporary art world, unleashing a flood of rabid debate over what is art and what is hokum, what is criticism and what is willful idiocy.
Then, last week, Federico Fellini died, unleashing a flood of paeans, eulogies and fawning obituaries.
In the, pardon the expression, wake of these events, it occurs to me that there are two kinds of Philistines in the world, and that most of us are one kind or the other.
The first kind says: I don't know if it's art, but I know what I like.
Right, Mr.
Safer?


Key West
To the Editor: "What's Doing in Key West" (Oct. 10) omitted one of the most interesting places in the city.
"What to See" should have included President Harry Truman's winter White House.
Full of memorabilia, it deserves mention not only for itself, but also because of Truman's current stature, exploited by both President Bush and President Clinton in 1992 and sustained in a recent best-selling biography.
JAMES A. RAWLEY  Lincoln, Neb.


Bread Lines At Canada's Universities
WHEN Robear Alain, a fourth-year Native Studies major at Canada's University of Alberta, in Edmonton, runs out of money he goes to a campus bread line operated by students.
Its staff hands out 30 bundles of food a week, serving a regular monthly clientele of about 45 students.
Mr.
Alain, one of the regulars, is a 45-year-old former aircraft mechanic looking for a new career who has discovered that his $7,800 student loan and summer work savings do not keep him fed.


The Oracle Has Spoken. Come Again?
The entrance hall of paneled wood and stained glass at Harvard's Sanders Theater serves notice that nothing here is to be taken lightly.
And Mr.
Berio made sure that his first lecture of the academic year, in a series of six entitled "Remembering the Future," was as solemn and weighty as the setting.
In a tangled web of allusion and suggestion, the talk, gnomically called "Formations," concerned itself with the ways musical experiences "invite us to revise or suspend our relation with the past."


Holyfield Wins Title in Bout Marked by the Bizarre
Evander Holyfield survived history, a younger, bigger opponent, and a bizarre delay after a parachutist landed in the ropes in a fight he was dominating, to regain his heavyweight title tonight from Riddick Bowe.
The 31-year-old Holyfield won a majority decision -- two of the three judges voted for him, while the third called it a draw -- to become only the third fighter to reclaim the heavyweight title from the man who dethroned him.


SUNDAY, November 7, 1993; HASTA LA VISTA, BAMBI
Hollywood never gets it right.
In "The Last Action Hero," and before that in "Red Heat," Arnold Schwarzenegger packs a Desert Eagle Magnum (.44 caliber).
The gun also appears in "True Romance," "Demolition Man" and the new Steven Seagal film, "On Deadly Ground." Street thugs, attuned to cinema fashions in weaponry, love the huge handgun, although only a few can afford the $1,249 price for the new .50-caliber model, $500 extra for the 24-karat gold finish.
Unfortunately, anyone who has the idea this is a gun for the street is terribly mistaken.
According to John Risdall, president of Magnum Research, which designed and sells the gun, the Desert Eagle is meant to be used for target shooting and hunting.
Oops!
David Petzal, executive editor of Field &amp; Stream magazine, confirms that with the .50-caliber pistol you can hunt and kill "anything on this continent." But since the gun propels a half-inch diameter bullet with 50 percent more muzzle energy than a .44 Magnum, you wouldn't want to shoot anything much smaller than elk (one opinion) or deer (another).
A rabbit hit with such a bullet would simply explode.


M. J. Wildrick, James C. Thomas
Margaret Jeanne Wildrick, a daughter of the Rev.
Dr. and Mrs.
Kenyon J. Wildrick of Millington, N.J., was married yesterday to James Conrad Thomas, the son of Mrs.
James Rodney Crombie of New York and Conrad Thomas of Ventura, Calif.
The bride's father, a Congregational minister, officiated at Morrow Memorial Methodist Church in Maplewood, N.J.
Ms.
Wildrick, 29, is keeping her name.
She is the director of business development at Gateway Management Consulting in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Williams College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a master's degree in comparative literature from the University of Edinburgh.
Her father is the senior minister of Pilgrim Congregational Church in Short Hills, N.J.


SUNDAY, November 7, 1993; VEGGING OUT
Pity the fan who wanted a disk by Smashing Pumpkins but forgot the name and bought one by Screaming Trees (it was just awful).
No wonder.
Other new botanical bands are Blind Melon, Lemonheads, Cypress Hill, Gin Blossoms and the Cranberries.


From Smoky Saigon Bars To Stateside Concerts
When the folk singers who perform in the In Country Revue talk about unfriendly theaters, take their word for it.
They mean downright deadly.
Theirs was the theater of war in Southeast Asia; their songs were the lyrical log of days spent slogging through rice paddies, nighttime bombing runs through fierce flak and longing for home the rest of the time.
They are the ultimate 60's survivors.


Beyond the Marathon: Jogging for Your Life
ANYONE who has ever jogged through the streets of the city without a police escort is permitted mixed feelings about next week's New York Marathon.
Have a partly sunny day.
The marathon, written in ancient Greece and given a long out-of-town tryout in Boston, is now clearly a New York show; a pageant of symbols, disruptive, inspirational, painful, bonding.
It is a subverted apotheosis.
The marathon is to jogging as Thanksgiving is to eating, Christmas to giving, New Year's Eve to promises, all holidays that have come to exalt, in sometimes grotesque excess, simple techniques of survival.
Make no mistake: jogging is survival in the city, although a true believer must respect such other Physical Exercise sects as swimming, walking, pumping iron, Stairmastering and my own backup faith, yoga.
Perhaps we call it working out because it is more about taming the tics and the tygers than about actually getting into shape.
Exercise in the city, like most everything else in the city except stimulation and takeout, is harder to order up than it is in places with dirt roads and country clubs and town pools.
And exercise is critical to coping; if you can't burn the toxins, they will burn you.


Tigers Are Getting Back in the Hunt as They Keep Their Stars
Bill Lajoie, a Florida-based scout for the Atlanta Braves, was a visitor at the general managers' meetings in Naples, Fla., last week.
He was a general manager himself not long ago, and some highlights of the week were particularly interesting and meaningful to him.
As he watched from a distance, the Detroit Tigers signed Travis Fryman to a five-year, $25 million contract and Alan Trammell and Eric Davis each to a one-year, $3 million contract.
Lajoie was the general manager of the Tigers when they didn't spend money like that.


What's the Problem? He Won't Say.
In "The Remains of the Day," the Merchant-Ivory film that opened on Friday, Anthony Hopkins plays the butler at a stately English manor.
Emma Thompson is the housekeeper.
They have worked together and lived under the same roof for years.
He is truly, madly, deeply in love with her, and she with him.
But he has never told her.
They have never exchanged more than the most proper pleasantries.
In a climactic scene, she (not for the first time) tries to back him into an emotional corner by telling him she has agreed to marry another man.
His only response is to inform her of some dusting that needs to be done upstairs and to bid her goodnight.
What kind of man is this?
Repressed.
Incapable of acting on his feelings.
Paralyzed by an impacted libido.
Frozen.
More importantly, what kind of movie hero is this?
All too typical, it seems.
Typical not just of the leading men in tony period pieces like "The Remains of the Day" or "The Age of Innocence," in which Newland Archer (played by Daniel Day-Lewis) lets the love of his life pass him by.
It is equally prevalent in big-time, big-name movies like this summer's hit "Sleepless in Seattle" and in "My Life" (with Michael Keaton and Nicole Kidman), which opens on Friday.
And it crops up in offbeat films like "What's Eating Gilbert Grape," which opens next month.


Stiff Premium To Travel Alone
DIANA L. DIAMOND of Palo Alto, Calif., a hospital administrator, signed up with Globus Tours for a trip to India last summer.
The price of the 19-day trip, with air fare and land arrangements, was $3,530.
This, as is typical of tour operators' offerings, was the price for one person based on the traveler's sharing a room with a companion.
For Ms.
Diamond to make the trip by herself, she would have to pay $1,026 additional as a "single supplement."
Although a premium of 29 percent seems stiff, it is not unusual.
Sometimes, as in this case, it is that percentage of the air and land charges; other times it applies to land arrangements only.


Corrections
A biographical note on page 1 of The Times Book Review today with a review of "Genet: A Biography" misstates the reviewer's title.
She is head of the department of foreign languages and literatures at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.


Mad, Mad World of Hitting the Wall
Let's get this much straight.
They are only tears of joy at the finish line because the madness is over.
The body gets the rest of the day off.
No more blisters, for the time being.
No more cramps.
No more dizziness, nausea, lightheadedness, diarrhea, vomiting, chills, headaches, numbness and/or those pained expressions that make you very unattractive.
Gee, isn't running a marathon fun?


Off-Season Training


Police Act Against Loitering Near John Jay High
There is a stronger police presence around John Jay High School these days.
But it was not a result of the student melee that erupted Oct. 22.
Instead, the local police precinct had increased its patrols one week earlier, in response to complaints from storeowners whose businesses are along Seventh Avenue near John Jay.
The storeowners were objecting to the way groups of students lingered, playing radios and sometimes getting into shoving matches in front of their stores, which tended to frighten off some customers.


Treatment for Drugs Should Alter Behavior
To the Editor:
In "Stigmatized Treatment" (letter, Oct. 31), Beverly Feigelman is a bit disingenuous.
The stigma is attached to substance abuse, not to its treatment.
Nobody becomes a substance abuser by accident of birth, force of circumstance or bad luck.
It takes a conscious and willful act.
Cocaine abuse is not only stupid, but also illegal.


Building's Neighbors Seek to Change Rules
Residents and community leaders, angered by the 17-story building that is rising on Broadway between 67th and 68th Streets, are pushing for an unprecedented zoning rule that would forbid similar structures in the future.
At issue is Lincoln Square, a 47-floor building being developed by Millennium Partners and Lincoln Square Partners, that will include the Ansonia Post Office, 10 movie theaters and an eight-story health club.
Many residents have criticized not only the size of the 545-foot building but its appearance.


Young Playwright Feels Critics' Stings
JONATHAN TOLINS is getting over it.
But he is still trying to figure out why the New York reviews of "Twilight of the Golds," his first Broadway play, were so mean after all those encouraging words from critics in Los Angeles and Washington.
For Mr.
Tolins, 27, it is consoling to know that his kind of misery has had stellar company in theatrical lore.
Terrence McNally and Tony Kushner suffered critical trouncing with their first plays.
They had similar stories to tell, Mr.
Tolins said.


On a Caper


The First Antecedent
To the Editor:
As a film scholar, I am moved to comment on Lauren David Peden's article, " '20 Bucks,' a Film 58 Years Aborning"  [ Oct. 17 ] .
Ms.
Peden mentions that the screenplay, written in 1935 by the Hungarian producer Endre Bohem, is now being made by the screenwriter's son, Les.
The premise of the script involves the peregrinations of a $20 bill as it passes from one hand to another.


SUNDAY, November 7, 1993; TUNING UP
To prepare for I.Q. tests, vegetable rock is not the music of choice.
In a recent experiment it was Mozart's work that improved students' scores.
But the improvement didn't last.
Presumably, someone has found music that has a more permanent effect.
Toni Morrison's recent Nobel Prize and the title of her latest book, "Jazz," suggest one link between music and genius, and a direction to look for others: a survey of 1993 Nobelists.
All this year's winners were called except for the Peace Prize winners, since the experiment in question tested I.Q., not wisdom.
The replies:


Miss Clark And Mr. Shachoy
Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Thomas Clark of Rye, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Meredith Ann Clark to Christopher Mahan Shachoy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman J. Shachoy of Boston.
Miss Clark, 24, graduated from Cornell University.
She is a retail operations consultant with Arthur Andersen &amp; Company in Boston.
Her father is the president of Dubin Clark &amp; Company, an investment firm in Greenwich, Conn.
Her mother, Nancy Clark, is the president of the Clark Design Group, interior designers in Rye.


Crime
Whatever Pete Hautman was doing before he wrote DRAWING DEAD (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21), he was wasting his time.
He's got those good old writing genes, and the proof is in this first novel, a rollicking crime caper about a wacky bunch of con artists in desperate pursuit of a cache of vintage comic books, supposedly worth zillions.
The outrageous schemes that these shady characters devise to outwit and outmaneuver one another for the bogus treasure are brilliant enough to dazzle the players in novels by the likes of Joe Gores and Elmore Leonard.
For that matter, even the automobiles have personality.


OCT. 31-NOV. 5: AIDS Scare; Infected Blood Supplies Distributed in Germany
Germans were urged not to panic last week after officials confirmed that a company had distributed blood products tainted with the virus that causes AIDS.
Thousands of hemophiliacs and patients who had undergone surgery in recent years, some of them highly distraught, swamped the switchboards of hospitals and health agencies.
Minister of Health Horst Seehofer recommended that anyone concerned about possible exposure submit to an AIDS test, which he said would be paid for by health insurance.
The number of people possibly exposed is believed to run into the millions.


This Land Is My Land
THE WRATH OF NATIONS Civilization and the Furies of Nationalism.
By William Pfaff. 256 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.


GIULIANI PROMISES NEW TACK ON DRUGS AND CITY SPENDING
Sending a signal about some early priorities of his administration, Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani said he would issue two executive orders soon after taking office to enforce budget discipline among his department heads and to make clear to police officers that they can make street arrests of drug dealers.
The budget order, he said, would place agency spending under the Mayor's review every three months, to insure that "the budget we agree on is the budget we will stick to."


A Law Firm Open to All
To the Editor:
Regarding "For the Father of Securities Law, Yet Another Milestone" (Sept. 26), this firm for years has been honored by the fact that the William Nelson Cromwell chair it funded at Harvard Law School is held by so distinguished a scholar and lawyer as Louis Loss.
The article says that Professor Loss views it as "a delicious irony" that although he holds that chair, he would have been denied a job at Sullivan &amp; Cromwell because "the big Wall Street firms were closed to Jews."


LITTLE BIG PEOPLE
Too many youngsters are being raised by surrogate parents like nannies, baby sitters and housekeepers, while, in the more deprived homes of the city, day-care personnel, grandmothers, aunts, brothers and sisters have to provide for the emotional and social needs of children.
Family life involving parenting by parents is absent from too many homes.
STANLEY SEIDMAN New York, N.Y.


INSIDE
Holyfield Beats Bowe
In a bout at times bizarre, Evander Holyfield beat Riddick Bowe to regain boxing's heavyweight title.
Some copies of SportsSunday went to press before the fight ended.
Section 8.  133-1 Horse Triumphs
Arcangues provided the biggest winning return ever in the Breeders' Cup, $269.20 for a $2 bet.
Section 8.


Breathing Room
No real-estate ad would ever waste words on GRT HALL alongside such obvious assets as RVR VUS, WBFPL and HRWDFLRS.
And yet, these neither-here-nor-there connectors are truly indispensable in making a home livable.
They are an urban dweller's passage to sanity.
I should know.
I'm in the process of moving from a dumbbell plan with a wondrously wide hall linking the living room and bedroom to a renovated rectangle in which all the rooms connect directly like so many extruded tubes.
On paper, the new place has everything over the old, from high ceilings to the above-mentioned WBFPL.
But it's got no hall.
The entire apartment is laid out before you on a hardwood platter.
There's no unfolding, no mystery.
Modern architects call that honest; they're the ones who invented the open plan to promote the notion that life laid bare is somehow more efficient.
And that's fine for vacation houses and at-a-glance date books.
But city folk need more of a bang for their buck, if only as a subliminal substitute for square footage.


Oncologists and the Thompson Cancer Center
To the Editor:
As a medical ontologist, I read "A Father's Dream, a Son's Nightmare" (Oct. 24) with interest.
Even as a physician not involved in financial arrangements such as those described, I believe that more balance and insight is needed.


For Its Bicentennial, Louvre Gets a New Look
THE newest and most ambitious chapter in the Louvre's modern history is about to begin.
On Nov. 18, France's grand museum will wrap itself in pomp and glitter to celebrate its bicentennial and announce that it has become the largest cultural complex in the world.
In one fell swoop, it will double its exhibition space to a bit more than 70,000 square yards (almost 15 acres) by opening a mammoth new wing flanking the Rue de Rivoli, occupied for close to a century by the Finance Ministry.
Architects have redone the ministry's seven office floors, stripped off paneling and false ceilings and transformed them into three floors of dazzling exhibition space.
Three open courtyards have been covered with glass and rebuilt as multilevel display cases for the museum's monumental sculpture collection.


Programming For Reputation. And Profits.
About halfway through the Emmy Awards ceremony this year, HBO's chairman, Michael Fuchs, turned to a colleague and said, "Hey, I think we've done pretty well. I think we're third." In fact, HBO, a premium cable channel known primarily for unedited first-run movies, won 17 Emmys, beating out all four broadcast networks.
Fewer than 20 million homes subscribe to HBO (compared with 55 million homes that receive basic cable and nearly 94 million that get broadcast television), so a lot of people may not have noticed HBO busily carving a niche with its unexpurgated, edgy and socially conscious original programming.
But on Emmy night earlier this fall, the success of its strategy was clear.
When the nominees for best made-for-television movie were read, four of the five were HBO productions.
Two of them, "Stalin" and "Barbarians at the Gate," tied for the award.


Stephanie Miller, James F. Laborde
Stephanie Alicia Miller, the editor in the information products group of Fitch Investors Service Inc., was married yesterday to James Ferrier Laborde, an account executive at Katz Independent Television, a media representative.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
James P. Walsh performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Peace Church in New York.
The bride, 29, graduated from Drew University.
She is a daughter of James and Joan Miller of Barnsboro, N.J.
Her father is the president of the Tracy-Val Corporation and a vice president of the Gentry Machine Corporation, record manufacturers in Somerdale, N.J.


Welfare Moms Take Kids to the Campus
BEING a single mother on welfare just got easier for Gloria Raja.
She has enrolled in a program at Kingsborough Community College in Brooklyn that allows her and others like her to to attend while their young children attend a combined nursery and elementary school on the campus.


The Quiz
According to a recent Gallup Poll, one in seven Americans cannot find the United States on a blank map of the world.
Geography has been largely ignored in America's school curriculums for the last 50 years.
But next year some states will require high school geography for admission to state colleges.
These questions test your geography skills.
Warning: Some are tricky! (Answers on page 14)
1. Is Reno, Nev., east or west of Los Angeles?
2.
Going from the Atlantic Ocean to the Pacific through the Panama Canal, what is your direction of travel -- east or west?
3. Which state goes farther north -- Maine or Idaho?
4. Which of the 50 United States are farthest north, south, east and west?
5. Which city is farthest west -- Pensacola, Fla., Indianapolis or Louisville, Ky.?
6.
The 48 contiguous United States stretch about 3,000 miles from east to west; so does China.
The mainland United States has four time zones.
How many does China have?
7. Which city is farther east -- New Orleans or Chicago?
8. Which country in Europe, with its dependencies, has the largest area?
9.
What is the most popular name for American municipalities: Jefferson, Washington, Lincoln, Fairview, Franklin, Midway or Oak Grove?
10.
Give the present names of these three former colonial holdings in South America: British Guiana, Dutch Guiana and French Guiana.
11. Of the United States' 10 highest mountains, how many are in Alaska?
12.
In which of the United States will you find the oldest continuously inhabited location?
13.
Match the following countries and their currencies: Zimbabwe, Guinea-Bissau, the Sudan, Tunisia, Turkey, Djibouti, Uganda; dollar, peso, pound, dinar, lira, franc, shilling.
Seventh Graders Should Ace These:
1. Name four countries or colonies where Portuguese is an official language.
2.
For each of the six inhabited continents, name one country where English is a major language.
3. Name four countries where Islam is a major religion.
4.
Name four countries that contain, or partly contain, large deserts.
For a bonus, make them four countries on four different continents.
5. Name four countries that have rain forests.


Fordham Tops Colgate To End 10-Game Slide
Fordham 17, Colgate 13
Quarterback Joe Moorehead, who threw two touchdown passes, combined with John Strauss on a 17-yard toss with 50 seconds remaining as Fordham overtook Colgate, 17-13, yesterday afternoon at Jack Coffey Field in the Bronx, in a Patriot League game to end a 10-game losing streak.


Carter McIlvaine, Timothy Everitt
Carter Reynolds McIlvaine, the daughter of Virginia R. McIlvaine and Leighton H. McIlvaine Jr., both of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Timothy Spencer Everitt, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles B. Everitt of Manchester, Mass.
The Rev.
Terance Elsberry officiated at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Riverside, Conn.
Mrs.
Everitt, 24, is the national sales coordinator for Weebok, a children's division of Reebok International, in Stoughton, Mass.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father is a managing director of Furman Selz Capital Management Inc., an investment management company in New York.
Her mother is the assistant vice president of the Sound Beach Financial Corporation, a mortgage company in Riverside.


'Extreme Conditions'
To the Editor:
It is all too easy for writers living elsewhere to see what is so radically amiss with policies and conditions in a state as remote as Alaska, and many books and much money have been made of this.
Yet much of what Ann Crittenden refers to in her review of John Strohmeyer's book remains true: facts and abuses that many intelligent people living here would acknowledge.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
SOCIAL HISTORY LAND OF DESIRE Merchants, Power, and the Rise of a New American Culture.
By William Leach.
Pantheon, $30.


ITALY RE-EXAMINES 1978 MORO SLAYING
Fifteen years after terrorists kidnapped and killed Aldo Moro in postwar Italy's most enduring national trauma, investigators have been confronted with new evidence suggesting that the wrong man was convicted of the killing and that key testimony in court cases was false.
The Moro case is as obsessive for Italians as John F. Kennedy's assassination is for Americans.
And like the killing in Dallas in 1963, the 1978 slaying of the respected former Prime Minister has produced an endless stream of conspiracy theories.


Not Home? Here's a Solution For $129.95
My A.T.&amp; T. Digital Answering System 1343 cost $129.95 and is quietly inoffensive looking.
If it lasts longer than a year, I'll be satisfied.
Technophobes, however, should bear in mind that more evolved models will inevitably appear at lower prices.


Dismissals Divide a Parish
Tensions in St.
Brigid's parish boiled over last week as more than 100 students and parents protested the pastor's dismissal of the elementary school's principal and three teachers.
After a candlelight protest on Wednesday, Dr.
Catherine Hickey, the Catholic schools superintendent, met with about 100 parents in a closed session at the school, on Avenue B at Seventh Street in the East Village.
Nora Murphy, an archdiocese spokeswoman, said that Dr.
Hickey upheld the actions of the pastor, the Rev.
George J. Kuhn.
She said that the dismissals -- of Maureen Delaney, Debra Condon, Monica Medina and Angela Gallombardo -- stemmed mostly from a lack of student discipline, specifically at a mass that students disrupted.
She also said that some of the faculty "were fomenting the problem" -- a charge they denied.


At Kennedy Airport, the Wary Keep the Eyes on the Luggage
THE luggage carousel lurched into action, and so did Jeff Greenfield of Rockville Centre.
Dropping a telephone receiver in midsentence, Mr.
Greenfield raced over to the conveyor belt that had begun spewing forth luggage from an American Airlines flight from Los Angeles.
The first item out looked like a body bag.
"That's mine!" Mr.
Greenfield shouted to anyone who might think otherwise.
Pulling his rented luggage cart into position, he tenderly lifted the huge navy blue canvas bag off the carousel.


A Peripatetic King Is Timman's Undoing
JAN TIMMAN'S biggest debacle in his International Chess Federation championship match with Anatoly Karpov was Game 15, played Oct. 28 in Jakarta, Indonesia.
While the Dutchman has always been particularly creative in developing strategy, he also comes up at times with moves that look like material for his future nightmares.
These lapses are random and rarely conform to any discernible pattern.
If there was any quirk that he repeated in this match, it was an early exposure of his king.
Timman began walking his king in Game 1 and here in Game 15 it was still going where it shouldn't.
This time Karpov meted out beautifully severe punishment.


Purple Cows and Literacy
CORWIN Jacobs, a Cornell University senior, has discovered that a purple cow may be the ideal companion for a teen-ager who is learning to read.
As part of the university's Cooperative Extension Program, which performs community services within New York state, he and 10 other Cornell students tutored 50 teen-agers in the Bronx and Harlem last summer as part of a program to teach literacy through nutrition and other fields or activities closely tied to daily life.
The best way to a teen-ager's brain, they find, may be through his stomach.


'Does Your Yak Bite?'
One-upsmanship for phrasemakers is available in the form of a three-volume, 18-cassette language course in Tibetan developed by a University of Virginia team.
"Fluent Tibetan: A Proficiency Oriented Learning System, Novice and Intermediate Levels," focuses on the modern colloquial language.
The price is $250 plus $10 shipping.
Snow Lion Publications, (800) 950-0313.


CRACKDOWN FACED BY UKRAINIAN CULT
Ukrainian officials have begun a crackdown against members of a religious cult whose leader has pledged to stage her own crucifixion and resurrection this month outside the main cathedral.
Alarmed by reports that the followers of the White Brotherhood were flocking to Kiev to join their leader in a mass suicide, the police have detained more than 600 cult members in jails and hospitals, and confiscated pamphlets and posters that proclaim that the end of the world is near.


BENEFITS
Sunday Constitutional  TONIGHT -- Henry Cisneros, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, and Roger Rosenblatt, the writer and television commentator, will speak and Harry Belafonte will sing at an evening to raise money for People for the American Way, a nonpartisan organization that seeks to protect constitutional rights.
Norman Lear will present the organization's annual award to James Rouse, the developer of the South Street Seaport in New York, Harbor Place in Baltimore and the Quincy Market in Boston.
Cocktails at 6 P.M. at the Waldorf-Astoria will be followed by dinner and the program, which also includes John Rothman's portrayal of H. L. Mencken and dancing to Peter Duchin and his orchestra.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 944-5820.
Cystic Fibrosis  MONDAY -- The Grand Ballroom of the Pierre will be turned into a Paris Street scene at the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation's benefit saluting Edith Piaf.
Vivian Reed, a cabaret singer, will perform.
The evening will begin with a 6:30 reception, followed by dinner and entertainment.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 986-8783.


Poverty Is No Excuse, But It Doesn't Help
To the Editor:
In his Oct. 10 essay, "Alibis for Educational Failure," Michael Meyers criticized the new school performance scale that "allows for social and economic differences among students' families." According to Mr.
Meyers, looking at differences among students' families provides a way of "letting teachers off the hook."
Indeed, there is ample evidence to support Mr.
Meyers's view that higher teacher expectations and changed learning environments produce improved student outcomes.
But there is also ample evidence that other variables have considerable impact.
The amount spent per student is just one of these variables; it is reflected in leaky roofs and peeling paint versus well-maintained and cheery buildings, in class size or teacher-student ratio, in availability of guidance counselors and social workers, and in access to computers and books.


In the Region/Connecticut; Bridgeport Hopes a Dowdy Mall Can Spur Rebirth
LINED up along Broad Street in downtown Bridgeport are three sites, two to be developed, one already developed, that the city is betting will form the nucleus of its rebirth.
The centerpiece is the mostly empty, 450,000-square-foot Hi-Ho Mall, on 12 acres between Lafayette Boulevard and Broad Street.
It was chosen by the state as the site for a $40 million project that will include a new Housatonic Community-Technical College, a state police barracks and offices for several state agencies that are scattered around Bridgeport in rented space.


Corrections
A diagram on Oct. 24 about the cloning of human embryos misstated part of the process.
The embryos are divided into identical twins or triplets, but the nuclei from those subdivided embryos are not inserted into the shells of eggs from other women.


'Emmitt': A Name That Won't Go Away
In every corner of the Giant locker room this week there were conversations about Emmitt.
That was what people were calling him: Emmitt.
The Giants thought they were on a first-name basis with the Dallas Cowboy running back, since they had seen him so much on television and game film.
But they were fortunate; others have seen him in person -- from behind.
Giant cornerback Willie Beamon watched last week's Dallas-Philadelphia game on television and was wondering why some players around the league say Smith isn't that fast.
He saw with his own eyes how Eagles cornerback Eric Allen was left in the dust by Smith on a 62-yard run.
Allen is one of the fastest players in the league.


Where to Get, And Express, Views of Plans
Borough President Ruth Messinger's office will hold a round-table discussion on the zoning plan for the Lincoln Square Special Zoning District at 7 P.M.
Wednesday at Congregation Rodeph Sholom, 7 West 83d Street.
The City Planning Commission will hold its public hearing on the plan at 10 A.M.
Nov. 17 at City Hall.


Celebrity Goulash
Stars cooked at Gourmet Gala for March of Dimes, Nov. 1.


Do Drunken Drivers Get Railroaded?
DEFENSE lawyers, legal scholars and some municipal court judges are beginning to say that the well-intentioned attempts by lawmakers and judges to rid the state's roads of drunken drivers are undermining the constitutional rights of many defendants in such cases.
They say that over the last decade or so the courts and the Legislature have systematically and intentionally eliminated nearly all the defenses once available to those charged with drunken driving.
These include the right to challenge the accuracy of machines used to measure blood-alcohol content and the right to a jury trial, the critics assert.


To Polish Comic, New Chiefs Mean Old Jokes
Things are looking up for Poland's comics and satirists.
The years since the fall of Communism have been fallow, but now that the old guard is back in new clothes, their old tormenters have new lines.
"They never really left the scene," said Janusz Szpotanski, a writer and the creator of a fictional character, Comrade Szmaciak, who epitomized the servile Communist party hack.
"They went into business and created capital and now they're using the money to return to politics."


Pamela Marra, Carson Mathews
Pamela Lois Marra, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis P. Marra of White Plains, was married yesterday to Carson Paul Mathews, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas P. Mathews Jr. of Dumont, N.J.
The Rev.
John Wilkinson performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of the Sacred Heart in Hartsdale, N.Y.
Mrs.
Mathews, 25, is an associate in global technology at J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Manhattan College.
Her father retired as a sales executive for the American Telephone and Telegraph Company in New York.


Jill Lori Colman, Randy P. Kiewe
Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen P. Colman of Larchmont, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jill Lori Colman to Randy Paul Kiewe, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sol Kiewe of Linwood, N.J.
A January wedding is planned.
Miss Colman and her fiance are graduates of Brandeis University, he cum laude.
She received a law degree from Yeshiva University.
Her father is a managing director of Credit Research and Trading, an investment concern in Greenwich, Conn.
Her mother is a lawyer.


Soviet Atom Test Used Thousands As Guinea Pigs, Archives Show
On the morning of Sept. 14, 1954, in the Ural Mountains about 600 miles southeast of Moscow, the Soviet military exploded an atomic bomb in the air near 45,000 Red Army troops and thousands of civilians as part of a military exercise.
How many people were killed or maimed or became ill as a result of the exercise may never be known.
But a film of the test recently obtained from secret Soviet military archives sheds new light on the often reckless nuclear testing during the cold war and the use of people as guinea pigs, nuclear specialists say.


Remember The Edsel
To the Editor:
In categorically defending boardroom decisions based on bottom-line considerations, Walter Goodman seems to forget such fiascos as the Edsel, the auto manufacturers' stubborn addiction to gas guzzlers in the oil-starved 1960's and other costly misreadings of public preference by corporate decision-makers.
I doubt that television ratings are as sacrosanct as Mr.
Goodman seems to think.


GYPSIES SUFFERING IN HUNGARY'S SHIFT
Viewed from the street, the big apartment block in this former industrial city near the Slovak border looks empty and uninhabitable, with most of the windows missing and heaps of trash lying about.
Inside the courtyard of the four-story building, the exterior corridors teem with people.
Wash hangs on lines, and children swarm about amid trash and rubble, breeding grounds for rats and for the wave of hepatitis that struck last year.


Germany's Justice System Said to Favor Rightists
When the police quickly released four of the five skinheads accused of beating an American athlete last weekend, they were acting under criminal justice policies that are coming under increasing attack here.
Many politicians and criminologists complain that the German legal system is "blind in the right eye," meaning that the police, prosecutors and judges tend to be lenient when dealing with rightists or neo-Nazis.


Diane Grosz, Jonathan Gelman
Diane Grosz, a daughter of Cantor and Mrs.
Erno Grosz of Forest Hills, Queens, was married last evening to Jonathan S. Gelman, the son of Jo Ann Kirschner Gelman of Cliffside Park, N.J., and Dr.
Richard A. Gelman of Palm Springs, Calif.
The bride's father performed the ceremony at the Forest Hills Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Gelman, 30, is a consultant in the management consulting group of the Bankers Trust Company in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from Columbia University.


Harvey Keitel Tries A Little Tenderness
Harvey Keitel may not be the richest, the handsomest or the best-known actor in Hollywood, but right now he's probably the coolest.
Twenty years after making an impression in Martin Scorsese's ground-breaking film "Mean Streets," Mr.
Keitel, now 54, is once again at the forefront of adventurous cinema.
At a time when most of the great actors of his generation -- Robert De Niro, Al Pacino, Dustin Hoffman -- have already had their legend-making roles, Mr.
Keitel seems at a new stage in his career.
Last year, two independent films that Mr.
Keitel starred in and was the executive producer for -- "Reservoir Dogs" and "Bad Lieutenant" -- made him the unchallenged godfather of a new macho ethic.
He shows a very different face, however, in "The Piano," the much-acclaimed third feature by the New Zealand director Jane Campion, which opens in New York on Friday.
The film won the Palme d'Or at Cannes and closed the New York Film Festival.
Already there has been talk of an Oscar nomination for Mr.
Keitel's performance as the settler who trades a piano for music lessons and much else.


Present and Future Tents
NAME: Todd Dalland.
IDENTITY: Architect whose specialty is designing tents.
Founder, with his partner, Nicholas Goldsmith, of the firm FTL Architects.
It used to be called Future Tents Ltd.


Susan McLoughlin, Raymond T. Grant
Susan Mary McLoughlin, a daughter of Gillian Parkhouse of Charlton, Sussex, England, and John McLoughlin of Douglas Manor, L.I., was married yesterday to Raymond Thomas Grant, a son Rita B. Grant of Peekskill, N.Y., and the late Kieran J. Grant.
The Rev.
Thomas E. McNamara performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.


A Few Changes, Mr. Dreiser
JENNIE GERHARDT By Theodore Dreiser.
Edited by James L. W. West 3d.
Illustrated. 577 pp.
Philadelphia:  University of Pennsylvania Press.
Cloth, $39.95.
Paper, $19.95.


An Eye on the World And Also on the Self
LONG ago, when I was in junior high school in Kansas, our driver's ed teacher told us that we would have to drive 100,000 miles before we could consider ourselves really capable of handling an automobile.
Later, another teacher said that a person would have to shoot a mile of film before he or she would be a real photographer.
A roll of 36 exposures is about 4 feet long, so that translates into more than 1,300 rolls.
Many students I run into worry about how to make their pictures better.
Should they buy a new lens, or master this or that technique?
Should they paint on their photos or print big or hire a model or take pictures underwater?


Q and A
Transferring Title To a Condominium  Q, I am in declining health and wish to transfer my New York condominium title to my 18-year-old daughter's name.
Is this a gift to be taxed or can I deduct the value of the condo from the $600,000 exclusion allowable at death? . . .
Michael Lando, Manhattan


Seoul's Big Fear: Pushing North Koreans Too Far
When Secretary of Defense Les Aspin arrived here this week to devise a strategy for dealing with North Korea's nuclear weapons project, his party of aides and top American officials was immediately whisked off to the Foreign Ministry, where three photographs dominate the conference room wall.
The first shows Seoul in 1945, a peaceful town of traditional-style Korean homes.
The second was taken from the same site in the early 1950's, after the forces of Kim Il Sung had swept over the border, leaving nothing standing except smoldering ruins and a few chimneys.
Next to it is a color photograph of the same site today, with its sweeping boulevards and office towers.


Pennsylvania Grand Jury Urges Ouster of Justice
A special state grand jury has found "no credible evidence" to substantiate accusations made by Justice Rolf Larsen that a colleague on the Pennsylvania Supreme Court took kickbacks and another tried to run him down with a car.
Then, turning the tables on Justice Larsen, the grand jury charged him with "misconduct of the most serious nature" and urged his removal from the bench.


THE DOUBLE-BED PRINCIPLE
As I read E. J. Graff's Hers column "The Double-Bed Principle" (Oct. 17), I wavered between empathy and wanting to say to her: "Just live your life, lady! Get over it!"
My wife (yes, wife, we were married this summer) and I have joint checking and savings accounts.
The first question we ask is, "Do you discriminate?" No pulled punches.
This is business; if they want mine, they'll behave accordingly.


Corrections
A report in the Postings column last Sunday about a forum on the effects of landmarks policies misidentified the first building designated a landmark by the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission.
It is the Pieter Claesen Wyckoff House, at Clarendon Road and Ralph Avenue in Brooklyn, not the former Astor Library.


Attempting to Stop Foley Proves Folly for Va. Tech
Boston College 48, Va. Tech 34
Glenn Foley passed for 448 yards and three touchdowns and the Boston College defense stifled Virginia Tech quarterback Maurice DeShazo as the Eagles registered a 48-34 upset yesterday in a Big East game in Chestnut Hill, Mass.


Elyse H. Gould, Peter A. Fields
Elyse Hope Gould, the daughter of Eileen Gould of New York and the late Stephen Gould, was married last evening to Peter Adam Fields, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Fields of New York.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel officiated at the Tarrytown (N.Y.) House.
Mrs.
Fields, 28, is a special-education teacher at the Young Adult Institute/New York League for Early Learning.
She graduated from the University of Hartford and received a master's degree in special education from Fordham University.
Her father was the president of Cash Your Check, a check-cashing chain in southern Florida.
Her mother is an executive secretary at Lehman Brothers in New York.


Noisily Nurturing the Grass Roots
UNDER a radiant sun, Solomon Goodrich swung past screechy traffic into Roy Wilkins Park, a bold gesture of urban rehabilitation in southeastern Queens.
He studied several men swatting golf balls with mixed precision, then fetching them from their far-flung landings.
"They are here every day, whatever the weather," he said.
"They would be lost without this park."
Mr.
Goodrich, who manages the park and energizes the community, drove on.
"There was a time years ago when there was this big, forbidding fence here and people would bring their children and park on the outside and they didn't know if they were allowed in," he said.
"We removed the fence, and we are putting in a smaller one. People have to feel that this is their own."


Propelled by the Power of Arms, Wheels and Will
When Bob Neumayer lines up for his eighth New York City Marathon next Sunday, it will be symbolic not only of how far he has come but of how far wheelchair racing has advanced as well.
The marathon will be the 10th for the 46-year-old racer since he was paralyzed 17 years ago in a car accident.
Once he decided to compete seriously in the mid-1980's, he has steadily improved.
In 1989 and 1990, he was the first finisher in the wheelchair division, which is not an official event in the marathon.


The New Inner Circle: A Small, Trusted Group
Christine Todd Whitman has thrown a wide net in her search for people to serve in her new administration, but the final staffing and policy decisions will probably be made in the Governor-elect's living room with just her immediate family on hand.
Friends and advisers say Mrs.
Whitman often seeks their counsel but always makes up her own mind.
They pictured her as elated that she ran her campaign with little help from Republican Party leaders and will not have to listen to their patronage demands when she fills the dozens of top jobs in the administration that takes over in January.


LITTLE BIG PEOPLE
Concerning our precocious children, they're very bright, very attractive, almost totally self-absorbed ("Little Big People," by Lucinda Franks, Oct. 10).
No one in this generation is available to walk dogs, water plants, run errands, etc.
Materially, Mom and Dad take care of everything.
Sometimes a little need is good.
It helps to foster the entrepreneurial spirit.
Some are so scheduled with judo, computer, dance and art classes, etc. that there is no time to hang out, daydream, be foolish, be lazy.
I see them on buses, with their appointment books and those sad, dead eyes.
And so many are cynical about marriage, permanency, because of their own terrible experiences with divorce and separation.


Oncologists and the Thompson Cancer Center
To the Editor:
Having spent 10 years working with physicians during the 70's, I can attest to the validity of your report.


Starting a Pile of One's Own
If you don't have a compost pile, stop everything and build one this week.
Your garden will thank you for it next year -- and so will your local landfill.
These New York City "rot lines" have been set up to answer questions about how to start composting at home, at school, or in a community garden:


Holocaust Memories


LITTLE BIG PEOPLE
At my daughter's nursery school interview, the director of the institution asked the prospective parents if they had questions.
A tall man, sitting on a tiny, classroom chair, his briefcase on his knees, raised a hand to inquire: Would his son be an effective decision-maker upon completing their program?
NANCY COBB Guilford, Conn.


The Look of the Wild
PICTURING NATURE American Nineteenth-Century Zoological Illustration.
By Ann Shelby Blum.
Illustrated. 403 pp.
Princeton, N.J.:  Princeton University Press. $59.50.


'Twas the Plight Before Christmas
Come on.
Admit it, grinch.
All those sleigh bells ringaling and chestnuts roasting give you the willies.
It's not that you want the holiday season to go away -- the riding through the wonderland part is great.
It's the shopping.
It's a killer.
Unfortunately, you're damned if you do, dead if you don't.
The holidays minus presents is Barbie without her dream house.
So unless you're baking everyone a Christmas pudding, it's time to psych yourself up.


Buthelezi, Fly in South Africa's Ointment
CHIEF MANGOSUTHU G. BUTHELEZI of the Inkatha Freedom Party hardly fits the profile of a guerrilla warrior.
His weapon of choice is language, delivered in megaton doses; this year his opening speech to the parliament of the Zulu homeland stretched over 18 days and won him a place in the Guinness Book of Records.
When he dresses up in leopard skins for the ferocious ritual war dances that are part of a Zulu politician's job, he also wears his gold-rimmed spectacles and a black turtleneck.
His style of confrontation is more petulant than bellicose; he seems to carry with him the memory of every insult.
Yet one of the great preoccupations of South African politics at this precarious moment in its transition is the question of whether Mr.
Buthelezi could divert his country from democracy into civil war.
Here in Mr.
Buthelezi's home province, Natal, they argue about whether the Inkatha leader will follow "the Savimbi option," meaning the example set by the Angolan rebel leader, Jonas Savimbi, who lost elections last year and then led his men into the bush.


Deng and His Little Red Book
For many Chinese, it must have been shocking to hear China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping arguing that instability is good.
After all, this was the leader who in the name of "stability" sent the tanks after the pro-democracy demonstrators at Tiananmen Square.


Beyond the Neighborhood
EVEN New Yorkers, who tend to turn their neighborhoods into their own small towns, can benefit from a guidebook to the city.
Here are several to help even the best-traveled native.
New York Bound Bookshop (50 Rockefeller Plaza, (212) 245-8503) has them all, and most are widely available.
SUNDAY IN NEW YORKby Karen Cure (Fodor's Travel Publications: 1993), $13.
An insider's guide to great places for idling away the official American day off, including brunch spots and good parks.
With maps.
BROOKLYN: WHERE TO GO, WHAT TO DO, HOW TO GET THERE by Ellen Freudenheim with Daniel P. Wiener (St. Martin's Press: 1991), $12.95.
Where to eat, play, shop and sunbathe in Brooklyn, arranged by neighborhoods.
With a children's section.
LET'S GO NEW YORK CITY edited by Michael C. Vazquez (St. Martin's Press: 1993), $11.95.
Each year, Harvard University's student agency sends its researchers to New York to find the cheapest way to have a good time.
VEGETARIAN DINING IN NEW YORK CITY by Arthur S. Brown and Barbara Holmes (Callalou Press: 1993), $8.95.
This book's authors seem to have eaten sprouts in every corner of New York City.
The guide is arranged by neighborhood and ethnic varieties.
A.I.A.
GUIDE TO NEW YORK by Elliot Willensky and Norval White (Harcourt Brace Jovanowich: 1988), $21.95.
Put together by the American Institute of Architects, this book reveals the best places to look at buildings everywhere in the city.
No neighborhood goes unrevealed; some descriptions are mini-history lessons.
THE INSIDER'S GUIDE TO MANHATTAN BARS by Eric Zicklin (Carol Publishing Group: 1993), $7.95.
Though it covers only Manhattan, this book does it well, with honest descriptions of various hangouts.
Especially good for those who haven't had a cocktail outside a five-block radius of their building in the last few years.
FRANCE IN YOUR OWN BACKYARD: YOUR PASSPORT TO THE FRENCH EXPERIENCE IN NEW YORK CITY AND ENVIRONS by Jennifer A. Shafer (Old Quill Press: 1992), $15.95.
The bible for anyone who has even a passing interest in where to find French lessons, entertainment, shopping or jobs.
BLUE GUIDE NEW YORK by Carol von Pressentin Wright (Norton: 1991), $19.95.
Conventional wisdom says this is the most comprehensive guide to the city that exists.
U.S.A.
GUIDE TO BLACK NEW YORK (Hippocrene: scheduled for release in February), $14.95.
A guide to black historical and cultural landmarks, from old burial grounds to Louis Armstrong's house in Queens to the best soul food.


U.S. Can't Feel Proud About Role in Haiti
To the Editor:
Re "Key Haiti Leaders Said to Have Been in the C.I.A.'s Pay" (front page, Nov. 1): Repulsive is the word to describe the news we are getting on United States policy toward Haiti from the early 1980's until 1991.


Thrift Shop Backlash
To the Editor:
About the "On the Street" column of Oct. 17, which showed women in Paris during the fashion shows:


Suzanne Aishton, Nicholas Malone
Suzanne Kelsey Aishton, the daughter of Christine S. Siepert of Summit, N.J., and Andrew W. Aishton of Fort Myers, Fla., was married yesterday to Nicholas Charles Malone, the son of Penelope Malone-Zaback of Eden Prairie, Minn., and John J. Malone of South Salem, N.J.
The Rev.
Riley Jensen performed the ceremony at the Central Presbyterian Church in Summit.
Mrs.
Malone, 28, is a portfolio manager at HGK Asset Management in New York.
She graduated from Denison University.


Smooth Ways to Repair Wallboard
MINOR damage to gypsum wallboard, or drywall, can be easy to repair.
With all such repairs, the difficult part is hiding the repair.
Accomplishing that requires care to keep the surface as smooth as possible.
Even so, extensive repainting is usually necessary, especially if the paint has faded and new paint does not match.
To repair fine cracks, dents and holes like those from nails, first use a whisk broom or another stiff brush to clean the area.
Fill the spot with spackling or joint compound, using a flexible-blade putty knife.
After the compound hardens, sand the area with fine or extrafine sandpaper and paint over the spot.


Equal Opportunities?
To the Editor:
Robert Coles proves once again that some of the most stalwart defenders of women are men  [ "Compassion From Carver, Male Swagger From Altman," Oct. 17 ] .


Wading Hip Deep Into a Literary Backwater
Of all the flowerings of popular culture in the 20th century, jazz just might be the one worst served by its literature.
Decent biographies exist of sports figures, artists, photographers and writers.
Jazz, by comparison, doesn't have more than a handful of biographies that in any way compare to the most pedestrian literary biographies.
Standard jazz criticism doesn't come close to the critical canon in the fields of art, architecture or even classical music.
And jazz historiography is a mess: to find primary-source information, one has to shuffle through long-forgotten trade publications or have kept records with liner notes or squirreled away concert pamphlets or heard of the obscure academic publications that occasionally run jazz pieces.
Knowledge about the major players and movements in jazz is still, in many cases, at the anecdotal level, which is why of all the literary forms imposing themselves on jazz, oral history works the best.


Deborah Miller, Adam Landis
Deborah Lynn Miller, a postdoctoral research fellow in psycho-oncology at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, and Adam Gilbert Landis, an associate at the law firm of Schulte Roth &amp; Zabel, were married yesterday in Wilmington, Del.
The couple work in New York.
Rabbi Julie Greenberg and the Rev.
Dr.
Joseph Ruane of the Federation of Christian Ministries officiated at Brantwyn Mansion.
Dr.
Miller, 28, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Vanderbilt University and received a doctorate in clinical psychology from Louisiana State University.
She is the daughter of Ann Tansey of Greenville, Del., and Richard Miller of Havertown, Pa.


Television As Teacher's Assistant
JUDY Tretiak, a kindergarten teacher in Westfield, N.J., was having trouble explaining volcanoes to her students.
She couldn't find an appropriate book, and a field trip to Hawaii did not seem imminent.
So Ms.
Tretiak turned on the television set in her classroom at Franklin Elementary School and popped in a videotape on volcanic activity.
More teachers than ever are using television and videotapes in class.
But videos for the classroom bear little resemblance to the cartoons and sitcoms that children watch at home, says Sarah Feldman, project director for the National Teacher Training Institute for Science, Television and Technology.


Mystery of Young Politician's Death
Perhaps it was fitting that Nick Wasicsko was laid to rest on Election Day, his casket surrounded by dozens of Westchester County politicians and hundreds of his former constituents.
The general election was to be the first in almost a decade in which his name would not appear on the Yonkers ballot.
Friends said it had been a frustrating time for Mr.
Wasicsko, a City Council member and former mayor, who had failed to capture his party's nomination for the council presidency, the city's second most powerful office.


Suzanne Grant, Donald MacKenzie
Suzanne Pease Grant, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Grant Jr. of Chicago, was married there yesterday to Donald Douglas MacKenzie, a son of Phoebe Connor MacKenzie of Darien, Conn., and Warren G. MacKenzie of Rowayton, Conn.
The Rev.
John Buchanan officiated at the Fourth Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
MacKenzie, 26, was until recently the director of consignments at Leslie Hindman Auctioneers in Chicago.
She graduated from Kenyon College.
Her father is the branch manager in Chicago of Investment Management &amp; Research Inc., a financial services concern.


Treating Drugs at School
KARL GONZALES tried alcohol and marijuana at his older brother's urging at age 7.
He got his first tattoo at 11, joined a Latin gang at 12 and was arrested for stealing car parts at 13.
By 14 he was smoking pot regularly, and at 15 he dropped out of school.
Then things got ugly.


Lisa J. Telder, Robert Bowman
Lisa Jo Telder a freelance video producer in Westport, Conn., was married yesterday to Robert Allott Bowman, an executive vice president and the chief financial officer of the ITT Corporation in New York.
The Rev.
John Buchanan performed the ceremony at the Fourth Presbyterian Church in Chicago.
The bride, 35, graduated from the University of Illinois.
She is a daughter of Thomas and Glenna Telder of Saugatuck, Mich.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


Rider's Rite of Passage Comes at Father's Side
It is the horse, not the clothes, that make the man.
That's the unique vantage point shared by Barney Ward, one of show jumping's last self-taught iconoclasts, and his 18-year-old son, McLain, who will attempt to make history at the National Horse Show Sunday by winning both the Rolex-Maclay National Championship for junior riders and the $100,000 Grand Prix of New York.


Dancing on a High Wire Of Inspired Lunacy
Leonardo and his Mona Lisa argue endlessly, bound together in querulous domesticity over the years he takes to paint her portrait.
A crooner named Orfeo sings "I'll See You Again" to the housemaid who is his Eurydice.
A graffiti artist escapes over the Berlin wall, a man with a stuffed chicken finds that you can go home again, and a Greek-American contralto named Dagmar Onassis, the illegitimate daughter of Maria Callas and Aristotle Onassis, reduces a spellbound audience to simultaneous tears and laughter.
Welcome to some of the many worlds of John Kelly, actor, singer, director, designer -- and performance artist-turned-star.
This week, Mr.
Kelly will perform on the largest and most formal stage of his New York career in his "Light Shall Lift Them," which will run for four performances starting Wednesday at the Majestic Theater of the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
The new multimedia work, which is subtitled "The Parallel Lives of Jean Cocteau and Barbette" and is part of BAM's Next Wave festival, chronicles the life of Vander Clyde, a young American who, performing as a transvestite aerialist named Barbette, became the toast of Paris in the 1920's and an inspiration to Jean Cocteau.


What Is It? Well, What Do You See?
Some have wondered if it's a chunk from the Berlin wall; others have said it resembles an ancient ruin.
But the 25-ton slab of limestone in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park is from a quarry in Indiana.
"People will ask me what it's supposed to be," said Nick Micros.
"But before answering, I'll ask them what they think it's supposed to be, because what they see in it is important."


Bowling on the Bias To Kiss the Jack
To the Editor:
Despite what you said in your item about lawn bowling on Oct. 24, "For Bowlers, a Field of Dreams," one does not "toss" a bowl in this ancient and honorable game, which is one of finesse and skill.
The bowl itself has a built-in weight on one side (the bias), and the bowler must counteract it by an outward curved delivery (with the bias on the inside), making allowance for wind, state of the green and positioning of preceding bowls.
The aim, of course, is to "kiss the Jack," the little white ball, since points are awarded by proximity to the Jack.


Cranberry Desserts Brighten the Holidays
FRESH cranberries, which come into season in the fall, aren't just for a sauce to go with turkey.
Their tart flavor is also superb in desserts that are particularly colorful and festive on the holiday table.
Daniel Boulud, the celebrated French chef (formerly of Le Cirque and now owner of Daniel restaurant in Manhattan), stuffs whole apples with cranberries and orange peel, sticks a cinnamon stick in each one and bakes them in the oven.
Use large apples that will keep their shape and texture and will have a sweet taste when baked (Rome apples are especially good).
The dessert can be prepared up to four hours ahead of time but should be served warm.


From Sidelines 'Sis Boom Bah' To Making Tackles on the Field
BRUSHING past two blockers, the defensive right end cut left, lunged and tackled the ball carrier just across the line of scrimmage.
"Tackle by No. 80, Tiffany Sacchi," the public address announcer told a crowd of about 200 at Mount Nebo Park on a recent Friday night during a game between the Patriots and the Raiders in the Manchester Midget Football League.
Tackle by Tiffany?
The tackle was indeed made by a 12-year-old girl, a part-time model who plays for the Patriots in a league for 9- to 14-year-olds.
Serious Football
As a first-year member of the squad, Tiffany is seeing the Patriots from a different perspective this season.
In two previous seasons she was a cheerleader for the team in Manchester, where parents and coaches take youth football very seriously.
The Patriots, for example, have eight coaches, which is more than many college teams have.


Sicily Pensione
To the Editor: In April 1992, you ran an article by Mary Taylor Simeti, "In an Ancient Monastery, Family Fare," on the Tornabene family's remarkable monastery restaurant in Sicily's Madonie mountain town of Gangivecchio.
Now the enterprising Tornabenes have opened a delightful nine-room pensione where we spent an evening recently.
The Tenuta Gangivecchio, which is in the province of Palermo, costs 85,000 lire per person, including bed, breakfast, dinner and locally produced red wine.
The food is superb.
Three of the guest rooms open onto a terrace with views of the monastery garden, the monastery and the resident donkey.
All rooms are decorated with hand-woven Sicilian rugs, crochet work and provincial print bedspreads.


Campaign Finance Reform, in Action
Last week's mayoral election posed the toughest test yet for New York City's five-year-old voluntary public campaign financing system.
The law's spending limits predictably gave rise to a creative search for loopholes, but on the whole the system worked remarkably well.
The positive experience is a tribute to the Campaign Finance Board charged with enforcing the rules -- and a timely lesson for reformers in Congress.
Both Mayor David Dinkins and Mayor-elect Rudolph Giuliani agreed to participate in the system, which provides public matching funds to municipal candidates who agree to extensive financial disclosure, limits on private contributions and an overall limit on campaign spending.
The idea is to curb the influence of big contributors, and to prevent candidates from, in effect, buying City Hall.


Political Memo; G.O.P. Embraces String of Victories, But It Is Still Seeking Vision for '96
Edward J. Rollins, whose place as a Republican wise man was restored on Tuesday by his role in the upset victory of Christine Todd Whitman in the New Jersey governor's race, had stern advice for fellow party members: "Republicans shouldn't start buying inaugural tickets."
The Republican sweep this week will no doubt boost morale, fund raising and, perhaps most important for next year, the party's drive to recruit prime candidates.
But amid their jubilation about winning all the big contests since President Clinton was elected, including last week's races for governor in New Jersey and Virginia and the mayoralty in New York, many Republicans said the victories did little to crystallize the vision of a party still trying to find its ideological way since losing the White House.


Serbs Seize, Then Free 3 U.N. Soldiers
Bosnian Serb militiamen took three United Nations soldiers hostage in central Bosnia today, then released them unharmed after a standoff during which United Nations troops fired warning shots, a United Nations official said.
The incident occurred about four miles southeast of Vares, a grim steel town that Bosnian Croat forces abandoned Wednesday to the mostly Muslim Bosnian Army.
Most of the Croatian militiamen, together with thousands of civilians whom they had rousted from Vares, fled across nearby Serbian lines east of the town.


Zebra Technologies (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


School Voucher Plans Don't Improve Education; Benefits of Choice
To the Editor:
In "California's Experiment on Your Schools" (Op-Ed, Oct. 30), Jonathan Schorr says there's no proof that vouchers work, so let's not try them.
Yet there's ample proof that public schools are not working for many of the families who are paying taxes to have children educated by them.


Patriots Perfect at Losing Close
Bills 13, Patriots 10


Welfare Reform, Done Harshly
Wisconsin's welfare reform -- putting a two-year limit on benefits -- would seem to have come straight out of President Clinton's playbook.
During the campaign, he promised to "end welfare as we know it" by making benefits temporary.
No wonder then that the Administration granted its approval for Wisconsin's plan last week.
But a closer look shows that the two policies veer in starkly different directions.
Mr.
Clinton wants to guarantee a job for parents who reach the end of the two-year period; Wisconsin doesn't.
Mr.
Clinton pledges generous education and training programs before the benefits run out; Wisconsin doesn't.
And Mr.
Clinton's advisers recognize that for welfare reform to work, it must protect children from penalties meted out to delinquent parents; Wisconsin doesn't.


Puerto Rico Debates Statehood or Status Quo as a Vote Nears
Should Puerto Rico petition to become the 51st state, remain an American commonwealth or proclaim its independence?
After decades of debate and months of intense campaigning in every corner of the island, voters here are about to declare their preference in a historic plebiscite whose result the White House has pledged to support.
For the 3.7 million residents of this lush Caribbean island, the vote on status, scheduled for Nov. 14, hinges on questions both of cultural identity and material well-being.
Gov.
Pedro Rossello and his New Progressive Party say statehood will bring a financial bonanza.
But the opposition Popular Democratic Party argues that statehood will force a mixed-race, Spanish-speaking society to renounce everything that defines its character.


Review/Dance; Evoking Primal Earth And Soul
There is a peculiar magic to the theater of Kazuo Ohno, the pioneering Butoh performer.
And Mr.
Ohno worked his magic again in "Ka Cho Fu Getsu (Flowers-Birds-Wind-Moon)," presented on Friday night at the Japan Society.
A remarkably lithe 87 years old, Mr.
Ohno makes no attempt to disguise his age.
Dressed and made up as a woman of considerable ornamentation, he totters about the stage on heeled shoes, his face seeming to crumble under its bright cosmetics.
At times, in this New York premiere, Mr.
Ohno looked like nothing so much as some poor old dear who had lost her way to Mortimer's.


International Power Machines reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Intelligent Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


School Voucher Plans Don't Improve Education; Discrimination Built In
To the Editor:
Bret Schundler (Op-Ed, Oct. 28) disingenuously supported California's school voucher initiative.
The proposition would not have provided enough funds to allow poor children to attend private schools; it would not have regulated schools that any con artist could have established by assembling 25 children in a storefront.
Even with entrance to a decent private school, it would not have provided money for transportation.


Bridge
Seattle has some 7,000 hotel rooms, but it will be hard to find one around Thanksgiving.
There will be at least 5,000 visitors bent on attending the football game between Washington and Washington State.
There will be some 4,000 bridge players attending the Fall Nationals, with headquarters at the Sheraton Hotel.
And there will be 3,000 delegates, staff members and journalists attending the Asia-Pacific Conference, an economic meeting of nations of the Pacific Rim.
There has already been some furor because one president, Barbara Nudelman of the American Contract Bridge League, has refused to surrender the presidential suite at the Sheraton to another President, Kim Young-sam of South Korea.


Cambrex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pogo Producing reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Airborne Without Airplane
The man who descended into the edge of the ring during the Riddick Bowe-Evander Holyfield heavyweight championship fight Saturday night was riding a paraglider.
Paragliding, or parapenting (the French term), is normally done by foot-launching from a slope like a mountain.
Paragliders, which fly much like hang gliders and can ascend using thermal updrafts, are usually designed for free flight without power.


Market Place; In a high-tech age, investors embrace old-fashioned radio.
ON the information superhighway of the future, radio stations are seemingly Tin Lizzies.
But many investors consider them bargains compared with television stations and note that advertising revenue is approaching record levels.
Moreover, the market for initial public offerings for radio-station operators is reaching euphoric levels.
So far this year, seven radio companies have taken advantage of the market's enthusiasm for media stocks by selling shares to the public, some for the first time.
And, industry executives say, more stock sales are on the way.


Johanna Ginsberg, Mark Brownstein
Johanna Rachel Ginsberg, a daughter of Harold and Edna Ginsberg of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Mark Stuart Brownstein, the son of Irwin and Evalyn Brownstein of Teaneck, N.J.
Rabbi Allen Darnov performed the ceremony at the Livingston (N.J.) Country Club.
The bride is keeping her name.
She is a lawyer in the criminal defense division of the Legal Aid Society in Brooklyn.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Michigan, from which she also received a law degree.


Harmonizing From a Forbes Quartet
The frenetic 1980's had been over for only two months when Malcolm S. Forbes, chief executive of Forbes Inc. and a flamboyant presence on the American business scene for almost 40 years, died unexpectedly in his sleep at the age of 70.
It was, everyone said, the end of an era.
But it was also the start of an astonishingly compatible partnership, as his four sons assumed leading positions in the family publishing company that had been founded by their grandfather in 1917.


DIALOGUE: North Korea and the Bomb; Sanctions Won't Work
Still reeling from crises in Somalia and Haiti, the Administration is about to face another foreign policy test, in North Korea.
President Clinton said yesterday, "North Korea cannot be allowed to develop a nuclear bomb. We have to be very firm about it." The U.S. must move quickly to avoid a confrontation, but also must temper an impulse to punish North Korea with economic sanctions.
International Atomic Energy Agency inspectors discovered last year that North Korea may have reprocessed plutonium at least three times, not just once, as it has claimed.
We have no idea how much plutonium it may have or how close it is to a bomb.
The I.A.E.A. has demanded that it be allowed to inspect two possible plutonium waste sites.
Pyongyang has refused permission, arguing that the sites are conventional military facilities -- a blatant lie.
Calls are mounting for decisive action.


World Economies


A New Vigor in the Brazilian Press
Last year, press revelations about corruption toppled Brazil's president.
This month, press revelations about corruption are encouraging a purge of Brazil's Congress.
"There are not many countries that have two Watergates in two years," said Aluzio Maranhao, news editor for a leading newspaper here, O Estado de Sao Paulo.


Robbed Cabdriver Follows Suspects and One Is Arrested
A cabdriver who said he had been robbed three times before, decided he had had enough early yesterday when he was robbed again.
So after four men roughed him up on a street in upper Manhattan and took his night's earnings, he followed the van they were in and called for help on his citizens' band radio.
As a result, one suspect was caught and arrested, the police said yesterday.
"It's a dangerous job," said Yu Nien Lin, 44, who came from Hong Kong 10 years ago and has been driving a cab for three years.
At least 33 cabdrivers have been killed this year and 2,100 robbed in the first eight months, the police said.


New Delhi Journal; In Land of Believe It or Not, Hands-Down Winner
For 30 years, Romesh Sharma has raced toward glory, demolishing challengers, stupifying observers, troubling manicurists.
"In 1962, I started as a sort of hobby," offered Mr.
Sharma, a man of formality and precise words.
As he settled himself on a couch, he eased his left hand to the cushions, 196 combined inches of fingernail splaying from his fingers, like humanoid tentacles.


Review/Ballet; Boston's 'Sleeping Beauty' With Touches of the New
Because Tchaikovsky died a century ago and the Boston Ballet is now 30 years old, Bruce Marks, the troupe's artistic director, decided that an anniversary season featuring ballets to music by Tchaikovsky would be timely and festive.
After all, Tchaikovsky composed three magnificent ballet scores and his stirring instrumental compositions have inspired generations of choreographers.
The Boston Ballet has opened its Tchaikovsky season with a lavish new staging of "The Sleeping Beauty," the spectacle that Marius Petipa choreographed in 1890.
Its magic was present in performances, conducted by Mark Churchill, on Friday night and Saturday afternoon at the Wang Center for the Performing Arts here.
The cast was augmented by members of Boston Ballet II, students from the Boston Ballet School and participants in Citydance, a dance-training program for Boston schoolchildren.


Cowboys Do Just As They Intended
The first three possessions told the story.
The Dallas Cowboys established supremacy early.
*
Drive No. 1 -- Cowboys: 13 plays, 61 yards, seven minutes 37 seconds of ball control.
Dallas led, 3-0.
* Drive No. 2 -- Giants: Three runs. Punt.


CLINTON IS CRITICAL OF LABOR ON TRADE
Moving into the final 10 days of his battle to win ratification for the North American Free Trade Agreement, President Clinton today accused the labor unions that oppose the measure of applying "naked pressure" to kill the pact in Congress.
At the same time, he said, the businesses that stand to benefit from expanded trade have not done enough to convince their workers that the agreement is a good idea.


Tricord Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


As U.S. Vote on Trade Pact Nears, Mexicans Are Expressing Doubts
In the dizzying course of a five-minute conversation on the North American Free Trade Agreement, Jesus Hernandez begins with a great burst of national pride, focused on his shoes.
"See this," the 28-year-old owner of a tiny shoemaking company says, lifting a shiny black exhibit from a friend's workshop table.
"The gringos can't do leatherwork like this!"


PRO FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; Looming Larger Than 'The Game'
WITH a victory over the Jets yesterday, Donald Francis Shula would have had one of the most significant achievements in football within his grasp.
I'm not referring to the 325th victory that would have allowed him to stand alone as the National Football League's winningest coach.


Connecticut Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


MB Communications (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The President accused unions of applying "naked pressure" to kill the free-trade agreement.
He said businesses that stand to benefit from expanded trade have not done enough to convince workers that the agreement is a good idea.  [ Page A1. ]


Noble Affiliates reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New Guidelines For Lawyers Ignite Debate
Broad guidelines intended to protect divorcing clients from being exploited by their lawyers have set off an acrimonious debate in New York State over whether lawyers should be held to the kind of consumer regulations that other businesses must abide by.
Lawyers and bar associations have expressed such anger over the rules that Judge E. Leo Milonas, the state's top administrative judge, has modified some of them and put off implementation till the end of this month.
Even with the changes, the rules still amount to the toughest in the country.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Houria Aichi  Vocalist Thread Waxing Space
Houria Aichi sang intimate incantations on Wednesday night at the Thread Waxing Space.
Mrs.
Aichi, an Algerian singer who lives in Paris, has worked with world-fusion musicians like Ryuichi Sakamoto and sings music she has collected along with music she learned while growing up.
Her program on Wednesday was traditional music from the Aures region of Algeria: austere yet intricate solos and duets with Said Nissia on wooden flutes.
The songs, she explained in French, were about the beauty of a lover, the pain of exile, the pleasure of dancing, the wounds of war.


Review/Theater; Americana And Death: A Musical
If you folded a smaller, more sentimental answer to the Stephen Sondheim-James Lapine musical "Into the Woods" into Thornton Wilder's "Our Town" you would have a show not unlike "Johnny Pye and the Foolkiller," the likable family musical that opened at the Lamb's Theater on Sunday.
The show, adapted from an allegorical yarn by Stephen Vincent Benet, tells the story of an all-American boy named Johnny Pye (Daniel Jenkins), who acquires a precocious awareness of mortality the day his father dies.
On that day, the bereft youngster accidentally beholds the actual figure of death, a gnarled, burly workman wearing a smock and cap and toting a grindstone.


Litchfield Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Doctors, Not Bureaucracies, Give Health Care
To the Editor:
Our society has a history of attempting to satisfy human needs by creating elaborate institutions.
New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation is a prime example.
Founded out of a charitable sense of responsibility to the poor, it evolved into a paternalistic institution.
Administrative decisions, divorced from personal involvement, have become the hallmark of the system.


Joy Buzzer: Starks 3-Pointer Sets Up OT Victory
John Starks made a spectacular 3-pointer to force overtime.
Patrick Ewing (42 points, 10 rebounds) and Charles Oakley (19 points, 22 rebounds ) were spectacular all night.
The result was an impressive 115-107 come-from-behind victory over the Cleveland Cavaliers, which kept the Knicks unbeaten (2-0) in the young season.
Trailing by as many as 14 points just before halftime, the Knicks turned the momentum with their style of basketball -- relentless defense, with Ewing and Oakley controlling inside play.


As Mandatory Terms Pack Prisons, Experts Ask, Is Tougher Too Tough?
As a bored teen-ager in a conservative Colorado town, Christian Martensen quit a minimum-wage job, packed some tie-dyed clothes and followed the Grateful Dead band around America.
He led a carefree, vagabond life for a couple of years, but in the winter of 1991, his van broke down and he needed money to keep moving.
When a fellow Deadhead offered him $400 to find someone who would sell LSD, he accepted.


HANOI IS ACCUSED OF ABUSING CRITIC
Human rights groups and foreign diplomats have received reports that Vietnam is mistreating its most prominent political prisoner, a doctor who has spent most of the last 15 years in jail because of his harsh criticism of the Government and his efforts to organize a democracy movement.
The prisoner, Nguyen Dan Que, has a history of poor health.
Human rights groups and Dr.
Que's family in the United States say they have received reliable information in recent weeks that the 51-year-old radiologist is being held in solitary confinement in a prison camp in southern Vietnam, and that he has been forced to resume hard labor.


CHRONICLE
PATTI DAVIS, daughter of former President Reagan and his wife, Nancy, is giving marriage another try.
Ms.
Davis, 41, has moved to Westport, Conn., where she will marry PAUL C. HAYELAND, 27, The Associated Press reported.
The wedding is to be on Nov. 20 at their home, with a justice of the peace conducting the ceremony, according to their marriage license application.
Ms.
Davis declined to comment.


Elizabeth Colodny, William Giddins
Elizabeth S. Colodny, a daughter of Edwin I. Colodny of Bethesda, Md., and Mildred Colodny of Washington, was married yesterday to William Giddins, a son of Michael Giddins of New York and Celia Giddins of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Daniel Alder officiated at the Mark Hotel in New York.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is a vice president for human resources at Citibank in Long Island City, Queens.
She graduated from the University of Chicago and received a master's degree in management from Northwestern University.
Her father, who retired as the chairman and chief executive of the USAir Group, which operates the airline, is of counsel to the Washington law firm of Paul, Hastings, Janofsky &amp; Walker.


Equity Issues Scheduled for This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Ameristar Casinos Inc., Jackpot, Nev., an initial public offering of 2.4 million shares.
Montgomery Securities.


Landry Ends His Animosity
Tom Landry, the former Dallas Cowboy coach, was inducted into the team's Ring of Honor today, ending years of animosity toward the owner, Jerry Jones, who dismissed him almost five years ago.
In a 20-minute halftime ceremony, Landry, accompanied by the seven previous inductees, including Roger Staubach, Don Meredith and Mel Renfro, had his name unveiled on the row of names.
There was no number in front of his name, just a portrait of one of his trademark fedoras.


Zap! Bam! Cow! A Brawl of the Tabloids Is About to Begin
Mooooooo.
That is the sound of the New York City newspaper brawl getting much more mischievous.


Big, but Not Biggest, Payoff
Arcangues's winning price of $269.20 for $2 in Saturday's Breeders' Cup Classic at Santa Anita was the biggest in the 10-year history of the Breeders' Cup, and was one of the largest in the sport's history in a major stakes race.
But it fell far short of the $2,922 payoff on Power to Geaux at Aksarben on Dec. 8, 1989, the record in thoroughbred racing, according to the American Racing Manual.


Signal Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Linda K. Singer, Steven I. Roth
Linda Karen Singer, the daughter of Stuart and Elaine Singer of Highland Park, N.J., was married yesterday to Steven I. Roth, the son of Herbert and Marcia Roth of Lawrence, L.I.
Rabbi Bennett F. Miller officiated at Bridgewaters, a catering establishment in New York.


Clinton Warns North Korea Against Building Atom Bomb
President Clinton issued a stern warning today to North Korea not to develop a nuclear weapon as it continues to block international inspections of its nuclear sites.
"North Korea cannot be allowed to develop a nuclear bomb," Mr.
Clinton said in an interview on the NBC News program "Meet the Press." "We have to be very firm about it."


Oregon Steel Mills Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


River Oaks Furniture Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Patents; From a Culinary Mistake Comes the Latest in Healthy Snack Food; Baked Pasta Chips
HOPING to have their cake and eat it, too, Americans pursuing nutritious junk food scrutinize snack labels in search of baked not fried, seasoned not salted, and, above all, low-fat goodies.
Pretzels, once mere barroom fare, have practically become health food.
Now those seeking a little more variety may want to try baked pasta chips.
The health-conscious snack comes not from the test kitchens of a giant food manufacturer, but rather from a Long Island dinner party.


School Voucher Plans Don't Improve Education; Invitation to Fraud
To the Editor:
Bret Schundler (Op-Ed, Oct. 28) ignores the open invitation to large-scale fraud that the school voucher system represents.
More than anything else, this galvanized opposition to the voucher proposition that failed on the California ballot.


Review/Music; Marking the Anniversary Of a Cabaret Institution
Bobby Short has been synonymous for so many years with a particular image of Manhattan chic that it is easy to lose sight of what makes him the only cabaret performer in New York who could be called an institution.
The key to his endurance has little to do with fashion or his relationship with what used to be called high society.
It has everything to do with his superb musicianship, his impeccable taste in songs and an undiminished passion that infuses his brand of cultivated charm with a genuine joie de vivre.
That passion, which shifted between an ebullient enthusiasm and a mature, glad-to-be-alive reflectiveness, could be felt in everything Mr.
Short performed at Thursday evening's opening-night concert of his 26th fall season at the Cafe Carlyle (Madison Avenue and 76th Street).
The show opened with "Do What You Wanna Do" and "Take Love Easy," two brilliant, little-known gems with lyrics by John LaTouche, which Mr.
Short sang with an emphatic exuberance that turned them into personal philosophical statements.


Troubled U. of Bridgeport Is Seeing a Turnaround
Last year 19-year-old Ricardo Perez was teaching in an institute run by the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon's Unification Church in his native Dominican Republic.
Now, he's a student at the University of Bridgeport, where he lives on campus on a full $19,000-a-year scholarship.
In many ways Mr.
Perez reflects the changing student body here.
After years of declining enrollment, the university is making a concerted effort to recruit students from around the globe, said Edwin G. Eigel Jr., the university's president.


The High-Minded Road As the Path to Success
Does it mean anything to call William Hogarth a "critical deist"?
Richard Dorment, the art critic for The London Daily Telegraph, would really like to know.
And Ronald Paulson, who used the phrase and whose three-volume biography of Hogarth was scathingly reviewed in The New York Review of Books, would like to know how Mr.
Dorment can fail to see that Hogarth's art created a counter discourse to Shaftsburyian civic humanism.
The debate rages on, six months after the review originally appeared, with no end in sight.
Eventually, Robert B. Silvers, the co-editor of The New York Review, will call a halt to it and make space for a slanging match over Bosnia or the Federal deficit.
But for the moment Hogarth boils furiously on the front burner.


A Good Start on Overhauling Congress
Public exasperation with Congressional scandals, shenanigans and other dysfunctional behavior drove the Senate and House to create a special joint committee last year to develop fundamental reforms.
The Senate members have reached general agreement on what to do, and it's generally good.
House members are still angling for better.
The ranking Senate members -- David Boren, Democrat of Oklahoma, and Pete Domenici, Republican of New Mexico -- have mapped out an intelligent response to much of the criticism of Congress's ways.
Their plan will rile turf-conscious colleagues.
Among other things, it would limit senators' committee memberships, wipe out many subcommittees, reduce opportunities for filibusters, make Congress obey its own laws, and bring in outsiders for ethics investigations.


EMC Insurance Group Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Muslim Women Bridging Culture Gap
Maha Alkhateeb had just come home from a job search at the mall.
Her long, dark hair tumbled out as she pulled off her black hejab, the scarf many Muslim women use to cover their hair.
"People look at me and they're like, 'She wants to work here?' " said Miss Alkhateeb, 19, referring to the stares she said she received when she applied for a clerical job at an optician's store.


Smith's Knee To Be Tested
Charles Smith will have a magnetic resonance imaging of his sore left knee Monday.
Smith was forced to leave tonight's game with 3 minutes 7 seconds left in the fourth quarter, and after the game he gingerly limped off the court while being helped by Mike Saunders, the Knicks' trainer.
Smith had arthroscopic surgery done on both knees during the off season.
Asked if he was concerned, Smith said: "It was so sore that I couldn't play. That's a concern. It doesn't feel great."


School Voucher Plans Don't Improve Education
To the Editor:
"The Simple Logic of School Choice" by Mayor Bret Schundler of Jersey City (Op-Ed, Oct. 28) leaves out major problems of school choice.


Galveston-Houston Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pop and Jazz in Review
Tiger Trap and Lois  The Knitting Factory
K Records, in Olympia, Wash., is an independent label with a mission.
It is devoted to an innocent kind of pop, with smiley voices and straightforward lyrics about youthful concerns like love and fun.
Punk-rock's amateur spirit and its directness are acknowledged; punk's rage and disgust are not.
Two K bands, Tiger Trap and Lois, topped a bill on Wednesday night at the Knitting Factory as part of the College Media Journal Music Marathon.


Ms. Sullivan And Mr. Roseman
Elizabeth Seton Sullivan, a daughter of Mrs.
Peter Sullivan of Lincroft, N.J., and the late Mr.
Sullivan, was married yesterday to Matthew Glen Roseman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gilbert Roseman of Dix Hills, L.I.
The Rev.
William Morris, a Roman Catholic priest, and Rabbi Irwin H. Fishbein officiated at the Molly Pitcher Inn in Red Bank, N.J.
Mrs.
Roseman is a manager of public relations for Mastercard International in New York.
She graduated from Hamilton College.


Past Doesn't Repeat In Fear of Immigrants
To the Editor:
In "Fear of Immigrants Sounds an Old Theme" (letter, Oct. 28) Amy Bridges notes that New York City's foreign-born population was almost twice as high in 1855 as today, and she lauds the achievements of "that generation of immigrants."


Whole Foods Market Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Sept 26


Shevardnadze Enters Stronghold Recaptured From Foes in Georgia
As Georgian soldiers moved cautiously down the streets alert for snipers and as tanks were positioned at strategic corners, President Eduard A. Shevardnadze entered this town at noon today, marking the end of an uprising by backers of Zviad K. Gamsakhurdia, the country's former President.
Mr.
Gamsakhurdia was ousted in January 1992, and his return from exile in September set off one of the two civil wars that have torn this republic on Russia's southern flank.
Secessionists in the western province of Abkhazia are still holding out against Georgian troops.


Hunter College's Playhouse Prepares for a New Beginning
Two seasons ago, the Hunter College Playhouse was the rundown home of a few rootless ensembles, and barely in use at that.
Concertgoers old enough to remember the recitals and theater productions that had made Hunter a lively place between 1942 and 1975 could not help glancing wistfully around the tattered auditorium, or walking through the college's main building to peek into the larger Assembly Hall, where Horowitz, Heifetz, Segovia, Rubinstein, Pinza and other classical-music greats used to perform.
But after letting its performance series slide for nearly 20 years, to become a casualty of changing policies and campus overcrowding, Hunter is getting back into the business with a vengeance.
The Playhouse, at 68th Street at Lexington Avenue, has been fully revamped, and Joseph A. LoSchiavo, its new administrator, has put together a schedule of 200 dance, music and theater performances.
The hall opened for business quietly in April.
But its official Inaugural Week begins tonight with a Lerner and Loewe revue, "The Night They Invented Champagne." Stiff Competition
Hunter's new program is likely to draw heavily on an audience already stretched thin by the recession and distracted by numerous other entertainment choices.
On the East Side alone, the Playhouse is up against competition from the Tisch Center at the 92d Street Y, the Metropolitan Museum, the Frick Collection and Gould Hall.
Across town, Lincoln Center, Carnegie Hall, Merkin Concert Hall, Town Hall, the Joyce Theater and other halls offer further diversions.


Health care commercials bring a scolding from the White House, as well as a lot of attention.
THEODORE ROOSEVELT assaulted the "malefactors of great wealth." Franklin D. Roosevelt inveighed against three Republican isolationists with the mellifluous names of "Martin, Barton and Fish." Spiro T. Agnew condemned the "nattering nabobs of negativism."
And what has the Clinton Administration chosen to attack?
Bill and Hillary are lashing out at television commercials starring a couple named Harry and Louise.
The couple's creator is, it turns out, bemused -- but unapologetic.


Even Luxury Has Drawbacks
Everywhere he goes, someone opens a door, clears a path, or trails along whispering in his ear.
And when the President goes for his morning jog -- a cap pulled low over his forehead -- a string of dark security vehicles motors along beside him.
A year after winning election to the White House post he sought for so long and so hard, President Clinton has discovered that everything is a lot simpler on the outside.
Even the luxury accommodations at the White House have their drawbacks, he said today in a television interview.


Pop and Jazz in Review
'Stir It Up!'  Reggae Paramount
Saturday night's reggae concert, "Stir It Up!," opened like a variety show.
Diana King came out and sang, using a pop gospel voice over hard dancehall reggae beats.
Worl-a-Girl, an all-woman vocal quartet, harmonized tightly and tried a bit of rapping to go with the music, along with some ribald jokes.
And Wailing Souls, an older reggae duo, performed some gorgeously harmonized tunes in a classic reggae style, with one of the singers floating a falsetto over his partner's melody singing.


Giuliani Sees Rogue Police As Needing A Prosecutor
Setting himself at odds with New York City's district attorneys and a mayoral commission now completing a report on police corruption, Rudolph W. Giuliani said in a taped interview yesterday that he favored recreating the office of a special state prosecutor to investigate corrupt officers.
Dismantling the office, Mr.
Giuliani suggested on WCBS-TV's "Sunday Edition," which was taped on Friday, has eroded the willingness of the Police Department's Internal Affairs Division to catch rogue officers.


The Only Thing Biting Was the Weather


Decorator Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Karen Koretz, Richard N. Gordon
Dr.
Karen Koretz, a daughter of Dr.
David and Mrs.
Marilyn Koretz of Woodbury, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Richard Nathaniel Gordon, a son of Sylvia Gordon of New York and the late Dr.
Edward R. Gordon.
Rabbi Ronald Sobel officiated at Temple Emanu-El in New York.
The bride is a resident in dermatology at Tisch Hospital of New York University.
She graduated from Emory University.
She and her husband received medical degrees from New York University.
Her father is an orthopedic surgeon in Woodbury.


Sports of The Times; The Giants' Sideline Silence
ON the sideline near the end of a pro football game, you can always tell which team is losing just by looking at the players.
By their stares into space amid the paper cups, the ice and the chunks of adhesive tape strewn near the bench.
And mostly by their silence.
On the Giant sideline yesterday, as the final minutes of the Cowboys' 31-9 victory flashed on the Texas Stadium scoreboards, Phil Simms was out of the game and Lawrence Taylor wasn't going back in it.


A Preview of Winter During Autumn in New York


Curative Technologies Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mansion Sale to Make Way for New Art Museum
Museum Mile in Manhattan will get a new museum with the impending sale of one of the last grand Fifth Avenue mansions by the YIVO Institute for Jewish Research.
The five-story brick and limestone building, at 86th Street and Fifth Avenue, is to be sold by YIVO for an undisclosed price to the Serge Sabarsky Foundation and turned into a museum of Austrian and German Expressionist art.


Israel and Jordan Are Said to Have Signed a Pact on Economic Ties
King Hussein of Jordan and Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of Israel signed "understandings" last week on economic ties and other forms of cooperation at a secret meeting in Amman, The Jerusalem Post reported today.
The agreements, the signing of which was neither denied nor confirmed by senior Israeli officials, fall short of a draft peace treaty between the countries.
The two nations are technically at war but have had secret high-level contacts for decades and presumably could make a formal peace in short order.


Michele K. Vass, Robert B. Kay
Michele Kim Vass, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Joseph Vass of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Robert Bruce Kay, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Kay of Manhattan.
Rabbi Robert Levine officiated at the Terrace restaurant in New York.
The bride, 35, is a health-care consultant for Health Management Systems in New York.
She graduated cum laude from the State University at Albany and received an M.B.A. from Baruch College.


3 Drugs for Heart Attacks Are Shown to Be Ineffective
Two drugs commonly used to treat heart attacks show little or no benefit in preventing death, and a third shows only a small benefit, according to the largest study of heart attack patients ever conducted.
Leading experts had predicted that the study, presented at a scientific meeting here today, would confirm the benefits of all three drugs.
Heart attacks are the leading cause of death in the United States and many other countries.


Rematch? Answers Vary From No, Yes, Maybe
Rock Newman, who gets rival managers angry, always said, "I'm burning my bridges behind me."
Newman, Riddick Bowe's manager, a master of negotiating, is now the manager of a former champion.
And that means, he admitted today: "We'll have to work our way up again. Dan Duva will not give me a championship fight. I understand that."


Jet Defense Rises to Highest '93 Level
Sure, Boomer Esiason could hardly miss a receiver and his receivers could hardly miss catching the ball and the offense kept driving and driving.
But what really drove the Jets to their 27-10 victory over the Miami Dolphins today was a defense that played tough and almost error free.
"Today," said Jeff Lageman, the Jets' defensive end, "I think it was as good as the defense has played all year."


Review/Music; A 3-Day Weekend Amid the Sounds Of St. Petersburg
Despite the best efforts of packagers, promoters and thematic programmers, genuine musical occasions are more often born than made.
And the St.
Petersburg Philharmonic's concert on Saturday evening, the second of three by the orchestra over the weekend at Carnegie Hall, was nobly born indeed.
Tchaikovsky died in St.
Petersburg exactly 100 years before, on Nov. 6, 1893, just nine days after conducting this orchestra in the premiere of his "Pathetique" Symphony, and here was a program of Tchaikovsky conducted by the orchestra's music director, Yuri Temirkanov, including the "Pathetique." Talk about resonance!


Matlack Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Expeditors International of Washington Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Science and Law Clash Over Fraud-Case Appeals
The Federal standards for judging scientific misconduct have been changed to incorporate a greater measure of legal protection for those accused, a move that officials of a Federal fraud-hunting office say threatens to undo years of work by investigators.


CHRONICLE
About a year ago, DREW NIEPORENT, owner of Montrachet and the TriBeCa Grill, and JEAN-LOUIS PALLADIN, chef of Jean Louis at the Watergate Hotel, were in Sarasota, Fla., cooking at a stone crab festival, when Mr.
Nieporent was struck with the idea of cooking for charity in Israel.
Incongruous?
No, Mr.
Nieporent said the other day.
"We were fishing with a guy named MICHAEL GINOR, who owns a foie gras farm in the Hudson Valley and who is from Israel," he said.
"I leaned over and said, 'Why don't we do something in Israel?' "


United Meridian Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Successor Named For Bill Backer
Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide in New York, continuing a revamping under Michael Bungey, its new president and chief operating officer, has hired his London creative partner, Andrew Cracknell, as worldwide executive creative director.
Mr.
Cracknell, 47, succeeds Bill Backer, 67, who is retiring after a 40-year career in advertising.
Trade publications have reported since April that Mr.
Bungey, who worked for six years with Mr.
Cracknell at BSB Dorland, Backer Spielvogel's sibling British shop, had been wooing a reluctant Mr.
Cracknell to join him in New York.
But they speculated that Mr.
Cracknell would fill the vacant position of the executive creative director at Backer Spielvogel's American operation, rather than be hired for the agency's top creative position when Mr.
Backer retired, as planned, by the end of this year.


Authorities Turn to Curfews to Clear the Streets of Teen-Agers
Once, in simpler, more innocent times, towns enforced curfews on teen-agers only on the night before Halloween to crack down on pranksters' soaping car and store windows or throwing eggs.
Now, struggling to keep control of their streets, many suburbs, cities and small towns across the New York area have started using curfews as permanent tools to stop crime, improve safety and impose order on their streets.


LSI Industries Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Giuliani on Police Corruption
Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Mayor-elect, favors recreating the office of a special state prosecutor to investigate corrupt police officers.
Page B4.


For a Church, From Ashes to Hope; After Fire, a Bronx Parish Prays and Looks to Its Rebuilding
"For there is hope of a tree, if it be cut down, that it will sprout again, and that the tender branch thereof will not cease. Though the root thereof wax old in the earth, and the stock thereof die in the ground, yet through the scent of water it will bud, and bring forth boughs like a plant." Job 14:7.
It was only fitting yesterday that when the Rev.
Glenworth D. Miles approached his makeshift altar, he would look into the pained faces of his congregation and read them the words of Job.
For like the fabled man of the Old Testament, they too had suffered.


Now It's QVC's Turn to Raise Ante for Paramount
Faced with the news that Viacom Inc. has improved its friendly takeover offer for Paramount Communications, the rival bidder, QVC Network Inc. is considering a higher bid.
Last week, both companies had bids of roughly $9.5 billion on the table, with cash components of $4.8 billion, worth about $80 a share.
But in a surprising development, Viacom raised its bid on Saturday to $85 a share in cash for 51 percent of Paramount, and the rest in stock.
Viacom's new $10.1 billion offer includes $5.1 billion in cash, making it richer than QVC's.


Deborah Cummis, Richard E. Klein
Deborah Gwen Cummis, a lawyer in Beverly Hills, Calif., was married yesterday to Richard Erwin Klein, a senior sales representative in Irvine, Calif., for the Cognos Corporation, a computer software manufacturer.
Rabbi Norman Patz performed the ceremony at the Essex House in New York.
Ms.
Cummis, 34, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Brandeis University, and received a master's degree in liberal studies from New York University and a law degree from Seton Hall University.


Hard to Tell Eagles From the Turf
Cardinals 16, Eagles 3 The Phoenix Cardinals gained 243 yards on the ground yesterday with a clock-eating, ball-control offense as they beat the Eagles, 16-3, in Tempe, Ariz.
It was Philadelphia's fourth straight loss after a 5-0 start.


Catellus Development Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Beth F. Tornek, David Schulman
Beth Frances Tornek, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence D. Tornek of Coconut Grove, Fla., was married yesterday to Dr.
David B. Schulman, a son of Malkah Schulman of Great Neck, L.I., and Dr.
Martin Schulman of Manhasset, L.I.
Rabbi Sol Landau officiated at the Biltmore Hotel in Coral Gables, Fla.
Mrs.
Schulman, 25, is a sales associate at the May Company in St.
Louis.
She will begin studying for a master's degree in social work at Washington University there in January.
She graduated from Boston University.


3 Players Seek a Director For Foreign Policy Story
They are three troubled men in search of a strategy: a cerebral former college professor, a gregarious former Congressman and a careful lawyer cast in the roles of the United States' top national security advisers.
Anthony Lake, President Clinton's national security adviser, Secretary of Defense Les Aspin and Secretary of State Warren Christopher are all struggling to improve America's foreign policy performance and to build the President's reputation as a competent Commander in Chief amid the fallout from a disastrous raid in Somalia, the failure to restore democracy to Haiti and the prospect of a worsening war in Bosnia.
A Need to Explain
In response to criticism that they are not doing well -- and even calls for sacrificial resignations -- the three have begun to fight back.
But in characteristic fashion, they said in interviews last week that there is nothing fundamentally wrong with their approach; their solutions are small steps rather than grand gestures.


Cowboys March on a Mission and Pound the Giants 'Like a Drum'
The Dallas Cowboys were leading the Giants by 24-6, when Jimmy Johnson, not one to sit on a lead, had his offense run a wide-receiver option.
It went from the quarterback to Alvin Harper to Michael Irvin for 46 yards.
That's how good the Cowboys are -- their wide receivers are throwing deep.
So, of course, people will talk about how the Cowboys were trying to run up the score.
But what's the most talented team in football supposed to do when it's up big?
Go catch a movie?
The Giants ran into a team today that said it was on a mission.
The battle for the National Conference East lead turned out to be a rout, as the Cowboys dominated the Giants in every phase of the game, hammering them, 31-9, before 64,735 at Texas Stadium.


Nets Turn Into a Nightmare For Dream Team's Center
As everybody expected, New Jersey's debut in the Alamodome turned out to be an embarrassment tonight.
Not for the visiting Nets, however, but for the Spurs, and Olympic Dream Team center David Robinson, who were beaten, 99-73, by the injury-plagued Nets before a crowd of 15,280.
The 73 points were the fewest the Spurs have scored in a game.
The Spurs' previous low was in a 97-80 loss to the Lakers Nov. 28, 1990, in Los Angeles.


Making A Mark On French Culture
Any Gaullist successor to the dapper and charismatic Jack Lang would have had an image problem.
Jacques Toubon, who got Mr.
Lang's job as Minister of Culture after the Gaullist sweep in the March elections, is a balding, round-faced, 52-year-old croupier's son from Nice.
His main political accomplishment heretofore was his terrierlike loyalty to Jacques Chirac, the Mayor of Paris, the former Prime Minister and, both men hope, the future President.
Still, despite the unstoppable momentum of many of the Socialist initiatives, particularly the major Paris building projects known as the Grands Travaux, Mr.
Toubon is trying hard to make his mark after seven months on the job.
He has had his identity problems, especially outside the French press: he was recently referred to as Troubon and Tourbon in two English-language newspapers.
But partly through the sheer visibility and patronage his job entails and partly through the attention inevitably paid him during the current debate on the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, or GATT, he seems to be establishing himself.
Patience Needed
Bustling into his Palais Royal offices for a breakfast meeting recently, Mr.
Toubon does not yet inhabit these gilded and mirrored quarters with the seigneurial panache of his predecessor.
He argues that there is more that is similar than dissimilar between the cultural policies of the left and the right.
And that any striking shifts in French cultural policy will become evident only a few years hence.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14 MEXICANS' FREE TRADE WORRIES As Mexicans watch Americans debate the North American Free Trade Agreement, which may affect Mexico far more than either the U.S. or Canada, many express a similar mix of uncertainty and fear.
A1


Battle of Sexes Joined in Case Of a Mutilation
Groups concerned about domestic violence are using as a rallying point the trial of a man whose wife sliced off his penis after what she said was a rape and years of sexual and other abuse.
"Usually the woman is the victim; this was the woman striking back," said Lynne M. Nelson, 47, a state employee who works in this community 20 miles west of Washington.
"Every woman I've talked to about this says, 'Way to go!' "


110th National Horse Show Had Novices and Novelties
They struck the red-and-white striped circus tents that had housed the four-legged competitors in the Meadowlands parking lot, doled out the last of the week's $450,000 in prize money in a $100,000 grand prix finale that attracted 33 international jumpers, and anointed a new junior riding champion.
This completed the 110th National Horse Show.
In the interests of family entertainment, this year the National was reduced to a five-day schedule but expanded by novelty additions to its program: There was a combination dog-and-pony show in the form of Canada's high-leaping Superdogs, a celebrity cowpunching exhibition, a balletic dressage performance and, as usual, the epitome of hunter and show-jumping competition.


Signs of Growth Roil Bond Market
As Bette Davis said in "All About Eve," "Fasten your seat belts; it's going to be a bumpy night."
That sums up what seems to be ahead for the bond market as traders and investors grapple with a series of discomforting economic reports and a Treasury quarterly auction.


Calgon Carbon reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Acordia Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article on Thursday about a proposal to tax handgun ammunition misstated the cost of some particularly destructive bullets under the plan.
A 10,000 percent tax (calculated on the wholesale cost) would push the price of a $24 box of 20 Black Talon cartridges to $1,500, not to $150,000.


In Poland, Gerber Learns Lessons of Tradition
When Gerber, the American baby-food maker, bought a juice plant in this out-of-the-way town in southern Poland, it was considered a case study of how an American company should venture into the untried territory of Eastern Europe.
The price was right, the local employees were happy and the market potential a sheer dream: Polish babies had never sampled the even consistency of specially processed food from a jar.
The $25 million acquisition and investment in an untapped market is still a success, but nearly two years later, the hard part is just beginning.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; CBS is still No. 1 in the season's early ratings, but its new shows aren't giving it much reason to smile.
AFTER the first six weeks of the new prime-time television season, ABC is extremely buoyant, NBC is moderately buoyant, Fox Broadcasting is more or less treading water, and CBS is looking for a buoy.
In overall ratings, CBS remains the leader with a 13.5 rating, down from 13.6 at this time last season. (Each rating point represents 942,000 homes.) ABC is the only network to show a gain, to a 12.9 rating from a 12 last year.
NBC has also slipped marginally, to 11.1 from 11.2.
Fox has declined the most, to 7.2 from 7.5.


Oil Companies Shifting Exploration Overseas
As United States oil companies continue to cut their spending for oil exploration and the development of existing oilfields, an increasing percentage of the money that remains is being shifted to projects overseas.
A report to be released today by the American Petroleum Institute at its annual convention in Chicago shows that $5.3 billion was spent for exploration in 1992, a 29 percent decline from the $7.4 billion spent in 1991.


The Hammer That Failed on Cuba
Washington's Cuba policy is domestic politics by proxy.
So fierce are the anti-Castro passions of well-heeled, conservative Cuban exiles that reason flies out the window when candidates vie for their votes, and PAC contributions.
That helps explain why Congress last year added new teeth to an existing trade embargo by barring U.S. subsidiaries in other countries from doing business with Cuba.
The Bush Administration at first questioned the prudence and legality of this step, but flipped around when Bill Clinton, while barnstorming in Florida, accused the Administration of missing "a big opportunity to put the hammer down on Fidel Castro and Cuba."


Titan Holdings Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Future Mayor and a Past Mayor: So Much in Common, So Many Differences
The Mets had finished the season in last place.
As Election Day neared, the polls were forecasting a photo finish, and when the ballots were counted, New Yorkers had elected a Republican-Liberal as Mayor, a Manhattan man in his 40's who lived with his wife and children on the Upper East Side and whose agenda promised change.
And though his two running mates lost to Democrats, he celebrated with a triumphal five-borough tour and appeals for unity and a chance to succeed.
His name was not Rudolph W. Giuliani, but John V. Lindsay.


Jean Coutu reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


METRO DIGEST
ALBANY AND GIULIANI: ROUGH PATH AHEAD?
For Rudolph W. Giuliani, the road linking promises made to promises fulfilled will lead time and again through a place of complex partisan alliances and fierce regional loyalties, where labels lose their meaning and reliable maps of the political terrain do not exist -- Albany.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  F.B.I.
AGREED TO PUT TIMER BACK, TAPES SAY As a second bombing plot took shape months after the blast at the World Trade Center, nervous Federal agents agreed to slip a timer for a new bomb back into the garage where it was to be built, according to tape recordings made by an informer.
B3.


Hollywood Casino Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Deep, Painful Descent of Tokyo Stocks
With the Japanese stock market having taken another steep dive in the last two weeks and share prices in the fourth year of a deep overall decline, dissatisfaction over the Tokyo Stock Exchange's policies is growing.
At the heart of the market's drop, analysts say, are the nation's persistent recession, plummeting corporate profits, a mounting toll of bad loans by banks and the near-abandonment of stocks by small investors.


The Jets Win One for Halas, And Shula Remains Tied
To say that the Jets have a disdain for history would be incorrect.
They have a healthy respect for history: their own.
It was almost 25 years ago that Don Shula went for his first monumental victory against the Jets in Super Bowl III.
The Jets slammed the door on him then with a 16-7 victory.
This afternoon Shula entered Giants Stadium against the Jets with another important milestone within reach: his 325th victory to pass the Chicago Bears' George Halas as the winningest coach in National Football League history.
Again, the Jets emphatically denied Shula.
After jumping to a 20-3 third-quarter lead, they held on for a 27-10 victory before 71,306 fans.


Essay; Anatomy of a Coverup
Let me take you behind the scenes in the exposure of a scandal, as the irresistible forces of inquiry slam into the immovable stone wall of coverup.
In Iraqgate, the Bush Administration arranged for billions in unlawful financing of Saddam Hussein through the Atlanta office of Italy's Banca Lavoro.
To avert embarrassment after Saddam's double-cross, our Justice Department conspired with Italy to obstruct the investigation of Saddam's bankers and Bush's top aides.


Arenas Fading Without Stars
With the lowering of one man into a front-row seat, courtside at Chicago Stadium didn't much feel like a trendy place anymore, or a good investment either.
A building that thundered only moments before was no longer the loudest basketball arena in the country.
You could hear yourself think, and you could even read minds.


Need to Refute the Deniers of the Holocaust
To the Editor:
Jean Claude Pressac's book detailing how the Nazi gas chambers at Auschwitz actually worked (news article, Oct. 28, Week in Review Oct. 31) has elicited condemnation from a variety of sources contending that "genocide was possible because it happened." They argue Pressac's work is superfluous; the tears of the survivors should be sufficient proof.


Spoiling to Debate Gore, Perot Puts Up His Dukes
Tuning up for Tuesday's debate with Vice President Al Gore, Ross Perot taunted President Clinton today for sending "somebody else to do the dirty work" and asserted that the proposed North American Free Trade Agreement not only would destroy American sovereignty but also worsen Mexican poverty.
"I want to know how a President of the United States can be for that," Mr.
Perot demanded during a two-hour rally here that was attended by 3,500 cheering, whooping Perot partisans.


Kerr Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lynn Addington, Tad Van Norden
Lynn Andrea Addington, the daughter of Ernest W. and Judith L. Addington of Sylvania, Ohio, was married yesterday to Langdon Van Norden Jr., the son of Gloria Barnes Van Norden of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Mr.
Van Norden.
The Rev.
Richard F. Van Wely performed the ceremony at St.
Barnabas Episcopal Church in Greenwich.
The bride, 26, is an associate at the law firm of Cummings &amp; Lockwood in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Northwestern University and she and her husband received law degrees from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a controller in the operating division of Owens-Corning Fiberglas in Toledo, Ohio.
Her mother teaches kindergarten at the Stranahan Elementary School in Sylvania.


BALANCED BUDGET GAINING SUPPORT AMONG SENATORS
Conservatives who hate raising taxes and liberals who cannot stand to cut spending have joined to bring the Senate to within a handful of votes of passing a constitutional amendment to require a balanced budget.
Senator Paul Simon, the liberal Democrat from Illinois who is the measure's chief sponsor, is not yet predicting victory in the vote later this month, but he said in an interview that he had detected a gradual increase in support.
He has been pushing the measure for several years, and won a promise from the Senate majority leader, George J. Mitchell of Maine, a firm opponent of the amendment, for a vote sometime in this Senate session, which may end by Thanksgiving.


Books of The Times; A Traveler Seeks the Realities Behind an Imaginary Curtain
Exit Into History  A Journey Through the New Eastern Europe  Illustrated.
By Eva Hoffman. 410 pages.
Viking. $23.
To catch history in the act: this, as she explains in her introduction, is what Eva Hoffman was trying to do in the travels she reports on in "Exit Into History: A Journey Through the New Eastern Europe." She had been born in Poland but had immigrated in early adolescence to Vancouver, British Columbia, an adventure she recounted in her previous book, the prize-winning "Lost in Translation: A Life in a New Language."


Community of the Future Created for Today's Homeless
In downtown Los Angeles, 18 white fiberglass domes have been built to house a group of homeless people.
The community, called Genesis I and located on a one-acre parking lot on a dead-end street, was conceived of by Ted Hayes, an advocate for the homeless.
It was financed by the Atlantic Richfield Company with a grant of $250,000.


2 JEWS ATTACKED IN THE WEST BANK
Palestinian gunmen opened fire today on the car of a rabbi who is a leading advocate of Jewish settlement in the occupied territories, wounding him and killing his driver, the police said.
The attack on the rabbi, Haim Druckman, a former member of Parliament, and his driver, Ephraim Ayubi, resulted in the sixth slaying of an Israeli in the territories since the signing of an Israeli-Palestinian agreement in September.
It set off another wave of retaliation by Jewish settlers outraged by attacks by Arab militants opposed to the accord.


Lauren Layton, Anthony Biscotti
Lauren Patricia Layton, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Bernard H. Layton of Mountainside, N.J., was married yesterday to Anthony David Biscotti, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank T. Biscotti of Great Barrington, Mass.
Rabbi Phillip Berkowitz and the Rev.
Gerard Graziano officiated at the Stony Hill Inn in Hackensack, N.J.
Mrs.
Biscotti, 28, is a manager of the durable medical equipment program at the Harvard Community Health Plan Inc., a health maintenance organization in Brookline, Mass.
She graduated from the University of Massachusetts and received a master's degree in public health administration from Northeastern University.


It Happened in Las Vegas: It Was Night to Remember
Boxing's wonderfully tangled history added one of its most bizarre chapters on Saturday when, in one night, a dethroned heavyweight champion regained his title while an uninvited spectator sailed out of the sky to disrupt the savage bout.
Except for bumps and bruises, virtually everyone involved was all right today.
Among them were the paraglider; the newly deposed heavyweight champion's pregnant wife; his 82-year-old trainer, Eddie Futch, who is hospitalized, and the Rev.
Jesse Jackson.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Rage Against the Machine  Roseland
Rage Against the Machine, a Los Angeles band that performed on Thursday night at Roseland, crams together every angry, jolting sound in current rock.


NetManage Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Uniforce Temporary Personnel Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hard to Tell Eagles From the Turf
Cardinals 16, Eagles 3 The Phoenix Cardinals gained 243 yards on the ground yesterday with a clock-eating, ball-control offense as they beat the Eagles, 16-3, in Tempe, Ariz.
It was Philadelphia's fourth straight loss after a 5-0 start.


INSIDE
'Understandings' in Jordan
Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of Israel and King Hussein reportedly signed an economic accord, inching toward a peace pact.
Page A3.
Heart Drugs Questioned
Two drugs used to treat heart attacks show little or no benefit in preventing death, and a third shows only a small benefit, a study found.
Page B10.
One War Seems to End
With Russia's help, President Eduard A. Shevardnadze of Georgia has apparently halted one civil war, but a secessionist battle persists.
Page A14.
Drug Sentences Under Fire
A growing number of judges, prosecutors and wardens say mandatory drug sentencing laws have had disastrous consequences.
Page A16.


No Headline
A.T.&amp; T. and the state-owned telephone companies of France and Germany may be close to forming a joint venture that will offer one-stop shopping for corporations that want to link offices on both sides of the Atlantic.
If it comes to pass, the new venture would rival the alliance formed earlier this year by British Telecommunications P.L.C. and MCI Communications, the second-largest American long-distance carrier.


'Son of Sam,' on TV, Denies 70's Shootings
In a televised interview, David R. Berkowitz, the man known as the "Son of Sam" killer, said he was not responsible for all the shootings that he was convicted of carrying out in New York City in 1976 and 1977.
Mr.
Berkowitz, who pleaded guilty to the crimes, admitted in the interviews, to be broadcast in three parts starting tonight on the program "Inside Edition," that he was present at all eight shootings, but said he did not always fire the shots.


Leslie's Poolmart (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Allan Hoover Is Dead; President's Son Was 86
Allan Hoover, the younger son of President Herbert Hoover, died on Thursday in Portola Valley, Calif.
He was 86 and had lived much of his life in California.
Mr. Hoover died after a brief illness, the Associated Press reported.


At Age 9, Prodigy On-Line Reboots
Prodigy Services, the I.B.M.-Sears joint venture, is rededicating itself to the proposition that the world's biggest computer company and a large national retailer can succeed in selling on-line computer services to consumers.
With a $4 million advertising campaign that begins with live television commercials tonight during "ABC Monday Night Football" and "Northern Exposure" on CBS, and a technological overhaul that includes adding photo images and audio to its service, Prodigy is trying to protect its position as the nation's largest on-line personal computer service.


CHRONICLE
The first thought PAIGE RENSE, editor in chief of Architectural Digest, had when she heard about the fires that destroyed about 300 homes in California last week was that the state had once again been hit by a plague, and she worried for friends.
Then she thought of the cover of the December issue: a picture of Barbra Streisand's Malibu home that will herald a 10-page spread on the mansion and its collection of Art Deco paintings and furnishings.


Ely Landau, Producer, 73, Dies; Filmed Plays for TV and Theaters
Ely A. Landau, a television and film producer and production executive, died on Thursday at Midway Hospital in Los Angeles.
He was 73 and lived in Los Angeles.
The cause was complications of a stroke, the Associated Press reported, citing a family friend, Martin Roberts.


Deer
As deer season moves into high gear, the region's deer population is reaching crisis levels in some suburban and even urban areas, according to state wildlife officials.
The deer's ability to adapt to a changing habitat and the lack of hunting in built-up areas has led to bigger deer herds in northeastern New Jersey and Westchester and helped spread Lyme disease.
Fairfield County now has more deer per square mile than any other county in Connecticut and road kills in the state have doubled over the past decade.
All three states still rely exclusively on hunting to curb the deer population, and all three have lengthened deer seasons, allowed hunters to take additional deer and encouraged the hunting of antlerless deer, usually the females.


Waxman Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


2,000 No Longer Truckin'
More than 2,000 fans of the Grateful Dead are serving time in prisons around the country, says Toni Brown, the publisher of Relix, a magazine for the group's followers.
The magazine, published in Brooklyn, carries a feature called, "Heads Behind Bars," listing the prison addresses for "Deadheads" who wish to get letters.
Over the years, at least three prison newsletters have been circulated in Federal correctional institutions around the country.


Giuliani Accepts a Task Mired in Contradictions
ON election night, sounding conciliatory but invoking the verbs of a prosecutor, Rudolph W. Giuliani vowed that no group would "escape my care, my concern and my attention."
With that pledge, Mr.
Giuliani set himself an awesome challenge: to deliver on a potentially contradictory agenda of satisfying the middle class and businesses while not forsaking people unable to fend for themselves.


Patriots Perfect at Losing Close
Bills 13, Patriots 10


DIALOGUE: North Korea and the Bomb; A Deadline On Diplomacy
North Korea is playing a frightening game of cat and mouse in its efforts to build nuclear weapons without risking significant reprisal from the international community.
Other nations -- and particularly the United States -- should not let the North Koreans get away with it: we should threaten them with economic sanctions, and soon.
The bomb program came to international attention last winter, after the International Atomic Energy Agency detected that Pyongyang was diverting fissionable material from its civilian nuclear program.
To determine how much diversion had occurred, the agency demanded to inspect two sites.
The North Koreans refused and threatened to withdraw from the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.


Tapes Show F.B.I. Agreed To Return Timer for Bomb
As a second bombing plot took shape months after the blast at the World Trade Center, nervous Federal agents agreed to slip a timer for a new bomb back into the garage where it was to be built, according to tape recordings made by an informer.
The informer, Emad A. Salem, had insisted on procuring the timer so as not to expose himself to the group of Muslim extremists he had infiltrated.
But in a near-comic charade, F.B.I. agents stole the device because they feared that it might end up being used in an explosion, the transcripts show.


Prisons Chief Fights Public Anger
Larry R. Meachum, Connecticut's Commissioner of Correction, is a ramrod straight, rock-jawed man who looks like everyone's image of a prison guard made good, which he is, but who is far more likely to quote Gandhi than Bull Connor.
"An eye for an eye will make the whole world blind," he told residents here at a recent public meeting.
If you hate too much, he said, "you run the risk of becoming like what you fear and what you hate."


Encore Wire (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Ivanisevic Wins in Rout, To Crowd's Displeasure  Goran Ivanisevic was making it look too easy.
So easy the fans didn't like his manhandling of Andrei Medvedev.
They occasionally booed Ivanisevic's awesome power -- 27 aces and 32 service winners in winning the $2.1 million Paris Open yesterday, 6-3, 6-2, 7-6 (7-2).
"I don't care," Ivanisevic said.
"They want five sets but I don't want to play five sets." (AP) Navratilova Wins: No. 1-seeded Martina Navratilova defeated No. 3-seeded Zina Garrison Jackson for the 33d time in 34 meetings to win the $375,000 Bank of the West Classic in Oakland, Calif., yesterday.
Navratilova won, 6-2, 7-6 (7-1). (AP) GOLF  Couples Makes Top 10  Fred Couples shot a three-under-par 70 yesterday to win the Kapalua International in Hawaii by four strokes.
Couples, who earned $180,000, has played only 19 tournaments on the PGA Tour this year, but finished 10th on the money list with $796,579 in earnings. (AP) King Climbs to the Top: Betsy King sank a 20-foot birdie putt on the final hole to win the Japan Queens Cup in Yokawa by a shot, becoming the United States' L.P.G.A. top 1993 money winner and Player of the Year. (AP) HIGH SCHOOLS  St.
Francis Prep Ousted  St.
Francis Prep (3-5) will not go to the Catholic High Schools' Football League final for the first time since 1987.
Chaminade (8-1) made sure of that yesterday at Hofstra University, defeating the perennial finalist, 20-3, in a quarterfinal game.
Three-Way Tie: Stevenson (6-1) defeated Bryant (1-7) by 30-8 in the P.S.A.L.
B Division, putting Stevenson in a three-way tie with Truman and Flushing for first place in the division.
The P.S.A.L. will drop the names of the three into a hat today, then pick one.
It gets a week off before meeting the winner of a game between the other two.
AUTO RACING  A Memory for McLaren  Ayrton Senna won the Australian Grand Prix in Adelaide yesterday in his final drive for McLaren, while the world champion, Alain Prost, finished second in the final race of his career.
After the race the often bitter rivals shook hands, hugged, and then sprayed each other with champagne.
But although the two were gracious, they fell short of a reconciliation.
"There is no point in talking about it," Senna said.
"We should finish with the good things." (AP) HORSE RACING  Personal Bid Upset  Lottsa Talc, ridden by Nick Santagata, outdueled heavily favored Personal Bid yesterday to win the $60,000-added Schenectady Handicap at Aqueduct by 2 1/4 lengths for her first stakes victory.
Personal Bid weakened in midstretch with Jose Santos aboard.
Lottsa Talc returned $16.40 and $4. (AP)


Abroad at Home; Merchants of Hate
If you wonder how low the politics of hate and revenge can get in Washington, listen to this story.
Janet Napolitano, a leading Arizona lawyer, has been nominated by President Clinton as U.S.
Attorney for that state.
She is a Democrat but has supported both parties.
She once worked for Senator Pete Domenici, Republican of New Mexico, and he is for her.


Conflict for Working Couples: When He Retires, Must She?
John Synal, a Westchester County school superintendent, was 56, burned out and bored when he told his wife he was going to retire.
But Jean Synal, at 49, was just reaching the peak of her professional life.
"He was adamant he was going to retire," said Mrs.
Synal, who reared three children before becoming a teacher and then a principal.
"I wasn't too thrilled, because I wondered what he would do with himself. But I never had any doubt that I was going to go on working, because I was in my prime."


High Plains Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ex-Soviet Lands Must Consider Reunion
To the Editor:
In "The (Russian) Empire Strikes Back" (Op-Ed, Oct. 27), John P. Hannah suggests a reconstituted union of some former Soviet republics is a geopolitical threat to the West.


BellSouth's High-Tech Base Drives Its Search for Deals
When John L. Clendenin, the chairman of the BellSouth Corporation, was a high-level executive at A.T.&amp; T., he installed a backyard swimming pool in the shape of a bell.
After the breakup of the Bell System in 1984, he appeared at some meetings wearing a tie full of cracked bells.
So one can only wonder what symbol he will come up with if BellSouth agrees to a substantial investment in the QVC Network Inc.'s hostile takeover bid for Paramount Communications.
Paramount prefers a friendly takeover from Viacom Inc., the big cable company that on Saturday increased its offer to $10.1 billion, or $85 a share.  [ Page C7. ]


Republic Automotive Parts Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a news analysis article on Saturday about the planned debate between Ross Perot and Vice President Al Gore on the North American Free Trade Agreement misstated the position of Representative Charles E. Schumer of Brooklyn.
He opposes the agreement.


Dividend Meetings


Ameriwood Industries Intl Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


For Giuliani, Big Job in Albany: Separating Friends From the Foes
For Rudolph W. Giuliani, the road linking promises made to promises fulfilled will lead time and again through a place of complex partisan alliances and fierce regional loyalties, a place where labels lose their meaning and reliable maps of the political terrain don't exist -- Albany.
Whether he seeks to change homeless-shelter policies, sell city hospitals, repair the subways, improve schools, balance the budget or arrest more drug dealers, Mr.
Giuliani will need the help or approval of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the State Legislature.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Producer Prices . . .
October  Wednesday  Consumer Prices . . .
October  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Retail Sales . . .
October


Software Spectrum Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Game of the Century May Be Fiesta Bowl
Before the T-shirt manufacturers roll out those Game of the Century souvenirs, before psychics attempt to contact Knute Rockne for his take on the Notre Dame-Florida State game next Saturday, and before a weatherman is voted most valuable player should Charlie Ward start skidding on the ice, there is one thing neither the Fighting Irish nor the Seminoles want to know.
Miami could be waiting.


Treasury Plans to Auction Notes and Bills This Week
At the Treasury's quarterly auction this week, the Government will sell three- and 10-year notes.
The three-year note will be a new issue, while the 10-year note will be a re-issue of the 5.75 percent note auctioned in August.
There will not be a 30-year bond auction.
Under the new borrowing policy set in May, the Government is reducing the annual issuing of 30-year bonds by about 40 percent and will hold only two 30-year auctions a year, instead of four.
The next 30-year auction is scheduled for February.


Bayport Restaurant Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Pioneer Financial Services Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Alden Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corporate Software Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Zaring Homes Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Garan Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


No Headline
"We don't have any money for medicine, and life has become very hard. The little money I had has dried up. It's hard for me to watch my children like this." -- SOLIEUS FENELON, a Haitian mother of six children, three of whom are seriously ill.  [ A8:1. ]


GWC Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
The Market Place column in Business Day yesterday, about the stocks of radio companies, misstated terms of SFX Broadcasting's debt payments.
The annual interest payments total $9.1 million, not $17 million, and the debt is due in seven years, not six.


M. G. Products
Shares in M. G. Products, a lighting manufacturer and distributor based in Chula Vista, Calif., jumped sharply yesterday after a group led by the financier George Soros said it had bought an 8.9 percent stake in the company.
The stock had slumped in recent months, falling from a high of 20 in June.


Review/Music; Of Mists and Mystics, Muscles and Money
The good news from the Brooklyn Academy of Music last weekend is that the Brooklyn Philharmonic's new theme series can draw the kind of young and committed audience classical music presenters pine for but rarely see.
It is also pleasant to report that during this three-day combination of music and talk called "The European Mystics," the orchestra played always respectably and sometimes quite well.
Would that this opening theme had been a little clearer.
While the other events this season -- "Ellington's New York," "Sturm und Drang," "From the New World" and "The Russian Stravinsky" -- offer clear-cut exploration, "The European Mystics" seemed to be hiding an idea not quite thought through behind a mystical cloud of its own.
I don't think I was the only listener who came away still wondering what European mystics are and what the weekend's six composers had in common.


Grace and Big Hospital Join In Developing Blood Filter
W.
R.
Grace &amp; Company is teaming up with Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, a major hospital here, to develop a device that cleans poisons from the blood of liver-disease patients awaiting organ transplants.
About 30,000 Americans a year die of liver failure caused by drug or alcohol abuse, viral hepatitis or trauma.
No more than 1,500 get liver transplants.


Holiday on Thursday
Veterans Day will be observed on Thursday. Here are holiday schedules. NEW YORK
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.


Elscint Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Goldman Sex-Bias Verdict Is Thrown Out
Setting aside a jury's verdict, a Federal judge threw out a suit late yesterday that charged Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company with sex discrimination when it dismissed a woman executive.
In a 31-page opinion, Judge Kimba M. Wood essentially said there was insufficient evidence of discrimination against Joanne M. Flynn, who was dismissed in March 1989, to uphold the verdict.


D&amp;K Wholesale Drug Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Allou Health &amp; Beauty Care Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cousins Properties Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Mr. Potato Head beckons readers to consider a college, but some don't see eye to eye with ad.
THERE he was in the middle of the page, with those big eyes and ears, and toothy smile.
In a cursory view, a reader might have assumed the appearance of Mr.
Potato Head simply meant the start of another Christmas advertising season.
That was hardly the case.
As the dominant figure in a full-page ad for Bryant College in recent issues of Time, Newsweek and other national publications, Mr.
Potato Head has caused a minor stir back on campus.


POWERSOFT TO BUY WATCOM FOR $44 MILLION
The Powersoft Corporation, a maker of client-server software, said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire the Watcom Corporation, a software company in Waterloo, Ontario, for $44 million.
Watcom sells a line of high-performance computer language software for microprocessors and personal computers.
Powersoft, of Burlington, Mass., has been reselling Watcom's data base management system for a year.
Powersoft has been successful selling its Powerbuilder software, which allows software developers to rewrite mainframe applications on PC's.


Rifkin's Lawyer Assails Actions of the Police
A lawyer for Joel Rifkin, the former landscaper who confessed to killing 17 women, charged at a pretrial hearing today that the police acted illegally when they searched his pickup truck in June and discovered a body in the back.
They also said that Mr.
Rifkin, 34, of East Meadow, was interviewed by at least one officer before he was advised of his rights.


Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Green Point Stock Challenge
A proposed stock offering by the Green Point Savings Bank was challenged yesterday by a lawsuit representing the bank's depositors.
The suit, which seeks class-action status, objects to the decision by Green Point to ignore an unsolicited merger bid from the Republic New York Corporation and go ahead with its plan to convert from a mutual savings bank -- nominally owned by its depositors -- to one owned by stockholders.
In a bid on Friday, Republic offered to make a special interest payment of $100 million to Green Point depositors.
The Green Point offering contains no such interest payments, but its depositors would be able to buy stock in the offering.
Because of the structure of savings bank conversions, stock in these offerings almost always appreciates sharply immediately after the issue.


Israelis and Palestinians Resume Talks to Clear Way for Self-Rule
Determined to bargain in secret, Israeli and Palestinian negotiators quietly resumed talks here today on obstacles to carrying out limited Palestinian self-rule, but no details of the talks were revealed.
Egypt's Foreign Minister, Amr Moussa, and a spokesman for the Foreign Ministry confirmed that the delegates resumed talks at a secret location today on self-rule in Gaza and Jericho.


Corrections
An article in some editions on Saturday about the trial of a Newark police officer charged in the shooting of a car-theft suspect misspelled the last name of another officer.
The officer, who testified at the trial, is Michael Cavallaro.


Whitman's Budget Vow May Hurt Backers
If Christine Todd Whitman is going to make good on her promise to cut New Jersey income taxes, her own supporters will have to pay a part of the price.
Analysts outside her circle of advisers say her task will be to persuade the suburban voters who gave her the margin of victory to sacrifice some of their most cherished government benefits, including aid to education and local governments.


Small Businesses Also Deserve a Few Breaks From City Hall
To the Editor:
New York City is giving Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company $31 million in incentives to stay in New York City (news article, Oct. 30).
The city has been giving large corporations billions for decades to retain jobs.


Medstat Group Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Filter Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Music; Exploring the Effects Of Dvorak's Sojourn In the New World
A hundred years ago, Antonin Dvorak lived on East 17th Street in Manhattan.
He loved New York's pigeons and elevated trains, he once drank the music critic James Huneker under the table, and he directed a music conservatory founded by the wealthy wife of a wholesale grocer.
But this mundane three-year visit by the Czech composer has begun to take on epic proportions, partly because Dvorak came here with advice: that American music find inspiration in such folk sources as Negro and Indian songs.
His advice brings up issues that now cause anxious debate: What relationship does high art have to popular culture?
How should music evolve in a country that has no coherent national culture?


Collins 'Just Glad to Be Walking'
Giants cornerback Mark Collins put it simply.
One day after he lay on the turf for several minutes, his back hurting so much he could barely move and thoughts that he might be paralyzed creeping into his head, he woke up this morning and took pleasure in the very act of moving.
"I'm just glad to be walking," Collins said. "I'll tell you that."


Voting by Color
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 3 coverage of the New York City mayoral election included an article restating the now-familiar complaint that Mayor David N. Dinkins lost because of white racism.
The facts show otherwise.


U.S. Will Investigate Cost of the Arab Boycott
The nation's top trade official ordered a yearlong investigation today into the costs to American companies of the Arab economic boycott of Israel and of companies that do business with Israel.
The results of the study, ordered by President Clinton's trade representative, Mickey Kantor, could lead to threats of trade sanctions against some Arab countries late next year.


Turner Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Baldwin Technology Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Senate Showdown Set on Grazing-Fees Filibuster
Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt and his opponents in the Senate are about to square off one more time over his plan to toughen the rules for ranchers whose herds graze on public land in the West.
As early as Tuesday, Mr.
Babbitt's allies in the Senate are expected to try for the fourth time in three weeks to round up the 60 senators needed to break a filibuster that has stymied passage of a spending bill for the Interior Department.


Arabs Accusing Israel On Handling of Protests
As protesting Jewish settlers barricaded highways in the occupied territories with little interference by the army, a Palestinian leader accused Israel today of using a double standard in handling Jewish unrest caused by the latest attacks on settlers.
Arab traffic was paralyzed during the morning rush hour as hundreds of settlers blocked highways throughout the West Bank and Gaza Strip with rocks and burning tires for a second consecutive day, preventing thousands of Palestinians from reaching their jobs in Israel.


From G.O.P.'s Fall Guy To Our Man in Panama
IF the world of politics ever produced a good sport, it was Robert R. McMillan.
In 1988, when every prominent Republican in New York turned down the chance to run against Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the G.O.P. turned to Mr.
McMillan, a little-known Long Island lawyer who took on the job with uncommon gusto and good cheer.
For 22 weeks, Mr.
McMillan crisscrossed the state in his own Cadillac, receiving little money from the party and still making, by his own count, 702 campaign appearances.
And when it was all over, after Mr.
Moynihan had thoroughly whupped him, the Republicans in the White House asked Mr.
McMillan what he wanted for falling on his sword.


Observer; All Shook Up
Americans love crime in movies, television and books, but gibber and quake when it walks their streets.
This is one of many contradictions that confuse efforts to reduce crime.
A nation hooked on violent entertainment can hardly be expected to give it up because it just may happen to provide insensitivity training for children, can it?


Business Digest
Companies
SmithKline Beecham will give cash rebates to American consumers who buy Tagamet, an ulcer treatment, in a sharp break with pharmaceutical industry policy of not marketing prescription drugs directly to the public.
The move is the latest response to pressures for lower drug prices, which have intensified with the push for national health insurance.  [ Page A1. ]


Princess Wins a Court Ban on More Gym Photos
Declaring "distress and a deep sense of outrage," the Princess of Wales won an injunction tonight against two British newspapers that published photographs secretly taken of her exercising at a London health club.
The photographs, taken by a camera hidden in the ceiling, were sold to The Daily Mirror and The Sunday Mirror by the gym's owner for a sum that was reported to be about $150,000.


Bridge
If the diagramed deal seems confusing, be patient.
All will be revealed.
It happened in a crucial match between Britain and Italy in the 1954 European Championships, and has a strong claim to belong in the record books.
The weird-looking bidding was the result of an artificial Italian system.
The one-diamond opening bid by North was strong and artificial, and the one-spade response showed that South had exactly one king and no ace.
North showed a powerful spade suit, and then jumped to slam in the hope that South's hearts were relatively strong.
The heart king was a virtual certainty, and he hoped that the queen was in support.


Editorial Notebook: Nationalist China or Nationalist Taiwan?; Democracy Raises An Inconvenient Issue
Americans who still think of Taiwan as "Nationalist China" are in for a shock.
The most conspicuous nationalism to be encountered on the island these days is not Chinese but Taiwanese.
It's based on the idea that the immigrants who arrived from the Chinese mainland centuries ago created a new and distinctive society, just as the English colonists who settled America or Australia did.
Taiwanese nationalists point out that for only four years this century has their island been under mainland rule.


Leon Theremin, Musical Inventor, Is Dead at 97
Leon Theremin, the inventor of the electronic instrument that bears his name, died on Wednesday in Moscow.
He was 97.
The theremin, one of the first electronic instruments, looks like a radio receiver with a vertical antenna on top and a horizontal metal loop on the side.
It is played by moving the right hand in the air near the antenna.
The pitch varies according to the hand's distance from the antenna.
The volume is controlled by moving the left hand back and forth in front of the metal loop.
In effect, it was the first synthesizer.


Giuliani Sees Role for Police In the Schools
Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that police officers should be posted inside any New York City public school where the security was found to be inadequate, but Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines stopped short of endorsing Mr.
Giuliani's position.
The subject arose as Mr.
Giuliani, sharing a podium with Mr.
Cortines, explained how he would carry out his campaign proposal to create drug-free and crime-free zones around the city's 1,069 public schools.
He said police precinct commanders would determine how many officers to deploy to patrol the zones, covering a two-and-a-half-block radius around each school.


Testing Continues for Proposed Passaic Water Tunnel


A Quick Bite
Faster than a jumping flea, more rapid than a fleeing fly, able to trap small prey in single snap.
A denizen of the planet Krypton?
No, just the lightning-quick mandibles of the trap-jaw ant.
Researchers at the University of Wurzburg in Wurzburg, Germany, have found that the speed of the mandible strike of the trap-jaw ant, less than a millisecond, and sometimes as fast as a third of a millisecond, is among the fastest movements possible in animals.
By comparison, the jumps of fleas, at 0.7 to 1.2 milliseconds, and the escape response of cockroaches, at 40 milliseconds, are relatively slow.


Sullivan Dental Products Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ebersol to Remain Chief of NBC Sports
DICK EBERSOL ended all reports that he was a candidate for baseball commissioner yesterday by signing a four-year contract as the president of NBC Sports.
Ebersol has run the division since May 1989.


Onex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Central Asia, New Alliances Shift the Balance
To the Editor:
William Safire criticizes Turkey's unprincipled pressure to lift United Nations sanctions on Iraq in "Ally for Sale" (column, Oct. 28).
But he misportrays Turkey's relationship with Iran as one purely of conflict.


Books of The Times; With Flux Everywhere And Meaning in All of It
The Protean Self  Human Resilience in an Age of Fragmentation  By Robert Jay Lifton  262 pages.
Basic Books. $25.
As events like the fall of the Berlin wall, the collapse of the Soviet Union, the splintering of Yugoslavia and the recent signing of a peace accord between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization so dramatically attest, change has been accelerating around the world.
A sense of flux, the psychiatrist Robert Jay Lifton argues in his latest book, is further heightened by the growing spread of communication -- television, fax machines and telephones -- and it is underscored in the United States by the breakdown of communities and families and the constant movement of people from job to job, town to town.


Arnold Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jets Savoring the Remains of the Game
A day after dismantling the Dolphins for the second time this season, the Jets were still savoring their 27-10 victory.
But they were also casting a cautious eye toward Sunday's game at Indianapolis.
Just as the Jets own the Dolphins, having won five of their past six games, the Colts have dominated New York, taking 10 of 12 games since 1987 and 5 of 6 since Bruce Coslet took over as the Jets' coach in 1990.
And the Jets will be going into Sunday's game against a rejuvenated Jeff George at quarterback without their best cornerback, James Hasty, who broke his cheekbone and was scheduled to have surgery at Lenox Hill Hospital tonight.


Canada Links Trade Pact To an Accord on Subsidies
The United States charges that Canadian hog farmers get unfair Government subsidies, hurting American hog farmers but enabling American consumers to buy cheaper pork chops and bacon.
So the Commerce Department retaliates by slapping higher duties on Canadian pork.


Old Tablet From Turkish Site Shows Early Spread of Culture
NEW discoveries in Turkey and northern Syria, two buried cities and intriguing clay tablets with cuneiform writing, are expanding the known horizons of early urban civilization and literacy well beyond the Sumerian city-states of southern Mesopotamia.
Archeologists say the discoveries are among the most exciting in Mesopotamian studies in recent decades.
They are confident that further excavations at the sites will provide answers to one of the most important questions in archeology: how and when did the phenomena of urban living and the first writing spread from their place of origin more than 5,000 years ago in the lower valley of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers far into adjacent regions?


Trade Pact Divides New York's Garment Industry
Behind the facades along the streets of New York's storied garment district, it would seem that few workers or managers appear as vulnerable to the potential upheaval caused by opening trade with Mexico as those in the apparel business.
Over the years it has lost tens of thousands of jobs to foreign countries where lower wages and business costs seem the perfect setting for churning out competitively priced shirts, jackets, pants and blouses.
But the industry is split over the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Some prominent New York manufacturers support it and are convinced that they have little to fear from Mexico's lower-wage work force.
In fact, they think New York's battered economy may actually benefit if Congress approves the trade pact, which will reduce tariffs among the United States, Mexico and Canada.
However, other manufacturers -- and the industry's unions -- believe that the prospect of increased Mexican competition is unfair and may ultimately mean their demise.


Lee Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Western Gas Resources Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CFI Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Chiefs Again Turn Good Defense Into Their Best Offense
Before Joe Montana joined them, the Kansas City Chiefs would win football games this way: Defense makes big play, scores, jump-starts offense and defense wins it in the end.
There was no Joe Montana on the field when the Chiefs met the Green Bay Packers here tonight before 76,742 fans at Arrowhead Stadium.
Montana was still nursing his hamstring injury.
So, this is how Kansas City won: Defense made big play, scored, jump-started offense and defense won it in the end.


Fermilab Chief Appointed To Dismantle Supercollider
DR.
JOHN PEOPLES JR., director of the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory in Illinois, was appointed yesterday to take over direction of the dismantling of the superconducting supercollider in Texas.
Dr.
Peoples will replace Dr.
Roy F. Schwitters, the supercollider's founding director, who resigned last week after Congress decided to terminate the $11 billion project.
Dr.
Peoples will continue to direct Fermilab, which is the most powerful particle accelerator in the world, but for the time being he plans to spend most of his time in Texas.


Chempower Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bernstein Archive To Be Digitized For Public Access
Leonard Bernstein's personal archive, a vast collection of correspondence, musical manuscripts, photographs, recordings and memorabilia, is to be donated to the Library of Congress, the Bernstein family and the library announced today.
And in a collaboration between the Bernstein estate, the library and a consortium of institutions across the country, the material is to be used to create the Leonard Bernstein Multi-Media Archive, a technological experiment that may prove a major step in creating a vast, interconnected national data system.
The plan, outlined today at the library, calls for the material to be digitally copied.
Once digitized electronic facsimiles of the letters, scores, books and recordings are stored in the library's computers -- and once a distribution system is on line -- the material will be available not only to other institutions but to private researchers and music lovers, who will be able to dial into the collection from their home computers.
No archive as extensive and varied as this one has ever been made accessible by electronic means, and the technology being developed to accommodate it will be usable for any archive on any subject.


AIDS Message in a Subway Comic Strip; New York City Health Agency Teaches About the Disease in a Soap With a Sober Focus
Our story so far, as seen in 6,000 New York City subway cars, above the windows and between the advertisements for hemorrhoid, hernia, and foot doctors:
Julio and Marisol run into each other while visiting Raul Rodriguez, who is in the hospital with AIDS.
They apologize for the big quarrel several episodes back, when Julio refused to use a condom and walked out.
Their romance rekindled, they leave Raul's room to get some coffee and talk things over.


Lassonde Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Rare Chance to Flee Sarajevo


Bull Run Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Facelifters Home reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. ARRESTS MAN IN FIRE THREATS
A man was charged today with threatening to set fires in revenge for the Government seizure of his property.
But prosecutors said they had not linked him to recent fires in Southern California.
The man, Thomas Lee Larsen, 43, was arrested on Sunday and charged today in Federal District Court with one count of mailing threats to damage or destroy by means of fire.
The charge carries a maximum penalty of five years in prison and a $250,000 fine.


2 States That Limit Medicaid Abortions Are Object of a Suit
Using a new provision in the Federal budget, abortion-rights groups today began a legal campaign against states that have imposed greater restrictions than the Federal Government on financing abortions for poor women.
In separate lawsuits filed in Federal courts in Little Rock and Denver, the groups asked that provisions in the Arkansas and Colorado Constitutions be struck down because they limit Medicaid payments for abortions to only those instances in which the life of the pregnant woman is in jeopardy.


Theater in Review
Trophies  Cherry Lane Theater 38 Commerce Street Greenwich Village By John J. Wooten; directed by John Gulley; set by Mark Cheney; costumes by Missy West; lighting by Mark F. O'Connor; sound by Scott Stauffer; music by David Brunetti; production stage manager, Geoffrey F. Morris.
Presented by Yabadoo Productions.
WITH: Janet Nell Catt, John Henry Cox, R. Ward Duffy, Mark Irish and Christen Tassin.


McDonald &amp; Co. Invest reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
ITT Finance Corp., St.
Louis, is offering $100 million of notes due in 1995 at a price of 100 to float 10 basis points more than the 30-day commercial paper rate, which was at about 3.15 percent, and $125 million of notes due in 1994 also priced at par to float at the 30-day rate through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The noncallable notes are all rated P-2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc., D-1 by Duff &amp; Phelps and A-1 by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


Cambior Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


With Foreign Policies Under Fire, Top State Dept. Deputy Is Ousted
The Clinton Administration moved today to stanch the relentless criticism of its foreign policy performance by compelling the second-highest official in the State Department to resign.
Deputy Secretary of State Clifton R. Wharton Jr., the highest-ranking black official in State Department history, submitted his resignation, effective immediately, in letters to President Clinton and Secretary of State Warren Christopher, senior White House and State Department officials said.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BOWATER P.L.C., London, said its United States unit, Rexham Inc., had sold its Custom Papers Group to several investors including the subsidiary's senior management for $22 million in cash, plus $2.7 million in long-term debt.
FKI P.L.C., London, said its $102.5 million acquisition of SPX Corp.'s Truth unit, a maker of hardware based in Owatona, Minn., had been approved by United States antitrust regulators.


3 Officials Leave Spectrum As Sculley Tightens Reins
John Sculley, who recently left Apple Computer to run Spectrum Information Technologies, a small wireless communications company with a cloudy past, made it clear yesterday that he was in charge, announcing the resignation of the company's founder and two other executives.
Mr.
Sculley also said that Spectrum had settled a class-action lawsuit brought by investors.


Energen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Trans-Lux Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Far West Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nam Tai Electronics Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Parker &amp; Parsley Petroleum Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Designatronics Inc. reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


AmBase Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sports of The Times; The Sick Saga of the Paraglider
HE came from out of the blue, or the black, actually, the black of the night sky, flying down as if on a gossamer string.
He was the Mysterious Paraglider, searching for a seat in the middle of the heavyweight championship fight, and thinking he spotted one in the middle of the ring.
It might have been funny if it was not so dangerous and scary -- scary not only because of what has gone on before this to interrupt and disrupt sports events in recent times, but because of what we still might have in store for us.


Executive Changes
EVANS ENVIRONMENTAL AND GEOLOGICAL SCIENCE AND MANAGEMENT, Miami, a unit of Evans Environmental Corp., Miami, named William L. Young president.
FEDERAL-MOGUL CORP., Southfield, Mich., appointed Fred J. Musone to the new position of president for worldwide manufacturing operation.


Cronkite's Mother Dies
Helen Fritsche Cronkite, mother of Walter Cronkite, died on Sunday at her home in Washington.
She was 101.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said Julie Sukman, Mr.
Cronkite's executive assistant at CBS News, where he is a special correspondent.


Lebow's Mettle Earns French Medal
Countdown week for next Sunday's New York City Marathon got under way at Tavern on the Green in Central Park yesterday with the usual tokens of hype and of hoopla, from the over-sized athletic shoe behind the podium at the morning news conference to the presentation of the official medal of the French City of Caen to Fred Lebow.
You know Fred Lebow.
According to Caen's deputy mayor, Paul Dubourget, everybody in France does.
And what's more, the French are so taken with Lebow's sheer, shining human will in overcoming brain cancer and completing his 69th marathon last year that they plan to honor him from here to France.


Files Contradict U.S. On Salvador Killings
Newly released intelligence reports provide powerful evidence that the Reagan and Bush Administrations collected detailed information on assassinations by rightist leaders in El Salvador in the 1980's but continued to work with them.
The reports go far beyond the accounts provided to Congress at the time by Administration officials, who described their information as limited or incomplete.


Georgia Bonded Fibers reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the Treasury's auction schedule this week misstated the yield in the pre-auction market on Friday for the three-year Treasury note being auctioned today.
In "when issued" trading on Friday, the new three-year note was offered at a price to yield 4.55 percent, not 5.55 percent.


Chief of CVS Unit Promoted To President's Job at Melville
The Melville Corporation said yesterday that Harvey Rosenthal, president and chief executive of its CVS drugstore unit, would become its president and chief operating officer in January.
Mr.
Rosenthal, who is 50, has headed CVS, which is Melville's largest subsidiary, since 1984.
He joined CVS in 1969 after earning an M.B.A. from the Harvard Business School.


Big Pain For Jets: A Costly Collision
Don't tell Jets safety Brian Washington that strange plays and odd injuries are part of the game.
He feels responsible for putting teammate James Hasty in the hospital with a broken cheekbone.
"If anything, it should have been me that was hurt," Washington said.


U.S., Aware of Killings, Worked With Salvador's Rightists, Papers Suggest
Newly released intelligence reports provide powerful evidence that the Reagan and Bush Administrations collected detailed information about assassinations conducted by right-wing leaders in El Salvador in the 1980's but continued to work with them nonetheless.
The reports go far beyond the sketchy accounts of possible links between political killings and leaders like Roberto d'Aubuisson that were provided to Congress at the time by Administration officials who repeatedly described the information as limited and incomplete.


Scientists Propose Novel Explanation For Alzheimer's
Less than three months after its discovery of a genetic link to Alzheimer's disease, which turned an entire field on its head, a research team has proposed a radical new theory to explain how inheritance of the gene results in the devastating neurodegenerative disorder.
The hypothesis is highly preliminary, based solely on test-tube experiments, and was greeted by other neuroscientists with reactions ranging from measured enthusiasm to outright skepticism.
Nevertheless, the results suggest a method for designing drugs to prevent the disease, a common form of dementia that afflicts about four million Americans.
The gene is thought to account for the disease in about half those with the disorder, scientists said.


Vincent Declines the Mets' Job Offer
Fay Vincent, the former commissioner of baseball, will not become the chief business officer for the Mets.
Vincent, who had met with ownership three times in the last week to discuss the vacant title of executive vice president for business operations, notified the Mets yesterday that personal and professional commitments would make taking the job impossible.
"I was interested," Vincent said.
"But I decided this past weekend that it really wasn't appropriate at this time."


Political Memo; Complexities of the Middle of the Road
There is a certain grandeur to President Clinton's proposed Health Security Act, to the sheer reach of the thing, from Title I, Subtitle B, Section 1114, g(2A), authorizing Pap tests every two years for women aged 50 to 65, to Title X, Subtitle C, Section 10201(a), creating a 15-member Commission on the Integration of Health Benefits.
There is a certain pride in the White House over the sweep and intricacy of the 1,342 pages, which roll like the work of a bureaucratic Tolstoy from the procedures on the posterior teeth of children under the age of 13 to the borrowing authority for regional alliances to cover cash shortages.


Geico Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clinical Data Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Apco Argentina Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Senate Votes Life Term for 3d Felony
In a muscle-flexing but largely symbolic vote, the Senate today approved a measure that would set mandatory life sentences for people convicted of three violent felonies when the third crime is committed on Federal property.
The amendment to the $22.3 billion crime package working its way through the Senate is opposed by some liberals in the House, putting its enactment in doubt.
But the overwhelming Senate vote of 91 to 1 reflects a strong mood in both chambers to enact a strong crime bill.


Lannet Data Communications Ltd. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


West Fraser Timber reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Leviathan Gas Pipeline Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Prenden Journal; For East German Theme Park, the Bad Old Days
Guard towers cast ominous shadows over fearful citizens who are forbidden to leave their heavily guarded enclave.
Spies from the dreaded secret police are everywhere.
Prices are low, but there is little to buy.
Everyone is supposed to turn out for military parades and cheer the Communist boss as he waves from the reviewing stand.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Named John Wathan bullpen coach; Mike Roarke pitching coach; and Frank White first base coach.


All-Star Ballot Set in Pro Basketball
Election Day may have been last week, but balloting of a different sort began last night in National Basketball Association arenas across the country.
At stake: the right to start in the 1994 N.B.A.
All-Star Game at the Target Center in Minneapolis, Feb. 13.
Balloting by fans will continue through late January.
The entire Knicks' starting lineup made the ballot, while only two Nets were named.
Patrick Ewing, a seven-time All-Star, led the Knicks' contingent of Charles Oakley, Charles Smith, Doc Rivers and John Starks.
Derrick Coleman and Kenny Anderson are eligible for the Nets.


CytoTherapeutics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Norv Turner Has the Cowboys' Offense on the Go
After the Dallas Cowboys had ripped the Buffalo Bills last January in Super Bowl XXVII, the Dallas offensive coordinator, Norv Turner, got a call from his close friend and former University of Oregon teammate, the Hall of Fame quarterback Dan Fouts.
"Dan recapped each of our touchdown passes on offenses and knew the play, the formation and exactly what we had done," Turner recalled, smiling.
"He was right on the mark, but it wasn't a surprise."


METRO DIGEST
WHITMAN'S PLEDGE MAY MEAN SACRIFICE If Christine Todd Whitman is going to make good on her promise to cut New Jersey income taxes, her own supporters will have to pay a part of the price, analysts say.
A1.


Review/Television; Art Imitates Many Lives In 'Unsolved' Mystery
With the promise, or the specter, of a 500-channel future looming before the nation, television is scrambling to develop new programming sources.
Look for repackaging to become a survival craft.
Like some giant juice extractor, television is determined to squeeze every possible drop of programming mileage out of its more workable formulas.
This week's top example: "Victim of Love: The Shannon Mohr Story," a television movie on Channel 4 at 8 tonight.
In the beginning, going back to 1987, there was "Unsolved Mysteries," a "reality" show offering, according to NBC, "reports on the paranormal, as well as touching human dramas involving unexplained disappearances, medical miracles, lost loves, unclaimed fortunes and wanted fugitives." With the host, Robert Stack, assuming his patented Eliot Ness authoritative manner, the program consisted of interviews with actual participants and dramatic re-enactments.


Star-less Bulls Win Big After Losing Pippen
Bulls 106, Hawks 80
The Chicago Bulls, depleted by the retirement of Michael Jordan and an injury to Scottie Pippen, needed neither at home last night in a 106-80 rout of the Atlanta Hawks.
The Bulls also were without the injured Scott Williams and John Paxson.


Q&amp;A
St. Elmo's Fire
Q.  What is St. Elmo's fire?
A.
St.
Elmo's fire is a brushlike or treelike electrical discharge around an object in the atmosphere, often accompanied by a bluish glow and a hissing, crackling noise.
St.
Elmo's fire requires a large difference in electrical charge between the object and the surrounding air and is most commonly seen around pointed objects in high terrain in disturbed weather conditions.


Serbs Abduct 2 Aides Riding With Sarajevo's Catholic Archbishop
Serbian gunmen abducted two aides of Sarajevo's Roman Catholic Archbishop from United Nations armored cars today, United Nations officials said.
The cars were transporting Msgr.
Vinko Puljic, two priests and three aides from Sarajevo to Vares when about 50 Serbian militia members halted the convoy, forced the travelers from their vehicles and abducted two aides, the officials said, adding that the Serbs said the captives were "war criminals."


QVC and Regulators Discuss Paramount Bid
As the war for Paramount Communications Inc., reached its eighth week, QVC Network Inc. continued to negotiate with Federal regulators yesterday to remove potential antitrust problems in its bid.
At the same time, QVC was still talking with the BellSouth Corporation about a $1.5 billion investment.
QVC's chairman, Barry Diller, will need more financing if he intends to counter the sweetened offer made over the weekend by Viacom, Paramount's preferred merger partner.


Kasparaitis D.W.I. Case
It will be a little longer before DARIUS KASPARAITIS finds out the ramifications of his arrest this past summer on a charge of driving while intoxicated.


Sculptures Bloom at a Park in Queens


What Other Industry Suits Washington?
To the Editor:
In "Tax Fairness for D.C." (editorial, Oct. 30), you are right to criticize Congressional meddling with the budget of the District of Columbia.
The residents of the District should have the real self-government that cannot exist without fiscal autonomy, including the right to make foolish decisions.


Tokyo Panel Urges Loosening of Bonds on Business
In its first effort to reduce the Government's power over Japan's minutely regulated economy, a commission appointed by Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa called today for the elimination or easing of 475 regulations governing the nation's legal and economic systems.
The proposals, which were in an interim report hastily prepared so that Mr.
Hosokawa can present it to President Clinton this month at a planned meeting in Seattle, were ambitious but conspicuous in their lack of details.


Swift Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Browns Pass Kosar Off Their Roster Over Feud With Belichick
There was bad blood between Bill Belichick, the Cleveland Browns' head coach, and Bernie Kosar, their long-time quarterback, and the Browns solved it yesterday.
In a stunning move, they released Kosar.
The decision was ultimately made by Art Modell, the Browns' owner, and it was especially difficult because his two favorite people seemed to be his coach and his quarterback.
But there was friction because Belichick believed Kosar was not the player he once was and had benched him once this year, and Kosar believed Belichick's offense was too limited.
Something had to give, and it turned out be be Kosar.


Officials Look but Can't Confirm Plot to Kill Perot
Federal law-enforcement officials said today that they had been unable to confirm the existence of a plot to kill Ross Perot, who said in Tampa, Fla., on Sunday that he was a target because of his opposition to the North American Free Trade Agreement.
One law-enforcement official said information about a threat to Mr.
Perot's life was first received on Saturday evening by a nonprofit telephone tip line in Southern California.
The caller said that he was standing with a man who spoke no English, but that the man had recently been released from a Mexican jail, and in jail he had heard that a six-member Cuban hit squad planned to kill Mr.
Perot.
Perot Disclosed Threat
Officials of the Federal Bureau of Investigation said the agency's office in Los Angeles was alerted to the threat and advised Mr.
Perot in Tampa.
Federal agents have investigated the tip, but have so far failed to substantiate it, officials said today.


Vigoro Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chess
Jan Timman's three losses in a row to Anatoly Karpov, in Games 14, 15 and 16 of the International Chess Federation's world championship match, virtually knocked him out of contention.
He was then trailing by a score of 5 1/2 points to 10 1/2, and there were only eight more games to go.
The Dutch grandmaster kept struggling, and gained back one point with a victory in Game 20 before Karpov ran out another draw in Game 21 to triumph in the series, 12 1/2 to 8 1/2.
Karpov surpassed Timman in all phases of the game.
His positional play, skill in defense and technical mastery of the endgame were too much for Timman.
The Russian even stole his opponent's thunder by exhibiting greater creativity in opening strategy.
In Game 16, Karpov capped his superior opening play with decisive middle game maneuvers and a trenchant endgame.


U.N.L.V. Sanctions
A six-year infractions case involving the University of Nevada-Las Vegas men's basketball program will finally be resolved today when the National Collegiate Athletic Association announces sanctions against the program.


Bancinsurance Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


By Design; Thigh-High or Nothing
Micro-miniskirts dominated the spring shows in Europe and New York, bringing up the problem of the right hosiery to wear with them.
Heavy tights are fine for winter woolens but not for lightweight fabrics like chiffon and silk.
So designers offered two choices: bare legs or thigh-high stockings.
The thigh-highs turned up in shows by designers as varied as Gianni Versace, Byron Lars, Ralph Lauren and Nicole Miller in opaque, sheer, fishnet and lace versions.
And Bloomingdale's already has a good selection of the hosiery.


Fugitive in Contraband Cigarette Case Surrenders, Ending Standoff
A Golden Hill Paugussett Indian chief ended a bitter standoff with Connecticut authorities last night by surrendering to state police in Colchester after three months of hiding on the tribe's reservation.
The chief, Moonface Bear, was charged with illegally selling tax-free cigarettes.
Moonface Bear contacted the police late yesterday and agreed to leave the sanctuary of his 107-acre reservation, said Sgt.
Scott O'Mara of the Connecticut State Police.


Unitil Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Bronx Priest Is Dismissed In Church Leadership Rift
An Episcopal priest who believed that part of his mission was to deal head-on with the social ills buffeting his community, has been removed from his South Bronx church.
He had been suspended in May after questions arose over his understanding of church policies and conflicts with its leadership.
The Right Rev.
Richard F. Grein, Episcopal Bishop of New York, terminated the Rev.
Luis Barrios as the priest in charge of St.
Ann's Church, saying he had "no confidence" in the priest's ability to heal the rifts and protests that had besieged the Mott Haven parish since the suspension.


Evergreen Healthcare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Loewen Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Vornado Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chesapeake Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Theater: How to Write a Play; A Ludlam Legacy: New Drummer, Same Beat
Things could not have been going much better for Charles Ludlam a decade ago, when he wrote "How to Write a Play." "Le Bourgeois Avant-Garde" and "Galas," his major endeavors as playwright, star and director at the Ridiculous Theatrical Company in 1983, were artistic and popular successes.
Next up was "The Mystery of Irma Vep," a crowd-pleaser that repeatedly extended its run.
So much so that "How to Write a Play," which was originally intended to fill out the "Irma Vep" season, emerged from the wings for only a couple of in-house performances.
To see this lost play at last in 1993, in the authentically outrageous staging it receives from Everett Quinton, Ludlam's heir as star and director at the Ridiculous, is to be catapulted right back to an exuberant moment in the history of a groundbreaking theatrical company.
For a couple of hours you can almost forget that Ludlam died in 1987 at the age of 44.


'Today' Show Moving to Storefront Studio
NBC's morning program, the "Today" show, will relocate next fall to a new glass-walled studio that will use the sights of Rockefeller Plaza as a permanent backdrop.
NBC announced the move yesterday.
The program will move from a third-floor studio inside the General Electric Building across 49th Street to a three-story, 18,000 square-foot space that formerly housed a bank.
NBC will install three-story windows on both sides of the storefront that will, in effect, put passers-by on 49th Street on the air and give them a full view of all the activity during the show.


After a Show Gone Awry, Karan Makes Her Points
Donna Karan had a lot riding on her spring fashion show.
It was the finale last week in the white tents in Bryant Park, where, for the first time, American designers held their seasonal shows at a central site.
The designer planned an extravagant opening scene on Friday night to symbolize the new direction of fashion.
She selected fabrics that changed their characters under lights -- useful on dark country roads and at late-night clubs.
She ordered 1,000 headlamps and 1,000 flashlights so that the audience could catch the change as the models passed down the runway.


Jackpot Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Other States' Cuts, Cited by Whitman, Were Less Severe Than Her Proposals
When Christine Todd Whitman was challenged over her plan to slash state taxes and spending in New Jersey, she often replied that if other governors could do so, so could she.
Her advisers frequently point to Massachusetts and Michigan, along with Arizona, as examples of states where Republicans succeeded in reversing years of supposed Democratic profligacy after entering office.


Of Zoomers, Newtons and Real Life: So Far, Promise Exceeds Usefulness
WHEN the Newton Message Pad finally arrived a couple of months ago, Apple Computer Inc. was widely criticized for promising too much and delivering too little.
Billed as a "personal digital assistant," the Newton was the first of what was expected to be a new generation of pocket computers that combined information management and communications.
Now comes the Casio Z-7000 "Zoomer," which uses technology licensed from the maker of its fraternal twin, the Tandy Z-PDA, and one must conclude that these small, pen-based information managers are simply ahead of their time.
Although the Zoomer appears to be marginally more useful than the Newton, at least for now, it, too, is most likely to appeal mainly to what Casio refers to as "early adopters of innovative consumer electronics technology," in other words, gadget buffs who do not mind spending $700 or more for a gizmo of unproven utility, and who are willing to endure some frustration in learning to use it.
The suggested list price for the Casio device I tested was $899.95.


Guess Who Came to Dinner
Maybe it wasn't the dinner invitation that changed her mind, but President Clinton had one convert to the North American Free Trade Agreement even before the 13 undecided Democrats invited to the White House for dinner tonight with the President sat down to eat.
Representative Karan English of Arizona made her support for the pact known after receiving the invitation.


Question of Islamic Philosophy Raised at Explosion Trial
A bit of Islamic moral philosophy came up in the World Trade Center trial yesterday, and so did information on why an immigration inspector at Kennedy International Airport suspected that a Palestinian was not a Swede, as the prosecution, countered by a spirited defense, turned its attention to the movements of one of the defendants, Ahmad M. Ajaj.
Mr.
Ajaj is seen as a minor figure among the four men on trial in the World Trade Center bombing on Feb. 26.
Unlike the three other defendants, who are accused of helping to build the bomb and transport it to the trade center, Mr.
Ajaj is charged with bringing manuals into the country that were used in making the explosive.
He was arrested when he entered this country on Sept. 1, 1992, five months before the bombing, and remained in jail on immigration charges until after the explosion.


Lowrance Electronics reports earnings for Year to July 31


SCIENTIST AT WORK: Katy Payne; Picking Up Mammals' Deep Notes
WATCHING elephants from a tower in the African savanna seems a long way from the music studies Katy Payne pursued here as an undergraduate student at Cornell University in the 1950's.
But she insists that her career as a field biologist, which has produced remarkable discoveries about the language of the world's largest mammals, whales and elephants, has followed "a natural, logical line," and that her knowledge of music has been an essential ingredient in her studies of animal communication.
"It's all connected -- my outdoorsy childhood, my early musical experiences, my marriage to a musical biologist who abandoned laboratory science to study whales," she said.
Even her divorce in 1985 from the biologist, Dr.
Roger Payne, fostered new discoveries by prompting Ms.
Payne, a self-taught bioacoustician, to turn her research attention from whales to elephants.


Assembly Chief Weighs Run Against Lautenberg
A few days after winning re-election to the Assembly and to his job as Speaker, Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian has notified the Federal Election Commission that he has his eye on another post in 1994: the United States Senate seat held by Frank R. Lautenberg.
Mr.
Haytaian, a Hackettstown Republican, said today that he has set a goal of raising $1 million by the end of January and that if he meets it, he will announce his intentions about challenging the incumbent Democrat.
Speaking after a meeting here to discuss last week's elections, he said he did not anticipate difficulty raising the money.


BDM International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hillary Clinton Attacks Health Plans Offered by Conservative Democrats
Hillary Rodham Clinton said today that the Administration was willing to negotiate the future of the nation's health care system with liberal Democrats and moderate Republicans, but she turned a surprisingly cold shoulder to conservative Democrats whom her husband embraced in last year's Presidential campaign.
The First Lady said the Administration was willing to consider changes in President Clinton's health care plan so long as the final product guaranteed "universal coverage with comprehensive benefits." She said that the only proposals that earned serious consideration by those standards were the President's plan and those offered by liberal Democrats and moderate Republicans.


CHRONICLE
When ANTHONY DREXEL DUKE first heard about plans to celebrate his 75th birthday in Grand Central Terminal, "nothing shocked me more in my life," he said yesterday, adding, "I thought, they'll never be able to fill even a corner of it." .
Not to worry, Mr. Duke.


Jetliner From China, The Sixth This Year, Hijacked to Taiwan
In the sixth hijacking of a Chinese airliner to Taiwan this year, a man using bars of soap to simulate explosives diverted a jet carrying 59 people to the international airport at Taipei today.
As it has done in the previous hijackings, Taiwan returned the jet, a Dash-8-300, and its passengers and crew, and held the hijacker for trial.


Hagler Enters Hospital
The former world middleweight champion, MARVIN HAGLER , was hospitalized yesterday in Milan, Italy, after complaining of stomach pain, his agent said.
The agent, PETER DeVEBER, said Hagler's doctor told him the retired boxer would be kept overnight at Polyclinic Hospital for tests.
Hospital officials declined to release more information. (AP)


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Graf Returns Strongly  Steffi Graf, returning to competition after foot surgery five weeks ago, reached the second round of the Virginia Slims of Philadelphia by defeating Debbie Graham, 6-2, 6-0, last night.
The world's No. 1 female player showed her usual mobility and said she experienced no pain.
"I felt very good tonight and felt no effects from the layoff," the German star said. (AP)


Espey Manufacturing &amp; Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


YELTSIN APPROVES NEW CONSTITUTION WIDENING HIS ROLE
President Boris N. Yeltsin approved the draft of the first post-Soviet constitution today.
If approved by voters on Dec. 12, the constitution will give Russia a strong executive presidency and restrict the powers of its constituent regions.
The final draft is to be published Tuesday.
An earlier draft, which has only been slightly changed, confirmed that a new two-chamber parliament that is also to be elected on Dec. 12 will serve only two years, while Mr.
Yeltsin will serve out the rest of his five-year term, until June 1996.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices Agree to Rule on Rights of State Prisoners
Opening a new round in its long-running debate over the right of inmates in state prisons to have their cases reviewed in Federal court, the Supreme Court today agreed to decide whether inmates transferred from one state prison system to another can appeal to Federal court on the ground that their confinement violates the interstate agreement on prison transfers.
Under an agreement signed by 48 states -- all except Louisiana and Mississippi -- and the Federal Government, a complex set of rules governs the handling of prisoners who face criminal charges in more than one jurisdiction.
A prisoner who is transferred for trial in a different state must be tried there within 120 days, or the charges must be dismissed.


Essex County Gas Co. (NMS) reports earnings for 12mo to Aug 31


Ex-Yonkers Mayor's Death Is Laid to Fears of Inquiry
The wife and brother of Nicholas C. Wasicsko, the former Yonkers mayor who shot himself to death last month, said today that they believed his suicide was prompted largely by fears that he was under investigation for his role in the Yonkers Industrial Development Agency.
A continuing inquiry into financial practices at the agency, of which Mr.
Wasicsko was a board member and former chairman, began this summer after a former secretary admitted to embezzling at least part of an estimated $500,000 that is missing from agency coffers, officials said.


Upper Peninsula Energy Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tearful Woman Tells Jury Why She Cut Off Her Husband's Penis
A woman told jurors today that she cut off her husband's penis because she was distraught after he had choked and raped her for the second time in five days.
The husband's lawyer offered a different motive, saying the woman was a social climber who wanted to spite her husband for being a selfish lover.
The woman, Lorena L. Bobbitt, was testifying in Prince William County Circuit Court at the trial of her husband, John Wayne Bobbitt, who is charged with marital sexual assault.
Mrs.
Bobbitt said she sliced off Mr.
Bobbitt's penis when he fell asleep after attacking her.


The 'Great Debate' Over Nafta
Were it not for the fact that truly serious issues are involved, the caterwauling over the North American Free Trade Agreement would be almost comic.
On one side we have a populist President frantically wooing the Republican establishment to round up the 30 or so votes he needs to get Nafta through the House.
Standing the usual political coalitions on their heads, Mr.
Clinton has courted familiar G.O.P. luminaries like Henry Kissinger, James Baker and even Senator Bob Dole, while accusing his erstwhile allies in the labor movement of using "naked pressure" and "muscle-bound tactics" to defeat the agreement.


Lawrence H. Zahn; Executive, 79
Lawrence H. Zahn, a retired packaging executive for the Ciba-Geigy Corporation, died on Thursday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
He was 79 and a resident of New Vernon, N.J.
The cause was complications from Parkinson's disease, said his wife, Blanche Phillips Zahn.


Injured Knee Puts Morris Out 1 to 2 Weeks
There was more bad news from the front line of the Nets, who arrived here today for Tuesday night's game against the Mavericks.
It looks as if small forward Chris Morris will be out for one to two weeks.
Morris took a nasty tumble during the third quarter of the Nets' 99-73 victory over the Spurs on Sunday night.
Tests today showed that he sprained the medial collateral ligament of his left knee.
He will be replaced by P. J. Brown.


Patient Dies After Falling Into a Coma at a Hospital
A 60-year-old man who lapsed into a coma last month after he was sedated by an intern who was convicted of poisoning six people in 1985 died early today, and his family requested an immediate autopsy to determine if there had been foul play.
The patient, Barron Harris, was admitted to the Veterans Administration Hospital here on Sept. 29 suffering from pneumonia.
Two days later, family members said, he fell into a coma after being given a sedative by Dr.
Michael Swango, a convicted felon who had obtained a job here under an alias.
The family fears he may have been been poisoned, their lawyer, Andrew Siben, said.


Theater in Review
Eating Chicken Feet Playhouse 46 at St.
Clement's 423 West 46th Street Clinton By Kitty Chen; directed by Kati Kuroda; lighting by Michael Chybowski; costumes by Hugh Hanson; set by Robert Klingelhoefer; sound by Jim Van Bergen; production stage manager, Patt Giblin; fight choreography by Michael G. Chin.
Presented by Pan Asian Repertory Theater (Tisa Chang, artistic and producing director) and the Women's Project Productions (Julia Miles, artistic director).
WITH: Christine Campbell, Wai-Ching Ho, Mary Lee, Ben Lin, Liana Pai, Steve Park and Bobby Sacher.


KEVORKIAN LEAVES JAIL AFTER 3 DAYS
Dr.
Jack Kevorkian was unexpectedly released from jail after three days today when a lawyer who had never met him and says he opposes assisted suicide put up $2,000 to bail him out.
"I just felt it was time for this charade to end," said Jack A. DeMoss, 68, who described himself as a civil lawyer in general practice in suburban Clinton Township.
"He was trying to hold the whole legal system up to ridicule."


Mercury General Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Drug Promotion Based on Price Breaks the Prescription Tradition
Breaking sharply with a longstanding pharmaceutical industry marketing policy that largely bypassed the consumer, SmithKline Beecham P.L.C. said yesterday that it would give cash rebates to Americans who buy Tagamet, an ulcer treatment that is one of the largest-selling prescription drugs in the world.
Taking name-brand price competition to pharmacies for the first time, SmithKline Beecham is producing 50,000 counter displays that say the Tagamet rebate will save a customer $20 a month compared with the cost of Zantac.
That competing drug, made by Glaxo P.L.C, is an even-larger-selling ulcer treatment, with $3.5 billion in sales last year.
Tagamet sales were $1.1 billion.
Changing a Product's Status
SmithKline's move, which brings prescription drugs closer to popular consumer products like toothpaste and laundry detergents, is the latest and most drastic response in the industry to growing pressures for lower prices.
The pressures have intensified with a barrage of criticisms of the industry by President Clinton and his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton.


Canandaigua Wine Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


CHRONICLE
People who get up on stages to present honors to award winners usually lavish praise on their subjects.
So it was something of a surprise to listen to LARRY KING and SALLY JESSY RAPHAEL talk about RUSH LIMBAUGH at the 1993 Radio Hall of Fame Awards on Sunday evening.
Mr.
Limbaugh, the conservative talk-show host, received the award for top syndicated radio personality at the honors ceremony in the Museum of Broadcast Communications in Chicago.
"There is a new organization being formed," said Mr.
King, who was host of the event attended by 600 people.
"It's called 'Feminists, Blacks and the Homeless for Limbaugh,' and they are meeting in a phone booth in Wichita."


Pointing Fingers, Joined Hands
As the Dallas Cowboys began to run up the score and put the final touches on a 31-9 thrashing of the Giants on Sunday, the Giants' frustrations began to show in a big way.
Some were questioning the intensity of others, and shouting matches and finger pointing ensued.
For a brief time there was a hole in the bow of Ship Giant that had previously been cruising along so smoothly.
"I think guys were just frustrated, on both sides of the ball," said one offensive player, who asked not to be identified.
"Some guys took it out on each other. But it's over and forgotten."


U.S. Vendetta Targets Radar Detectors
To the Editor:
Even as the Clinton Administration promises to reduce arbitrary Government regulation, the Department of Transportation is trying to get the radar detector industry.
Despite a lack of evidence linking these devices to higher speeds or greater accident risk (and ignoring research by one of the department's agencies that concluded further studies of the subject were unjustified), the department goes ahead with efforts to ban detectors in commercial vehicles.


PRESIDENT BEGINS A LOBBYING BLITZ FOR TRADE ACCORD
President Clinton began an intensive face-to-face effort today to persuade lawmakers to throw their support behind the North American Free Trade Agreement as the White House added to his criticisms of labor unions who are the chief opponents of the accord.
Struggling to find the 218 votes he needs for the agreement's approval in the House of Representatives, Mr.
Clinton met from morning until well into the night with pairs and small groups of Democratic members of Congress, nearly all of whom had not declared their position.


Merisel Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


ERC Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Study Says Haiti Sanctions Kill Up to 1,000 Children a Month
An oil embargo and other sanctions intended to help restore democracy to Haiti are killing as many as 1,000 children each month, according to a study to be released this week by international public health experts at Harvard University.
The study, titled "Sanctions in Haiti: Crisis in Humanitarian Action," reports that although international attention has focused largely on killings and political terrorism in Haiti since the September 1991 coup that deposed President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, "the human toll from the silent tragedy of humanitarian neglect has been far greater than either the violence or human rights abuses."


Elron Electronic Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Japan, a Plundered Company
It was August 1989, and corporate Japan was enjoying the best of times.
The stock market was sizzling and the economy was brimming with optimism, but the Janome Sewing Machine Company, a conservative industrial concern, was secretly committing what would nearly turn it into a corporate suicide.
Without informing shareholders, the police or regulators, Janome's board and its main bank, now known as the Asahi Bank, handed nearly $300 million in hush money to Japan's most notorious corporate raider.


Rangers Finally Measure Up to Messier's Standard
Mark Messier will not compare last night's game at Madison Square Garden with the infamous one between the Rangers and the Tampa Bay Lightning almost exactly one year ago.
That game was an unqualified disaster, one Messier followed with his own diatribe, and that night still stands as the first major indication that New York's 1992-93 season was going to turn out a mess.
Instead, Messier stepped onto the ice last night thinking about a Tampa Bay game played just a few shorts weeks ago in Florida, a game that followed New York's embarrassing loss to the Anaheim Mighty Ducks and also was a mortifying defeat.
Would the Rangers once again fail to prepare for a lesser opponent?
Would they take this one lightly and get burned again?


Interlinq Software Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Eldest Bush Son Runs for Governor in Texas


Durkin Hayes reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A School Crossing Guard Is Slain in Her Apartment
A 50-year-old woman who had been a crossing guard at her neighborhood school for 22 years was stabbed to death in her apartment in Brooklyn on Sunday evening and her 12-year-old grandson critically wounded, the police said yesterday.
Gladys Aviles, who held a second job cleaning the school as she struggled as a single parent to raise four children, was found stabbed once in the chest after neighbors heard her grandson screaming in the third-floor hallway outside their apartment.


DSG International Ltd. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Firm's Pact Seen Adding 150 Workers
Countering a trend among Long Island military contractors, an engineering and testing company here is hiring up to 150 new workers and expanding its plant.
The company, Dayton T. Brown, Inc., which employs about 350 people, has won a five-year, $150 million Army contract to test helicopter components including rotors, engines and transmissions.


I.B.M. Subsidiary to Handle Southern Pacific Rail's Data
The Southern Pacific Rail Corporation, the sixth-largest freight railroad in the United States, said yesterday that it would turn over much of its information-processing operations to a unit of I.B.M.
The companies said that under the deal, the first of its type in the railroad industry, Southern Pacific is to pay $415 million over the 10-year life of the contract to the Integrated Systems Solutions Corporation, a unit of the International Business Machines Corporation.
Southern Pacific said the contract would save the company $10 million a year.


Move by Time Warner
The Time Warner Entertainment Company, a unit of Time Warner Inc., has named Gordon Cooke president of Time Warner Interactive Merchandising.
The new division was created to develop programming for marketers on Time Warner's cable systems and the planned interactive system that will be offered in Orlando, Fla., next April.
Mr.
Cooke has been chief executive of Bloomingdale's By Mail, a division of Federated Department Stores Inc.


Biologists Decipher Body's Signals for Repairing Wounds
WHETHER from the edge of an envelope that seems suddenly to have sprouted teeth, or a bread knife that completes its journey through a bagel by diving into the tender V of flesh between thumb and forefinger, a wound to the skin sets off a predictable reaction: a yelp of pain, a fleeting desire to blame somebody else for the injury, and the body's nearly instantaneous efforts to minimize the damage and begin cleaning up the mess.
The task of healing wounded tissue is among the most essential, dramatic and visible jobs the body performs.
And lately scientists have made significant progress in parsing the complex sequence of events that allows traumatized tissue to heal itself.


Cabdriver Shot Dead On Staten Island
A livery-cab driver was shot and killed yesterday afternoon near a Staten Island housing project, the police said.
The driver, identified as Mahmoud Addelrehiem, 45, of Staten Island, became the 37th driver killed this year and the fourth killed in the last month.
All but five of the drivers operated livery cabs.


Fort Dearborn Income reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Firm Gets $400 Million Investment
CS First Boston is expected to announce as early as today that it is joining its parent, CS Holding, in making a $400 million investment in Clipper Capital Partners, a merchant banking firm founded by a number of former First Boston executives.
The investment raises about two-thirds of the seed money that Clipper Capital wanted.
The big investment is the clearest indication yet that the merchant-banking business is reviving on Wall Street after almost four years of dormancy after the go-go years of the 1980's.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  THE TOLL ON YOUNG HAITIANS  An oil embargo and other sanctions intended to help restore democracy to Haiti are killing as many as 1,000 children a month, say public health experts at Harvard.
A1  YELTSIN APPROVES DRAFT CHARTER  Boris Yeltsin approved the draft of the first post-Soviet constitution, which if approved by voters will give Russia a strong executive presidency and restrict the powers of its constituent regions.
A1


Hudson General reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.07
2.95
2.98
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.11
3.04
3.10
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.28
3.24
3.31
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.23
5.33
6.55
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.19
6.20
7.73
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.25
7.30
8.70
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.65
5.65
6.55
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Comdisco reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Allan Hoover Is Dead; President's Son Was 86
Allan Hoover, the son of President Herbert Hoover, died on Thursday in Portola Valley, Calif.
He was 86 and had lived much of his life in California.
Mr. Hoover died after a brief illness, The Associated Press reported.


Motorola Radio Deal For Nextel
In a move that could hasten new nationwide competition for cellular telephone service, Motorola Inc. has agreed to sell its vast patchwork of "specialized mobile" radio services to Nextel Communications for an estimated $1.8 billion.
People familiar with the plan said last night that Motorola would announce the sale today.


Repairing New York's Schools
It took a crisis over asbestos to call widespread attention to the appalling physical deterioration of New York City schools.
Now it is inescapably clear that the school system must find ways to repair and maintain its physical plant before the deterioration becomes terminal.
Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines has proposed a reasonable plan to overcome the two chief problems causing the maintenance crisis -- a shortage of funds, and poor management.


Edward Ross Aranow; Takeover Expert, 84
Edward Ross Aranow, a legal expert on corporate takeovers, died on Sunday in his home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He was 84 years old.
His family said the cause was cancer.


Review/Fashion; Glamour by Kors Has a 1940's Feel
Michael Kors had some good news to relate at the beginning of each of his three fashion shows in his showroom yesterday.
"On Friday, we reached agreement with our creditors' committee, which will bring us out of Chapter 11," he said.
With the threat of bankruptcy behind him, he introduced clothes that could help his company prosper.


Total Research reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


May Department Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


CV R.E.I.T. Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


MCI Mail Changes The Nature Of Letters
MANY things can be done with an on-line service's computer connected to a modem and a personal computer through telephone lines.
There are countless programs to be downloaded, that is, copied from the service's big computer; there is banking from home; shopping; checking movie reviews; looking up information in an encyclopedia or sampling the news and weather reports; making friends, and exchanging electronic mail.
In a typical electronic-mail transaction, you might write a letter on the little computer before calling the big computer.
Then you sign on; the service costs $6 an hour.
It takes, say, two minutes to send the letter.
That is 20 cents, not counting the $12 monthly charge for the service, which you probably use for other things anyway.


At 86 Years Old, Mavis Lindgren Is a Road Runner
Her first running suit was a home-made dress and canvas shoes, which caused some commotion along the highway here.
She was frail, a grandmother, and moving not that much slower than a Volkswagen.
Cars kept screeching to a halt, figuring she needed a ride to the nearest telephone.
"Something the matter?" the drivers would ask.


Needham Named To Seiko Account
The Seiko Corporation of America in Mahwah, N.J., said yesterday that it had selected DDB Needham New York to handle its estimated $10 million account for the Seiko Time division, which had been at AC &amp; R Advertising in New York for 25 years.


Patterns
50 Toledos for Barneys
When Barneys New York opens in Los Angeles in March, only one designer will be depicted 50 times in a mosaic that spans the first floor apothecary: Isabel Toledo.


Notre Dame? It's Just Another Game to Low-Key Ward
The quarterback says he is fine.
The ribs are still a little sore, but Charlie Ward says they will not be a problem by Saturday, when his Florida State Seminoles face the real and imagined obstacles at Notre Dame Stadium.
He says he is fine with all the excitement and anticipation of someone looking toward a dental appointment.
This must be a big game.


In Los Angeles, a Museum on a Roller Coaster
The earth didn't actually quake.
But to those at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, the effects of the last 18 traumatic months may make it feel as if the Big One had hit.
The museum was still enjoying tremendous growth when its director, Earl A. Powell 3d, resigned in April 1992 to head the National Gallery in Washington, one of the most prestigious jobs in the arts in America.
From a fledgling institution in 1965, it had become the most comprehensive art museum west of Chicago.
More than $80 million of private money had been raised during Mr.
Powell's 12-year regime to put up new buildings to house the growing collection and the blockbuster exhibitions that regularly stopped there.
Annual operating costs had topped a whopping $30 million, but the museum felt secure that about half of that would be picked up by the County of Los Angeles under a contractual commitment any museum could envy.


Another Shifting Alliance
Hillary Rodham Clinton said the Administration was not willing to negotiate its health care plan with conservative Democrats, a group once aligned with her husband.
Page A12.


Shadows of a Season's Twilight Hours


ACR Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


The Debate On Television
The debate between Vice President Al Gore and Ross Perot on the North American Free Trade Agreement will be televised live starting at 9 P.M. on "Larry King Live" on CNN.
The debate will also be broadcast live on National Public Radio.


Unifirst Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


Tri-Lite reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Attack Suspect Held
A suspect in the neo-Nazi attack on members of the United States luge team is back in jail, but a court rejected arrest warrants for two other suspects, a German prosecutor said yesterday
About 15 neo-Nazis beat up luger DUNCAN KENNEDY of Lake Placid, N.Y., in a bar in the eastern German mountain resort of Oberhof Oct. 29.


Herman Nolen, 92, Chairman Emeritus Of Drug Corporation
Herman Christian Nolen, chairman emeritus of the McKesson Corporation, the San Francisco-based manufacturer and distributor of drugs and health and beauty care products, died on Sunday at Bethesda Memorial Hospital in Delray Beach, Fla.
He was 92 and lived in Delray Beach.
He suffered a brief illness after a stroke, his family said.


The Secret of Long Life? Be Dour and Dependable
SCORE one for those pious voices of prudence: being cautious and somewhat dour is a key to longevity, according to a 60-year study of more than 1,000 men and women.
Those who were conscientious as children were 30 percent less likely to die in any given year of adulthood than their most freewheeling peers.
But those who were ebullient in childhood fared less well in life's roulette wheel; they were about 6 percent more likely to die in any given year than the least cheerful children.


Andros Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 24


Continental Can reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A photograph yesterday with an article about growing foreign student enrollment at the University of Bridgeport was published in error.
The picture, at the right, showed Stacy Andriolas, a student at the university and a resident of Bridgeport, not Erica Roesch, president of the senior class.


Fossil Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


IFR Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Theater in Review
The Cincinnati Saint  Playhouse 91 316 East 91st Street Manhattan Book by Norman Lessing; music by Raphael Crystal; lyrics by Richard Engquist.
Based on the play "36," by Norman Lessing.
Directed by Ran Avni; set by Barbara Cohig; costumes by Gail Cooper-Hecht; lighting by Betsy Finston; orchestrations and musical direction by Mr.
Crystal; musical staging by Helen Butleroff; production stage manager, D. C. Rosenberg.
Presented by the Jewish Repertory Theater, Mr.
Avni, artistic director; Edward M. Cohen, associate director, in association with the 92d Street YM-YWHA.
WITH: Robert Ari, Ellen Foley, Gordon Greenberg, Jonathan Hadley, Steve Sterner and Kurt Ziskie.


Mutual Assurance Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Casino Data Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Oceaneering International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rio Algom Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Teledata Communication Ltd.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rexon Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Oct 3


International Potter reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lomak Petroleum (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Aladdin Knowledge reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Market Place; Toyota surges as investors bet on an increase in sales in Japan.
AT a time when the company might suffer the first operating loss in its history, the stock of the Toyota Motor Corporation has nonetheless started to break away from the pack.
Toyota shares, traded on the Tokyo stock exchange, rose from 1,690 yen on Sept. 1 to 1,900 yen on Nov. 1, its highest level in more than two years.
In the last few days, it has fallen back somewhat as the Tokyo market as a whole plunged, closing on Monday at 1,840 yen (about $17), unchanged.


In Central Asia, New Alliances Shift the Balance; A Deadly Censorship
To the Editor:
A kind of censorship by assassination has taken place in Turkey.
Since February 1992, 16 journalists, most of whom wrote for left-wing or pro-Kurdish journals have been murdered, often gangland style, in southeast Turkey, where a separatist guerrilla war has cost more than 7,400 lives, mostly civilians, since 1984.


THE FREE-TRADE ACCORD: Estranged, Not Divorced; Clinton Attacks Labor for Stance on Trade, But Reconciliation Appears to Be Inevitable
Many in organized labor viewed Bill Clinton with suspicion in the spring of 1992 as he appealed desperately for the votes that would knock Jerry Brown and Paul Tsongas out of the primary campaigns in Michigan and Illinois.
Mr.
Clinton was Governor of a state that did not much accommodate unions, and he would not say what he would do about the North American Free Trade Agreement, an idea they despised.
But Mr.
Clinton was the pragmatic choice -- he seemed most likely to win -- and he insisted that he was "pro-worker, not anti-union."


Mercantile Stores Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


On My Mind; Grovel and Pander
Ross Perot?
He is a team player and yes, he might be considered for a job in Bill Clinton's cabinet.
Who said that? Al Gore, when he was running for Vice President.


Polymedica Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Insight Under the Big Top
Tim Ryan, who called the Riddick Bowe-Evander Holyfield fight for TVKO Saturday night, needed a day to recall anything in his career as remotely outrageous as parachutist James Miller's descent to the edge of the Caesars Palace ring 1 minute 10 seconds into the seventh round.
He was working for a Toronto TV station 30 years ago, announcing a police track and field meet.
As entertainment, the organizers brought in an aerialist.


Agnico-Eagle Mines (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


EQUITABLE COS. (N)
The Equitable Companies continues to do well since it transformed itself from a mutual insurance company owned by policyholders into a publicly traded stock company in July 1992.
Yesterday, the company announced that after-tax earnings for the third quarter were more than three and a half times higher than the $19.2 million reported for last year's third quarter, which excluded an extraordinary charge of $55.6 million for demutualization expenses.


Corrections
The Inside Art column in Weekend on Friday misstated the price paid by the Metropolitan Museum of Art for "The Golden Age," a 1605 painting by the Dutch master Joachim Wtewael.
It was $2.1 million, not $1.2 million.


Trenwick Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Plax and Ben-Gay Move to Cline, Davis
Pfizer Inc. said yesterday that it had moved its Plax and Ben-Gay brands to Cline, Davis &amp; Mann in New York, after five years at Ally &amp; Gargano in New York.
Though billings were not disclosed, trade publications estimated the combined billings at $18 million to $20 million.


Thomas Wins Title
It took a national championship to do it, but JEFF THOMAS of Plainview West in New Jersey has finally become the Metropolitan Golf Association player of the year.
Thomas, a fixture on the circuit for years, clinched the award by capturing the 1993 Mid-Amateur Championship.


CHRONICLE
Mr.
King had to postpone a part of the tour he is making to promote his book, "On the Line: The New Road to the White House," which was published last week by Harcourt Brace &amp; Company.
But it was for a good cause.
Mr.
King is the moderator of the debate between Vice President Al Gore and Ross Perot tonight on "Larry King Live" on CNN, about the North American Free Trade Agreement.
So scratch Seattle and Los Angeles from his promotional itinerary, at least for now.


INSIDE
Crime Bill Advances
The Senate approved an amendment that would set mandatory life sentences for people convicted of three violent felonies when the third is committed on Federal property.
Page B9.
Police in New York's Schools
Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani said police officers should be posted inside public schools if needed, but the Schools Chancellor stopped short of endorsing the plan.
Page B1.
Insight Into Healing
New research has increased knowledge of how wounds heal themselves and offers hope that science might discover ways to improve on the process.
Science Times, page C1.
High-Tech Harmony
Leonard Bernstein's family is donating his vast personal archive to the Library of Congress in a collaboration intended to make it accessible to anyone with a computer.
Page C17.


Handy &amp; Harman reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


P.A.M. Transportation Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


E-W-I-N-G Spells Trouble for Bradley and the 76ers
After the superb weekend that Patrick Ewing had, Shawn Bradley may be in trouble.
Bradley, the Philadelphia 76ers' 7-foot-6-inch rookie center, makes his Madison Square Garden debut tonight in New York's home opener.
And waiting for Bradley will be Ewing, who averaged 38 points while leading the Knicks to road victories in their first two games.


In Central Asia, New Alliances Shift the Balance; Turkey Looks to West
To the Editor:
William Safire's "Ally for Sale" (column, Oct. 28) lacks understanding of Turkey's deep commitment to the Western alliance, of which Turkey is an integral part.
Since World War II, Turkey has promoted and strengthened its alliance with the West out of respect for shared ideals of freedom, democracy, human rights and economic liberalization.


Stocks Edge Upward as Dow Gains 4.47
Apparently winded after a week of agitated trading, investors nudged stocks forward yesterday, warily holding some of their orders while waiting for the Government to release reports on inflation today and tomorrow.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was 234.3 million shares, one of the lowest totals in months and about 30 million shares less than the session average for the year.
Volume on the American Stock Exchange and the Nasdaq also sagged.


College Soccer Report
N.C.A.A.
Tournament  Thirty-two teams were awarded berths yesterday in the Division I tournament, which will start at campus sites this week and conclude with the Final Four Dec. 3-5 at Davidson College in Davidson, N.C.
Sixteen of the 32 bids went automatically to teams that won their conference titles.
Two of those schools, Memphis State (13-8-2) and Robert Morris (14-6-1), are in the tournament for the first time.


Winpak Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nassau Plans A Tax Freeze In '94 Budget
Facing a projected deficit of at least $39 million, the Nassau County Executive, Thomas S. Gulotta, today proposed a 1994 budget that he said would freeze taxes while cutting millions of dollars in personnel, consulting, welfare and other costs.
At about 4:30 P.M., about 15 minutes before the budget was due, the county announced that the plan would total about $1.91 billion, about $70 million more than this year's budget.
To achieve the higher revenues, the county is projecting a 5.5 percent increase in sales tax revenue from the amount received over the last 12 months.


Yes, the Sky Is Falling (in a Shower of Dust)
BY studying the tiny dents on a satellite that had been in space for nearly six years, scientists have determined that about 40,000 tons of dust fall from space onto the surface of the Earth in a typical year.
The research marks the first time that levels of cosmic dust less than a millimeter in diameter have been measured directly and precisely, said Dr.
Stanley Love, a postdoctoral research associate in astronomy at the University of Washington in Seattle.
He and his colleagues examined 761 hypervelocity impact craters in 12 aluminum panels that had been designed to protect and cool the satellite, the Long Duration Exposure Facility.
Their findings were published last month in the journal Science.


Review/Film: Carlito's Way; The Triumph of Atmosphere Over Detail in Spanish Harlem
When Carlito Brigante gets out of prison in 1975, he returns to Spanish Harlem as a street-smart Mr.
Big.
This has less to do with Carlito (a vaguely written, not-so-clever character) than it does with casting, since "Carlito's Way" brings Al Pacino back to familiar dramatic territory.
Playing one more tough, savvy gangster, Mr.
Pacino brings vast entertainment value to a film that otherwise would not make great sense.
And Brian De Palma finally succeeds in a "Bonfire of the Vanities" vein, delivering a droll portrait of the disco years as seen through a bemused, jaundiced eye.
"Carlito's Way" is supposedly fueled by Carlito's dreams, which are to open a car rental business in the Bahamas (really) and resume his romance with Gail (Penelope Ann Miller), the kind of woman who calls him Charlie.
But the film's real heart is in the very places Carlito speaks of escaping: the seedy social clubs and slick dance palaces where the story's main action unfolds.


Theater in Review
Jimmy Tingle's Uncommon Sense American Place Theater 111 West 46th Street Manhattan  Written and performed by Jimmy Tingle; directed by Larry Arrick; lighting, Christopher Boll; production stage manager, Paul A. Kochman.
Presented by the American Place Theater, Wynn Handman, artistic director; Susannah Halston, executive director.


High Court Hears Arguments on the Limits of Parody


Women Hold 6.2% of Seats on Top Boards
Women hold only 6.2 percent of the board seats in the 1,000 companies that make up the Fortune 500 and Fortune 500 Service companies lists, according to a study released yesterday.
Of 11,715 directors' seats in the study, only 721 were filled by women, said Sheila Wellington, the president of Catalyst, the nonprofit women's organization that conducted the study.
"The selection process has to be examined, and the pool has to be broadened," she said.
"Almost half these boards have no women on them."


Theater in Review
Promises, Promises  Goodspeed Opera House East Haddam, Conn.
Through Dec. 19 Book by Neil Simon, based on the screenplay "The Apartment" by Billy Wilder and I. A. L. Diamond; music by Burt Bacharach; lyrics by Hal David; directed and choreographed by Ted Pappas; musical direction, Michael O'Flaherty; scenery by James Noone; costumes by Deborah Newhall; lighting by Kirk Bookman; orchestrations by Keith Levenson and Andrew Wilder; stage manager, Donna Cooper Hilton; produced by Michael P. Price.
Presented by Goodspeed Opera House.
WITH: Jim Athens, P. J. Benjamin; Linda Bloom, Paul A. Brown, Michael Cone, John Deyle, Cynthia Khoury, Juliet Lambert, Joe Palmieri, Evan Pappas, Marilyn Pasekoff, Steve Pudenz, Robert Roznowski, Avery Saltzman, Laurie Sheppard, Elizabeth S. Steers, Suzanne Van Johns, Mary P. Wanamaker, Rob Woronoff and Kayoko Yoshioka.


Bank Data, On Screen, Via Phone
In partnership with Citicorp, the nation's largest bank, Ameritech said yesterday that it planned to offer banking and other information services through advanced telephones with large calculator-like screens.
The service will be offered to 200,000 Chicago customers in one of the largest test markets to date.
Mark P. Bayer, a vice president of Ameritech, a regional Bell company, said thousands of the telephones were expected to be leased or sold.


Cuomo Wants High-Speed New York City-Albany Rail Link
Hoping to tap into the Clinton Administration's interest in high-speed rail transportation, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo yesterday proposed building a high-speed rail link between New York City and Albany that would eventually connect to Boston in only two hours.
The project would rely on a technology called magnetic levitation, which enables trains to "float" an inch or two in the air and achieve speeds of up to 300 miles an hour.
Japan and Germany are testing "maglev" trains but have not yet put them into commercial use.


3 Women Accused of Making Firebomb
Three women from 18 to 21 years old were arrested on Monday and charged with helping to make a firebomb that was thrown into a fire engine, injuring three firefighters during a night of unrest in Washington Heights in July.
A fourth young woman, 16 years old, was arrested on riot and assault charges arising from the July 9 disturbance, the police said yesterday.


Paris Journal; France's Homeless Get Help! Read All About It!
After a chilly night huddled in blankets outside the Musee d'Orsay, Georges was up with the sun and ready for a morning's work selling Macadam Journal at an open-air market near the Seine in Paris's elegant 16th arrondissement.
By noon, he had earned enough for a good lunch.
"It has made a big difference for me," he said, nodding toward the tabloid newspaper "for the homeless" that he was holding out to passers-by.
"I can stay in a small hotel one night out of three, but at least I'm well fed now. And I have saved a bit of money."


Wine Talk
FRENCH wine drinkers are a tradition-bound lot.
They may flirt with all kinds of wines, but sooner or later they return to that basic trinity of French wines, Champagne, red Bordeaux and white Burgundy.
Within this fairly rigid framework, however, some subtle and not-so-subtle changes have been taking place for at least a decade.
Taken together, these changes reflect a steady and rather startling drift toward an American taste in wine.


Champion Parts Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Mistakes Are Islanders' Only Consistency
Tonight's 5-2 loss to the Winnipeg Jets was an embarrassment to the Islanders.
Although Aleksei Zhamnov scored a hat trick for the Jets, the winning goal was scored by Tie Domi, a gnome-like brawler who used to pester the Islanders when he was a Ranger enforcer.
Domi had a couple of other scoring chances and skated freely across the ice, doing as he pleased, intercepting passes, bumping into Islanders and firing pucks at the net.
Toward the end of the evening, he verbally baited Mick Vukota, the Islanders' tough guy who declined the invitation to fight.
Both were sent off with misconduct penalties.


Anthony T. Vaccarello, 67, Dies; Former Sanitation Commissioner
Anthony T. Vaccarello, who served as the New York City Commissioner of Sanitation for three years in the 1970's and shocked New Yorkers in 1977 when he called them "a bunch of slobs," died on Monday in North Shore Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 67.
The cause was prostate cancer, said his son, Robert.


Man and Boy Hurt After Being Hit by Subway
Holding his 5-year-old foster brother in his arms, a 27-year-old man jumped in front of a moving subway train yesterday, the police said.
The boy was critically injured.
The man escaped with bruises.
Both were lucky to have survived, said Sgt.
Luis Medina, a transit police spokesman.


Adage Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CCX Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


17 States in Vanguard of War on Smoking
WHILE most funerals are somber events, in Portland, Me., residents cheered last Friday as a local funeral director laid to rest a life-size model of Joe Camel, the advertising symbol for Camel cigarettes.
The event and others like it around the country marked the start of the largest, most comprehensive effort ever undertaken against smoking.
As the health and other costs related to smoking soar to a projected $68 billion this year and as the social acceptability of tobacco smoke sinks to an all-time low, the National Cancer Institute and the American Cancer Society have begun a five-year, 17-state project intended to attack smoking from every possible angle -- at work, at home and at play -- through schools, health-care settings, community groups, work sites and the mass media.


Smith Is Sidelined With a Sore Left Knee
Charles Smith, the Knicks' starting small forward, will be out at least 7 to 10 days because of soreness in his left knee.
Smith underwent a magnetic resonance imaging test Monday that revealed no ligament damage, but some roughening of and damage to the cartilage underneath the kneecap.
The knee has been bothering Smith since late in the exhibition season, when he sat out an Oct. 28 game against the Phoenix Suns.
He aggravated the injury in the season opener last Friday in Boston, then he had to leave Sunday's game in Cleveland during the fourth quarter when the pain became too severe.


Personalities and Pictures: A Made-for-TV Debate
Sometimes there is a political event so transcendentally weird, so Silly Putty, to use one of tonight's Perot-isms, that it almost defies description.
Tonight's big Nafta debate on "Larry King Live" on CNN was not exactly Webster and Clay.
More like Punch and Judy -- with charts instead of bats.


Trimark Holdings (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
GENERAL CABLE CORP., Plainfield, N.J., said it had reached an agreement in principle with Rowan Cos. of Houston for the sale of the net assets of its Marathon LeTourneau Co. subsidiary for about $50 million.
NEWELL CO., Freeport, Ill., announced the completion of its acquisition of Goody Products Inc. for about $150 million.


Courting the Israelis; With Barriers Down, Arab Lands Compete To Conclude Deals With an Ancient Enemy
The meeting between Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of Israel and King Hussein of Jordan last week provided a glimpse into a fascinating new phase of Middle East politics in which different Arab parties are tacitly forging alliances with Israel against one another.
Now that the walls of enmity around Israel are crumbling, Israel is being drawn more than ever into the do-si-do of Arab rivalries and economic competition.


Brady (W.H.) Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
California Pollution Control Financing Authority is selling $200 million of tax-exempt pollution control revenue bonds for the Pacific Gas and Electric Company, through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The 5.85 percent bonds are priced at about 99.299 to yield 5.90 percent, and for some investors these securities may be subject to the Federal alternative minimum tax.
Underwriters expect the issue to be rated A-1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and A by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
Casino America Inc., Boca Raton, Fla., is selling $105 million of 11.5 percent first mortgage notes due in 2001 at a price of 100 through Salomon Brothers.
Nonredeemable for four years, the notes are rated B-1 by Moody's and B by S.&amp; P. The financing includes warrants to purchase 3 percent of the company.


Intuit Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Thermotrex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Giuliani Chooses 19 for Transition Council
Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani named 19 people to his transition council yesterday, assembling a group largely from prominent campaign supporters and donors, but one that also sent a signal that he is consulting women and minority groups as he puts together his government.
The council, headed by Richard D. Parsons, the chairman of the Dime Savings Bank, has been described by Mr.
Giuliani's aides as a part-time advisory panel that will act as a "magnet" for potential recruits to the Giuliani administration.
But a separate set of subcommittees, yet to be named, will have the real power to carry out interviewing and winnow the lists to the three to five candidates that will be submitted to Mr.
Giuliani for key posts.


Overseas Shipholding Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chad Therapeutics (ECM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Coleman-Anderson Tandem Beats Jackson and Mashburn
After losing a big chunk of their offense for the second game in a row, the New Jersey Nets found some more of their defense and fought off the young and pesky Dallas Mavericks tonight, to come away from Reunion Arena with an 86-80 victory.
"We were fortunate enough to win in San Antonio, and then we were able to get this win against a well-coached team that is going somewhere," said Coach Chuck Daly, who got 46 points from his two all-star candidates, Derrick Coleman and Kenny Anderson.
Coleman's game-best total of 28 points included 10 in the crucial fourth quarter.


Seafield Capital Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ann Taylor Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Middle East Sports History: Arabs Join in Israeli Event
When Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization reached their historic peace agreement in September, Abed Rabian decided to run in the second annual Jerusalem Marathon.
The 17-year-old from East Jerusalem today joined other Palestinians, Israeli Arabs and Arabs from abroad who used their running shoes to take steps toward normalizing relations between Israel and the Arab world.


France Arrests 88 Suspected Islamic Militants
Apparently in reprisal for the kidnapping of three French citizens by Islamic militants in Algeria last month, the French police today arrested 88 suspected members or sympathizers of the Islamic Salvation Front who are living in France.
The crackdown also reflected France's mounting concern about the influence of Islamic militants among the three million Muslims living in France and a desire to bolster the besieged Government in Algeria, its former North African colony.


Garment Graphics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Florio and Whitman Meet, And Some Advice Is Passed
For the first time since Election Day, Gov.
Jim Florio and Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman met yesterday.
Mrs.
Whitman talked privately with Mr.
Florio for about two hours at the gubernatorial mansion in Princeton and then accompanied his wife, Lucinda Florio, on a tour of the residence, known as Drumthwacket.
Mrs.
Whitman has said she will spend Monday through Friday at the mansion and weekends on her farm in Oldwick.


Ban on Gun Sales to Minors Passes Senate Easily
After Senators told grim tales of gang violence in their states, they passed two measures today expanding Federal authority to prosecute crimes committed by gang members and making it a Federal crime to sell a pistol to a minor.
Senate passage of the two measures by overwhelming margins was another indication that the overall $22.3 billion crime package Senate leaders hope to pass on Wednesday would include new Federal initiatives on youth violence.


Lintas Appoints 3 Department Heads
Battered by the loss of three large accounts, Lintas New York said on Monday that as expected it had revamped management by appointing three new department heads.
Kevin B. O'Neill, 40, executive vice president and group creative director, was promoted to chief creative officer, succeeding Tony DeGregorio, who resigned earlier last month.
Sheri Colonel, 38, executive vice president and head of the Maybelline and Lego System account groups, was named to the additional new post of chief strategic officer.
And Steve Norcia, 50, executive vice president and worldwide account director, was named to the new post of director of business development.


Let's Not Extend Morning Darkness in Winter
To the Editor:
In advocating daylight saving time during the winter in "The Tunnel at the End of the Light" (Op Ed, Oct. 30), Harriet Van Horne emphasizes the problems caused by one less hour of afternoon sunlight under the present system.


Top Black Studies Scholar Is Leaving Princeton for Harvard
Cornel West, a leading scholar of African-American studies and religion and a best-selling author, will move next fall from Princeton to Harvard.
For the past six years, he has been a professor of religion and director of the Afro-American Studies Program at Princeton University.


Corrections
A holiday schedule yesterday, for tomorrow -- Veterans Day -- referred incorrectly to plans for the financial markets.
They will be open.
The schedule also misstated the day and time for the Transportation Alternatives Street Fair to be held on St.
Marks Place between First Avenue and Avenue A in Manhattan.
It is on Saturday from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M., not on Thursday from 11 to 1.


Randers Group (ECM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


California State Women Win Promise on Sports
In the most comprehensive resolution of a sex discrimination lawsuit to date, the California State University system has agreed to offer women attending its 20 member campuses substantially the same opportunities to play varsity sports as men by the 1998-99 academic year.
To settle the suit brought by the state chapter of the National Organization for Women, the universities agreed to peg to the percentage of women on each campus the percentage of varsity team positions available to women as well as the financing for women's athletic teams and scholarships.


Venture Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Corrections
A report in the Benefits column of Styles of The Times on Sunday about a fund-raiser to be held tomorrow at the Grand Hyatt Hotel, honoring Ted Turner and journalists from five countries who have demonstrated a commitment to freedom of the press, misidentified the sponsoring organization.
It is the Committee to Protect Journalists (not "Society").


Rax Restaurants Inc. reports earnings for Year to July 25


AT LUNCH WITH: Katie and Anne Roiphe; One Daughter's Rebellion Or Her Mother's Imprint?
ANNE ROIPHE wanted to make just one statement about her daughter Katie, the social critic-slash-prodigy who is at the center of the most intense feminist controversy since Betty Friedan pitched a fit about lesbians two decades ago.
"There's been some criticism that she's a young person in rebellion against her mother's generation, against her mother," Mrs.
Roiphe said, directing an exasperated, tough-gal glare toward foes not present during a recent lunch.
"That's the explanation, 'It's just a rebellion.' "
Her daughter, who had been fiddling with a fork, began using it to beat a rapid tattoo on the tablecloth.


Holco Mortgage Acceptance Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Schools
Early on, the pediatrician noted Jonathan Estrada's attention span.
"At six months he liked watching 'Wheel of Fortune,' " says his mother, Mary.
"He'd get all excited when they turned over the letters."
When Jonathan was 9 months old, Mrs.
Estrada and her husband, Mario, were waiting in traffic at a red light.
"I was saying, 'Do you think we should get him a Sesame Street ABC-123 video?' My husband says, 'What?' And Jonathan says, 'ABC-123.' We turned and stared. We were frozen. Cars were honking. I said, 'Jonathan, say it again.' "


The Food, You Can Be Proud to Say, Is in the Mail
CHEESECAKES and chocolate cakes, ice creams and butter creams, goat cheese and sheep cheese.
In hot pursuit of the best food available by mail, somewhere in the neighborhood of 8,000 samples (well, make it 16,000) have passed my lips over the last dozen years.
Some of those flavors have remained in my taste memory, and I thought that this year, instead of searching for 20 new items, which are getting harder and harder to find, I would include the best of the old, along with the best of the new.
In the early 1980's the original mail-order foods -- Day-Glo orange cheeses, unspeakable fruitcakes, frozen steaks and unripened pears -- began to meet delicious foreign and local competition.
Unlike the fruitcake that makes its way around the world year after year, barbecue, champagne truffles, smoked salmon and lemon cake have made gifts by mail something to be anticipated, not dreaded.


Healthy Planet Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


House Fire in Jamaica Kills Two Boys, Ages 3 and 4
Two boys were killed yesterday afternoon when fire swept through their home in Jamaica, Queens, trapping the children in an upstairs bedroom, fire officials said.
Byron Bowen, 3 years old, and his cousin Nicholas Walters, 4, were found unconscious beneath a window in the front bedroom of their home at 155-57 116th Road, said Jerry Sanford, a spokesman for the New York City Fire Department.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-18  CHINA WEIGHS VISITS TO PRISONERS  China said it was considering allowing the Red Cross to visit political prisoners, a signal of what would be a major shift on human rights.
A1  Russia will provide military technology to China.
A15


John Boy Calling on the Videophone
John Boy Walton in cyberspace?
In what appears to be a first in television broadcasting, the "Sally Jessy Raphael" talk show has used a videophone to let a celebrity at a remote site interact with Ms.
Raphael, other guests on the show and the audience in the Manhattan studio.


HCC Insurance Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ambar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dateq Information Network Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


After 9,319-Mile Run, 26.2 Should Be a Mere Stroll
As Japan's Demon Drummers sprinted the final yards in Central Park yesterday, completing a three-year, 9,319-mile run around the perimeter of the United States, Sunday's New York City Marathon promised to be less a torturous race than a stroll down the driveway for the morning paper.
"After this, only 26 miles will seem like dessert," said Marco Lienhard, 31, a Swiss-born member of the drum troupe, known in Japan as Ondekoza, which will play Carnegie Hall on Dec. 3.
"A treat."


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A cable network fires off a rebuttal about regulating violence.
AS magicians, Penn and Teller can deal with some annoyances by making them disappear.
They have had less success in the current debate involving government officials who argue that television and film producers have done too little to reduce the amount of violence shown to the American public.
Until last month, Penn and Teller had been merely vocal critics in opposition to any government intrusion into the artistic process.
But they jumped into action quickly after Janet Reno, the Attorney General, warned leaders of the television industry last month that if they failed to reduce the crime and mayhem broadcast each night, the Federal Government would do it for them.


Grand Central Television
On Manhattan's East 42d Street, there's an enormous room with Tennessee marble floors, an extraordinary staircase, 75-foot windows and a sky-blue ceiling, 10 or so stories high, that's soon to be twinkling once more with golden stars.
Doesn't sound like the kind of place to which a 60-square-foot television screen would add much, does it?
But it's about to get one just the same.
For 90 years Grand Central Terminal has provided more drama in a day than any television screen can provide in a year.
Part of the drama is provided by people; a mixed bag of humanity crosses the main concourse from morning till night.
But most of it is provided by the sheer splendor of the soaring spaces and arched windows that make this as extraordinary a public space as Trafalgar Square or the Place Vendome.


Sports of The Times; Bradley's Eloquent Teacher
IT may be surprising to learn that Moses Malone is only 38 years old, not even the elder statesman of the National Basketball Association.
He seems to have been around, if not since the beginning of time, then at least before the creation of the 24-second clock.
Actually, he broke into pro ball in 1974, a year after Wilt Chamberlain quit.
In the mid-1970's, Malone battled Dave Cowens and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar.
In the mid-1980's, he tutored a college kid from Africa named Hakeem Olajuwon in sweltering Houston summer leagues and took a Georgetown rookie named Patrick Ewing to school in his first game for the Knicks.


At Haiti-Dominican Border: Barrier or Loophole?
More a creek than a river, the Rio Artibonito forms the border between Haiti and the Dominican Republic, and for as long as the two countries have existed people on both sides have often just waded across at points like this whenever they wanted to trade with each other.
But with Western ships off the Haitian coast, the success of an oil and arms embargo against Haiti may ultimately depend on enforcement of the sanctions along the country's 241-mile border with the Dominican Republic.


Market Place; Wall Street Savors Boston Chicken
In the most successful initial public offering of stock in years, Boston Chicken, a fast-food chain that has yet to earn its first annual profit, went public and promptly more than doubled in price.
At yesterday's closing price of $48.50 a share, Boston Chicken had a market value of $839 million, or almost 27 times revenues over the last 12 months.
While the offering had been tipped for weeks as this year's hottest, the amount of the increase stunned both company officials and Wall Street traders.


Primadonna Resorts Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Treasury Refunding Wavers a Bit
The Treasury struggled a bit in the first leg of its quarterly refunding auctions yesterday, even though the latest report on inflation was unexpectedly good.
Bidding for the $17 billion worth of new three-year notes sold yesterday was somewhat ragged, traders said, and the securities sold at an average yield of 4.44 percent.
It is the lowest yield on a three-year note since the May 11 auction, when the average yield was 4.27 percent.


Personal Health
FOR many years, American women thought they were relatively immune to heart disease, long the leading killer of American men.
But now a tide of information intended to dispel this myth has many thinking that heart disease is the newest epidemic to afflict women.
Both ideas are wrong.
Women were never immune; they just lag 10 years behind men in developing heart disease.
After the age of 65, a woman's risk of suffering a heart attack is almost as high as a man's.
Nearly half the 500,000 Americans who will die of heart attacks this year will be women, most past menopause.


Sigma-Aldrich Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


House Panel to Examine Arkansas S.&amp;L. Failure
The chairman of the House Banking Committee said today that his panel would investigate the failure of an Arkansas savings and loan owned by a former business partner and political patron of President Clinton.
The announcement, along with a development in a separate criminal investigation of the savings and loan, makes it more likely that the relationship between Mr.
Clinton and the owner of the S.&amp; L. will be under review well into next year.


Moore-Handley Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Excerpts From the Free Trade Debate Between Gore and Perot


Thermo Process Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Amre Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Peak Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Thermo Voltek Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Accounts
*
Colgate-Palmolive Co., New York, to FCB/Leber Katz &amp; Partners, New York, to handle advertising and promotions for Palmolive Ultra, a superconcentrated automatic dishwashing detergent that uses enzymes to remove dried on food and stains from dishes.
FCB/Leber Katz, which already handles all Palmolive brands, was awarded the account, with billings estimated at $23 million, without a review. *
Nature's Best, Hauppauge, L.I., to Waring &amp; LaRosa, New York, to handle advertising and promotion, previously at Wallack &amp; Wallack, Great Neck, L.I.
Billings were estimated at $3 million.


CHINA MAY ALLOW RED CROSS TO VISIT DISSIDENTS IN JAIL
Signaling what would be a major policy shift on human rights, China said today that it would give "positive consideration" to allowing the Red Cross to visit more than 3,000 political prisoners.
Speaking with United States journalists, Foreign Minister Qian Qichen also said China viewed a meeting next week between President Clinton and the Chinese Communist Party Secretary, Jiang Zemin, as not for "picture taking," but as a discussion of "a broader and longer-term perspective" on bilateral relations.


Yonder, Into a Wintry Sun and High Clouds


Electrocom Automation
Shares in Electrocom Automation Inc., which manufactures high-speed document processing systems, dropped sharply yesterday in active trading after the company said its 1994 earnings would be flat because the United States Postal Service had delayed awarding its contracts.
The stock has sagged since late September.


Daly, Breaking His Silence, Denies Drinking Again
Speaking publicly for the first time since he was suspended from the PGA Tour on Sunday, a contrite John Daly apologized yesterday for his conduct and said he would not appeal the suspension imposed by Commissioner Deane Beman.
At an impromptu news conference after an exhibition round in Mexico City, Daly, 27, a recovering alcoholic, stressed two things: he has not resumed drinking and he does not know when he will play again on the PGA Tour.


Increase by RJR May End a Cigarette Price War
In a move that reflects a change in strategy under its new chairman and chief executive, Charles M. Harper, the RJR Nabisco Holdings Company told its cigarette distributors Monday night that the company was raising prices for most brands, including Camel and Winston, by 4 cents a pack, a cost virtually certain to be passed on to consumers.
The move may signal an eventual end to the cigarette price war started earlier this year by the Philip Morris Companies, the industry leader, but neither Philip Morris nor any other cigarette maker would comment on whether it would follow the RJR move.


Review/Music; Chamber Society Starts an Annex
On Monday night, the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center inaugurated its Music of Our Time series in the Walter Reade Theater.
This venture seems to have grown out of difficulties encountered with contemporary music in the society's regular concerts at Alice Tully Hall; a smattering of new works will remain at Tully, but most will be taken by the new three-concert offshoot.
Some might say that separating new music in this way amounts to segregating it: precisely the sort of "out of sight, out of mind" treatment that composers have suffered for too long.
Sharply defined programming could overcome the appearance of ghettoization, but Monday night's concert was a motley collection


Bonds Gets Another M.V.P. Award
He still hasn't reached the World Series, but Barry Bonds yesterday attained a distinction no player ever had achieved: Bonds was named the National League most valuable player for the third time in four seasons.
Bonds, winning the award for the first time with the San Francisco Giants, easily held off Lenny Dykstra of Philadelphia, gaining 24 first-place votes and a total of 372 points.
Dykstra was named first on the other 4 ballots and received 267 points..


Stoked by Ethnic Conflict, Refugee Numbers Swell
The spread of ethnic conflict since the end of the cold war has pushed the number of refugees to 44 million people, or more than one in every 130 inhabitants of the globe, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees reported today.
The number of people qualifying as refugees because they have been driven across an international frontier has climbed steadily from 2.5 million in 1970 to 19.7 million today, taking into account the recent mass exodus from the tiny African state of Burundi.
In addition, roughly 24 million people have been forced into exile within their own countries.


Mashburn Content as a Builder
Whether it was Cardinal Hayes High School in the Bronx or the University of Kentucky in Lexington, Ky., Jamal Mashburn has made a strong impact on any program he has been a part of.
So why should it be any different with the Dallas Mavericks, the National Basketball Association's worst team last season with only 11 victories in 82 games?
So far, it isn't.
Even though the Mavericks were beaten by the Nets, 86-80, tonight at Reunion Arena, and even though they are still without a victory in three games, Mashburn has already made a big impression in this town.
He is playing small forward and averaging nearly 18 points and 6.0 rebounds.
Dallas Feels Like Kentucky
That puts Mashburn, this year's fourth pick over all in the N.B.A. draft, right up there with Jim Jackson, last year's fourth draft choice over all, for scoring honors on the Mavericks.
It is a position Mashburn enjoys, the cornerstone of a sagging program.


Coca-Cola Reassigns 3 Beverage Brands
The Coca-Cola Company said yesterday that it had further widened its agency roster by realigning responsiblities for three of its brands.
As expected, Chiat/Day in Venice, Calif., was named to handle advertising for the Cherry Coke brand, which had been previously inactive but at McCann-Erickson Worldwide in New York.
Also, McCann's Powerade sports drink account moved from its New York office to the agency's Seattle office.


Bid Tactic for Green Point Receives Qualified Approval
Delicately trying to referee the Republic New York Corporation's hostile takeover battle with Green Point Savings Bank, the New York State Banking Department gave a qualified approval yesterday to one of Republic's main tactics -- its offer of a $100 million special interest payment to Green Point depositors.
As a mutual savings bank, Green Point Savings of Flushing, Queens, is nominally owned by its depositors and is trying to convert to stock ownership through a public offering.
But Republic has instead proposed to merge with Green Point, offering the special interest payment, representing 2 percent of the bank's deposits, as an inducement.


Germans Sigh As One Nov. 9 Passes Easily
On the German calendar, this date is eerier and more disturbing than any other, a date that has marked four of the country's most dramatic turning points in this century.
Nov. 9 has been a fateful day for democrats and tyrants alike.
Germans have trouble deciding how to commemorate it, so most of them simply don't.


A Satisfactory Marriage; Many Economists See Boon to Competition In Merger of Cable and Phone Companies
The proposed $32 billion merger of Bell Atlantic and Tele-Communications may turn out to be not only the biggest deal yet, but also one of the most scrutinized.
The Justice Department, the Federal Communications Commission and a host of Congressional committees are all expected to weigh in.
Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum, the Ohio Democrat whose Judiciary subcommittee on antitrust policy held hearings last month on the merger of the giant regional phone company and the nation's largest cable television conglomerate, has attacked the deal as a "double whammy for consumers," a mega-monster that will raise both phone and cable prices.


CNN Extends Its Audience
Larry King threw a party for Al Gore and Ross Perot last night in the form of a free-swinging debate on the North American Free Trade Agreement.
And the question is: who showed up?
For the first nine months of this year, the average audience for "Larry King Live" on CNN was 850,000 households, or about 1 percent of the 93.1 million American household with television sets.


Figure in Bank Scandal Links Bush to Iraqi Loans
An Atlanta banker who helped to secretly funnel more than $5 billion in loans that were used to arm Iraq in the mid-1980's told a Congressional committee today that everything he did was with the knowledge of the Governments of the United States, Italy and Britain.
But the banker, Christopher P. Drogoul, quickly found himself dismissed by some members of the House Banking Committee as unable to offer any proof for his allegations.
Mr.
Drogoul was the manager of the Atlanta branch of Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, which processed the loans.


Book Notes
An Editor's Book
It was perhaps inevitable that Judith Regan, the avowedly self-promoting Simon &amp; Schuster editor whose best-selling authors include Howard Stern and Rush Limbaugh, would toy with the idea of writing a book herself.
After all, Ms.
Regan is the woman Mr.
Stern praised for her "pouty lips" and miniskirts in his current book, "Private Parts"; the woman who gained notoriety several years ago by picking a fight with some police officers who, she said, had insulted her cabby, and the woman who has been the subject of several admiring, if slightly snippy, magazine and newspaper profiles lately.
With Mr.
Limbaugh and Mr.
Stern in the No. 1 and No. 2 spots on the New York Times nonfiction best-seller list for Nov. 21, Ms.
Regan and her agent, Al Lowman of Authors and Artists, have been making the rounds of New York publishing houses, trying to gauge interest in her possible book project.
Nothing has been written yet, but Ms.
Regan already has a title: "The Art of War for Women."


Bridge
It is always irritating to reach an excellent contract, devise a careful plan of play and fail.
The irritation is compounded when the post-mortem reveals that a pedestrian course of action would have succeeded.
The victim of the diagramed deal, played Oct. 24 in a Long Island Swiss Team event, was Rob Gordon of Northport, L.I., who sat South.
He heard his partner bid two no-trump over one heart to show length in the minor suits and eventually jumped to five diamonds.
This was a slam invitation, in view of the earlier cue-bid, but North had no reason to accept.


Remembering the Women Who Served
To the Editor:
America's women veterans are receiving special recognition this Veterans Day for their years of service and sacrifice in defense of our country.
Nov. 7-13 has been designated a week of tribute for America's women veterans.
Our organization is sponsoring a registration drive among such veterans for a computerized register in connection with the Women in Military Service Memorial.


Vouchers Become Hot Tickets for Russian Bulls
The great Russian bear -- the investor variety -- has turned into a bull.
The price of the most widely traded type of security here, the vouchers issued to all citizens for purchasing shares in state-owned enterprises that are being privatized, has more than quadrupled on the two largest exchanges in the last several months.


Hallwood Energy Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Theater in Review
The Game of Love and Chance  Pearl Theater Company 125 West 22d Street Chelsea Through Dec. 11 By Pierre Carlet de Chamblain de Marivaux, translated by Adrienne and Oscar Mandel; directed by Shepard Sobel; set by Robert Joel Schwartz; lighting by Russell H. Champa; costumes by Deborah Rooney; sound by Donna Riley; wig master, Emily Garrick; stage manager, Mary-Susan Gregson.
Presented by the Pearl Theater Company.
WITH: Robert Hock, Raye Lankford, Victoria Miner, Sean Pratt, Andrew Sellon, Margo Skinner and Timothy Wheeler.


A Haven for Hopeless Causes; Devotions to St. Jude Are Growing, Manhattan Church Says
Clutching rosaries or wrinkled prayer cards, thousands of urban pilgrims filed through the sanctuary of St.
Francis of Assisi Roman Catholic Church over the course of a recent week, seeking answers to the impossible -- chronic illnesses, broken marriages, lost jobs -- or just a glimpse of happiness.
Laborers and executives, blacks and whites, young and old sat together during prayers, lining up afterward for a blessing from a relic of St.
Jude, the patron saint of impossible causes.
Attendance at the devotions has doubled at the Manhattan church in the last six years, just one sign of the popularity of this dedication of prayers to a saint who, despite having been one of Christ's 12 Apostles, had been obscure until a priest in Chicago erected a shrine to St.
Jude.
It has become one of the most durable American devotions, with numerous prayer services that attract even non-Catholics.
There are also countless tiny newspaper ads by worshipers that read "Thank you, St. Jude, " and there is even a St.
Jude chain letter.


Ag-Bag International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Television; Eisenhower: The Warts Are Receding
Military genius or bland bumbler?
A hero of our time or Old Bubblehead?
When he left the White House in 1961, his "crusade for peace" in tatters, Dwight D. Eisenhower was ranked by a survey of historians as being in the bottom third of American Presidents, below Chester A. Arthur.
During the 1980's, the same survey ranked him near the top.
"Eisenhower," continuing a series of in-depth political portraits ("The Kennedys," "L. B. J.," "Nixon"), finds its subject more complex and more interesting, though not always more admirable, than the public image.
The two-and-a-half-hour documentary has two sections.
In "Soldier," written and produced by Adriana Bosch, Eisenhower is followed from his spiritedly rebellious youth in Abilene, Kan., to world renown as Supreme Commander of the Allied Forces in World War II.
His career in the military was hardly orthodox.
At West Point, his poker playing was more distinguished than his grades.
By the age of 49 he was an obscure lieutenant colonel who had never seen combat.
But as he told a confidant, "in an emergency, anything can happen." The war began and Eisenhower, whose mother was a pacifist Jehovah's Witness, began his ascent.


METRO DIGEST
MONEY TO MINISTERS IN CAMPAIGN CITED The campaign manager for Christine Todd Whitman's successful race for Governor in New Jersey said the campaign paid money to black ministers who agreed not to rally their flock to vote for Gov.
Jim Florio.
A1.
NO AREA VOTES FOR TRADE ACCORD As evidence of the hill President Clinton must climb if he is to win Congressional approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement, no Democrat in the New York, New Jersey and Connecticut delegations in the House of Representatives is committed to voting for it.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  HIGHER COST SEEN TO REMOVE ASBESTOS The projected cost of the cleanup of asbestos at schools has more than tripled to at least $119 million, making it likely that other urgent maintenance and construction projects will have to be delayed, school officials said.
B3.
TWO BOYS KILLED IN QUEENS FIRE Two little boys were killed when fire swept through their home in Jamaica, Queens, trapping the children in an upstairs bedroom, fire officials said.
B3.
BOMB-MAKING BOOKS SHOWN AT TRIAL Six large-format books with blue-green covers containing writing in both Arabic and English and, most importantly, diagrams on bomb-making, were at the center of testimony in the World Trade Center trial.
B4.
GIULIANI APPOINTS ADVISERS Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani named 19 people to his transition council, assembling a group largely from prominent campaign supporters and donors, but one that also sent a signal that he is consulting women and minority groups as he puts together his government.
B6.
A group of New York State legislators and members of the City Council have been wined and dined in Puerto Rico at a conference.
B9.
Three women were charged with helping to make a firebomb that was thrown into a fire engine, injuring three firefighters in Washington Heights in July.
B11.
Holding his 5-year-old foster brother in his arms, a 27-year-old man jumped in front of a moving subway train, the police said.
B11.
REGION  WHITMAN AND FLORIO MEET For the first time since Election Day, Gov.
Jim Florio and Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman met.
Mrs.
Whitman talked privately with Mr.
Florio at the gubernatorial mansion.
B8.
FIRST CANDIDATE FOR GOVERNOR George E. Pataki, a little-known State Senator from Peekskill, said he will run for the Republican gubernatorial nomination in 1994, and he apparently will have the support of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and the state party chairman, William D. Powers.
B8.
A Rye, N.Y., couple testified that they thought their baby had been abused by a nanny.
B8.
A nanny in Jericho, L.I., was charged with leaving two young children alone while she went off to get married.
B8.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman B3  Holiday Box B3  Chronicle B12


Plaintiffs' Lawyers Applaud Decision
Lawyers said the Supreme Court's ruling yesterday on sexual harassment in the workplace meant that their clients would not have to show that the incidents drove them crazy in order to get their cases to a jury.
Although the ruling underlines existing law rather than altering it, plaintiffs' lawyers were exultant: the restating of the status quo brought an enormous sigh of relief.


Showdown on the Brady Bill
There's a chance today for the House of Representatives to pass the simple, fair Brady handgun bill and take a big step toward the safety from uncontrolled weapons sales the public yearns for.
Auspiciously, the Senate is committed to a vote on the bill and for the first time a President is eager to sign it.
House members widely support this bill, yet friends of the National Rifle Association in their ranks threaten to cripple it with damaging amendments.
The House must stare down these challenges and avoid changes that will complicate quick final passage in both chambers.


A.L. Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Two Challenges for the House Campaign Finance Reform, Redux
As we expected, the Democratic campaign finance legislation finally moving in the House is not as strong as it ought to be.
Indeed, the weaker points in this legislation are not accidental creations.
They stand as monuments to months of purposeful procrastination by House Speaker Thomas Foley.
Mr.
Foley, on behalf of the careerist Democrats sheltering behind him, refused all pleas to put the legislation on a fast-track spring or summer agenda.
He knew his history.
Delay is the career pol's strongest weapon against the reform fevers that rage right after a national election.
The bill set to be considered today by the House Administration Committee could have been a poison arrow to the heart of the Washington influence system.
That's what the voters said they wanted, and it's what the disappointing freshman class in the House had promised.
But by refusing to act on the legislation for the first 10 months of the year, Mr.
Foley allowed House Democrats time to co-opt the newcomers and build support for the incumbent-protection features of the legislation.


Tripled Estimates for Asbestos Cleanup Could Delay Other Work
The projected cost of the emergency cleanup of asbestos at New York City public schools has more than tripled since September to at least $119 million, making it likely that other urgent school maintenance and construction projects will have to be delayed, school officials said yesterday.
Ramon C. Cortines, the Schools Chancellor, said he was stunned by the increase, which far exceeded any previous estimates and that was reported to him last Thursday.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Nov. 5
Oct. 29
Nov. 6
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.4
7.0
Distillate production, daily
3.4
3.5
3.2
Gasoline stocks
210.1
210.5
208.3
Distillate stocks
138.0
138.5
135.7
Crude imports, daily
6.1
6.9
6.2
Product imports, daily
1.9
2.0
2.0
Crude stocks
329.5
333.9
326.9
Crude production, daily
6.8
6.8
7.0
Refinery utilization (%)
91.8
92.4
89.0
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Open-and-Shut Encounter for Knicks at Garden
A scintillating home opener it was not.
An easy Knick victory it was.
Sweeping aside a Philadelphia 76er team that has a 7-foot-6-inch center but plenty of holes, New York cruised to a 95-86 victory last night at Madison Square Garden.
Led by John Starks (19 points), the Knicks built a 22-point lead early in the fourth quarter, then rested their starters, who enjoyed the view.


WAL-MART STORES INC. (N)
Wal-Mart Stores Inc., the country's largest retailer, reported another quarter of strong sales and earnings yesterday, continuing to prosper in spite of the stock market's concern that the company's string of successes is almost over.
Wal-Mart, whose shares have been a favorite of short-sellers betting the price will fall, said it sold almost 20 percent more merchandise in the third quarter than it did in the comparable period last year.


Thalia to Showcase Fine Line Films
The Thalia Theater, the venerable revival house on 95th Street west of Broadway, which reopened in July after six dark years, will show first-run art films distributed by Fine Line Features beginning on Friday.
Under an agreement reached last Friday and announced on Monday by Ira Deutchman, the president of Fine Line, the company will pay rent on the Thalia to its current landlord, Roy Ennacheril, and use the theater as an outlet for exhibiting primarily Fine Line films.
Rick Azar, programmer at the theater, is to stay on as manager.


Livery Driver Shot
A livery driver was shot and killed by a passenger in the Bronx yesterday, and the police said he was the 38th cabby to die on the job this year.
The victim, a 44-year-old man who was not immediately identified, was shot while he drove down West 188th Street around 8:20 P.M., said Sgt.
Frances Haimeck, a police spokeswoman.
The driver, who was struck in the upper chest, was taken to North Central Bronx Hospital, where he was pronounced dead on arrival.
The gunman fled.


Johnson: He Runs, Catches And Starts
Jets running back Johnny Johnson had an excellent training camp.
Some people said he earned the starting job.
He didn't.
Blair Thomas, the incumbent, got the job.
And Johnson, who came to New York in a draft-day trade with Phoenix with a reputation for being sullen, held his tongue and did not sulk.


A Writer Considers Fate, Evil And Movies
After the success of "The Fabulous Baker Boys," the stylish 1989 movie that made Michelle Pfeiffer a star, Steve Kloves was embraced by movie studios here.
It seemed they all wanted the film's writer and director, then only 28, to take on big-budget projects that would make him rich.
"Did the golden gates open?" he said recently with a gentle laugh.
"Maybe the bronze gates."


Blessings Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 9


Pact Has Few Votes From New York Region
As evidence of the steep hill President Clinton must climb if he is to win Congressional approval next week of the North American Free Trade Agreement, no Democrat in the New York, New Jersey and Connecticut delegations in the House of Representatives is committed to voting for it.
Three Democratic Representatives -- Floyd H. Flake and Nita M. Lowey of New York and Robert G. Torricelli of New Jersey -- say they have still not decided which way they will go when the trade pact is put to a vote on Nov. 17.
But the 25 other Democrats in the three states are firmly opposed to the agreement.


Varco International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
Because of a production error, the continuation of an article yesterday about Leonard Bernstein's personal archive appeared in some copies with passages interchanged.
Readers wishing corrected copies of the page may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Safeguard Health Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Brands reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Food Notes
Organic California Raisins
Pavich Family Farms in California has been growing grapes organically since 1968 and marketing them nationally for about 10 years.
Now, it has introduced raisins.
And these are no ordinary raisins.
In addition to being made from grapes grown without chemicals, they are large and plump, with a deep rich flavor.
Pathmark supermarkets sell them in the produce department, and many health-food stores are starting to carry them.
Prices range from $2.25 to $3.50 for a 15-ounce container, depending on the store.
They can also be ordered, but only a dozen containers at a time, directly from the company by check for $25.75, including postage.
The address is Pavich Family Farms, Route 2, Box 291, Delano, Calif. 93215.
Wine Tasting and Benefit
The annual wine and food tasting held to raise money for scholarship programs at the State University of New York at Stony Brook invariably sells out each year.
This year, the event, which features nearly 50 American wineries and two dozen Long Island restaurants, is scheduled for Nov. 18, from 5:30 to 8:30 P.M., at the Indoor Sports Complex on the campus on Nicholls Road in Stony Brook.


Wallace M. Cohen, 85, Regulatory Law Expert
Wallace M. Cohen, a retired Washington lawyer who was an expert in regulatory and administrative law, died on Saturday at Sibley Memorial Hospital.
He was 85 and lived in Washington.
A native of Norton, Va., he graduated from Harvard University.
He began in private practice in Boston but moved to Washington in 1940 to work for the Government as a specialist in regulatory legislation.


Corrections
A picture caption on Saturday with an article about exchanging coins at the Federal Reserve Bank's office in Manhattan misidentified an employee at the counter.
She was Sandra Williams, not Joanna Grever.
The article also misspelled the surname of the chief of the Government Bond Department.
She is Grace Jaiman, not Taiman.


N.H.L. Offers a Deal to Officials
The National Hockey League Officials Association, whose agreement with the league ends on Monday, received a proposal yesterday from Commissioner GARY BETTMAN.
The four-year deal would increase the base salaries for first-year referees from $50,000 to $65,000 in the first year of the contract and to $80,000 by the fourth year.
A referee with 10 years' experience would receive an increase from $80,000 to $125,000.
The most senior referees would nearly double their salaries from $90,000 to $175,000.
"This offer puts the N.H.L. referees well ahead of our counterparts in major league baseball or the N.B.A.," said Bettman.


Atkinson (Guy F.) Co. of California (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Oilers End Loss Streak  The Edmonton Oilers, overcoming a 2-0 first-period deficit, snapped an 11-game losing streak and 14-game stretch without a victory with a 4-2 victory over the Detroit Red Wings last night at Detroit.
The Oilers, who opened the season with two victories, tied it with second-period goals by Steve Rice and Craig MacTavish, then won it with third-period goals by Ilva Byakin and Igor Kravchik. (AP) Blues 3, Penguins 3: Brett Hull's second goal of the game tied visiting Pittsburgh, but a last-minute chance turned out to be only a tantalizing tease for St.
Louis.
Later, Tracy Austin, a wild-card entry, lost to Ann Grossman, 6-4, 6-1, 6-4. (AP) Sampras and Becker Win: Pete Sampras and Boris Becker each won their opening matches yesterday at the European Community Championships at Antwerp, Belgium.
Sampras coasted past fellow American David Wheaton, 6-3, 6-2.


Bowl America Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


INSIDE
Core Curriculum in New York
The New York City Schools Chancellor has ordered preparation of a core curriculum describing what to teach and when to teach it.
Page B1.
Bosnian School Is Attacked
Up to nine children died in an attack in Sarajevo, and a historic bridge that symbolized the old Yugosalvia's common bonds was destroyed.
Page A18.
Refugee Increase Cited
Some 44 million people are refugees, in part because of growing ethnic conflicts since the end of the cold war, the United Nations said.
Page A6.
Surprising Drop in Prices
Producer prices declined two-tenths of 1 percent in October, providing a surprisingly strong reassurance that inflation is not reviving.
Page D1.


Russell Puts Account in Review
The Russell Corporation, the maker of sports and casual apparel, said yesterday that it had placed in review its athletic division's account, after almost seven years at Gillis Advertising &amp; Public Relations in Birmingham, Ala.
Though billings were not disclosed, Advertising Age estimated them at $10 million to $15 million.


U.S. Should Preach Less to the World
To the Editor:
I feel I'm at the mercy of a New York Times literary perpetual motion machine.
First, you publish selective quotations purporting to be my view of United States China policy (news article, Oct. 28).
Then A. M. Rosenthal pre-emptively punches me in the nose on the basis of those quotations in "How Dare We?" (column, Oct. 29).


The Light That Raged, Then Died, 40 Years Ago
YESTERDAY, on the 40th anniversary of Dylan Thomas's death, a retired Welsh clergyman, who had married Miss Piggy and Kermit the Frog in one of the Muppet movies, and a waiter read the dead man's poems at his favorite table at the White Horse Tavern.
It was at least as fitting as the plaque on the wall that referred to the writer as a "poet, scholar, and gentleman." Not long before he died at 39 of too much drink and too much life he had categorized his identities as "Welshman, drunkard and heterosexual."


Chairman to Retire From Bowes, Dentsu
Murray R. Bowes, the chairman and chief executive of Bowes, Dentsu &amp; Partners in Los Angeles, unexpectedly announced yesterday that he would retire on June 30 from the direct-response agency he founded six years ago.


Clearing a Path as a Restaurateur From Busboy to Empire Builder
ARMED with emphatic opinions, a talent for shaping trends, and a volatile temper, Pino Luongo has been cutting a swath of style and controversy through New York's restaurant scene.
Even his detractors concede he has excellent taste.
An outspoken Florentine who started as a busboy 13 years ago and popularized his interpretation of the fresh simple cuisine of his native Tuscany, he has been called the George Steinbrenner of the restaurant world, a man with a short fuse and little patience when things are not done his way.


Del Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Libya Expels Thais in Chemical Weapons Dispute
Libya has ordered thousands of Thai workers out of the country in retaliation for Thailand's efforts to investigate American allegations that Thai companies were involved in the construction of chemical weapons plants in Libya, Thai officials and foreign diplomats said today.
The expulsion order was made directly by Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader, who was quoted as saying on state television on Sunday that he wanted Libyan companies and foreign contractors operating in Libya to dismiss all Thai workers.


47 New Death Penalties. Big Deal.
In the 1993 crime bill working its way through Congress, the proposals to put more police officers on the beat nationwide and to construct new high-security prisons are sound.
Little else deserves support.
The bill lacks a coherent national anticrime strategy.
It is a potpourri of programs that offers something to everyone -- except perhaps those who live in fear of violent crime.
Most disturbing are provisions extending the death penalty to an additional 47 Federal crimes and creating more than 60 new Federal crimes for conduct already harshly punished under state law.
Legislators who think these measures will reduce violent crime fool themselves and the public.


CPT Holdings reports earnings for Year to June 30


Review/Rock; Faith, Love And Death: It's Weighty
Johnette Napolitano, Concrete Blonde's bassist and singer, writes about weighty matters: faith, love, death, resurrection.
She addresses them in a big voice, a mezzo-soprano that can be a bluesy growl or a clarion; like Ann Wilson of Heart, she has clearly listened to Grace Slick and Robert Plant.
At the Academy on Thursday night, in a College Media Journal Marathon show, Ms.
Napolitano's voice and her premeditated but unforced gestures filled her songs with drama.
In long, sweeping crescendos, her voice kept finding new reserves of power; then, suddenly, she would drop to a confidential purr and start again.
At a time when rockers are often flippant and self-deprecating, she sings as if personal crises and triumphs can shake the world.
In "Heal It Up," about battle-scarred romance, the word "up" became a 20-note cry of hope, pain and exhilaration.


Maxwell Advisers Seen As Winners in Breakup
Regardless of the outcome of today's auction of Macmillan Inc., some clear winners in the deal will be the advisers to Maxwell Communication, the parent company of Macmillan.
The biggest prize will go to Price Waterhouse, the accounting firm that is acting as the administrator in the liquidation sale of Maxwell's assets.
According to court documents, Price Waterhouse will earn a fee of an estimated $36 million.
That appears to be even more than what J. P. Morgan &amp; Company will receive.
The investment bank had already earned more than $6.5 million in fees, the documents show, and could earn several million more.
The law firm of Milbank Tweed could earn $6.2 million.
The total fees were estimated at $60 million.


Small Ranchers Can't Pay More for Arid Lands
To the Editor:
"Bruce Babbitt's Landscape, at Risk" (editorial, Oct. 31) captures the attitude of the Clinton Administration (and your newspaper) that the Secretary of the Interior and the Federal Government can lord it over citizens of the West and arrogantly impose upon them a new system of grazing regulations.
This tired old command-and-control approach is deemed by Mr.
Babbitt to be in the best interests of Westerners, despite the historical, social, economic and, yes, even democratic arguments to the contrary.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.93
3.04
2.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.09
3.11
3.05
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.24
3.28
3.26
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.20
5.23
6.45
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.14
6.19
7.66
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.22
7.25
8.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.58
5.65
6.51
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Hanger Orthopedic Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Whitman Funds Went to Curtail Black Turnout
Christine Todd Whitman's campaign made payments to black ministers and Democratic Party workers in exchange for promises not to rally votes for Gov.
Jim Florio in the final stages of the New Jersey gubernatorial race, her campaign manager said today.
The manager, Edward J. Rollins, said the campaign funneled about $500,000 in such "walking around money" from the state Republican Party.
Those efforts to depress the vote in urban, heavily Democratic areas, he said, were important in Mrs.
Whitman's narrow upset victory.


D.R. Horton Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fresenius USA Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Becton, Dickinson &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Promoted Lou Gorman to executive vice president of baseball operations.


Adelaide Hall, 92, International Star of Cabaret
Adelaide Hall, a singer whose Broadway career began in the 1921 revue "Shuffle Along" and who went on to become an international cabaret star, performing into her 90's, died on Sunday at Charing Cross Hospital in London.
She was 92.
The cause was an infection after a fall, said Barry Sullivan, a friend.
Miss Hall's most recent appearance in New York City was in March at Weill Recital Hall, where she sang an exuberant program that ran from 1920's vaudeville tunes through Duke Ellington standards to such 1970's songs as "The Way We Were." Scat With Ellington
She first won prominence in 1927, for her wordless, growling obbligato in "Creole Love Call" with the Duke Ellington Orchestra.
The next year, she introduced "I Can't Give You Anything but Love" in the Broadway revue "Blackbirds of 1928." Through the years, she also worked with Count Basie, Art Tatum and Fats Waller.
She frequently embellished her concerts with reminiscences of Ellington, Ethel Waters, Cab Calloway, Al Capone, Josephine Baker and other notable figures she had encountered.


Berger Holdings Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


No Headline
"There is a mood here that if someone came to the floor and said we should barbwire the ankles of anyone who jaywalks, I think it would pass." SENATOR JOSEPH R. BIDEN, of Delaware.  [ A1:2. ]


Barringer Tech reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Heileman Makes Choices for 5 Brands
The G. Heileman Brewing Company has named the Richards Group in Dallas and Eisaman, Johns &amp; Laws in Chicago, to share its beer and malt liquor brands account.
Combined billings were estimated at $20 million to $25 million.
The Richards Group, which already handles Heileman's Rainier, Lone Star and Mickey's Malt Liquor brands, was selected to handle the Colt 45 Malt Liquor and Colt 45 beer account, previously handled by Deutsch/Dworin in New York and the Henry Weinhard's brand, previously handled by Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer Euro RSCG in New York.
Eisaman, Johns was selected to handle the Old Style and Special Export brands, which had been handled by Messner Vetere.


Trade Center Witness Tells of Manuals on Bombs
Six large-format books with blue-green covers containing writing in both Arabic and English and, most importantly, diagrams on bomb-making, were at the center of testimony in the World Trade Center trial yesterday.
The books, along with false passports and identification cards, were introduced by prosecutors as they continued to build their case against Ahmad Ajaj, one of the four defendants in the case.
Mr.
Ajaj is accused of having brought the bomb-making manuals to Kennedy International Airport when he arrived on a flight from Pakistan on Sept. 1, 1992.
He was arrested on passport violations and has been in prison ever since.


Indians Question Americans' Motivation
The hosts are ready and willing, but will anybody represent the visitors when the United States, a 1993 Davis Cup first-round loser because of apathy among its top players, and India, 1993's sleeper semifinalist, clash in the first round of Davis Cup next March in Bombay or Madras?
India's Davis Cup veteran RAMESH KRISHNAN said yesterday from his training headquarters in Tampa, Fla., that he hopes the unassembled United States squad includes PETE SAMPRAS and JIM COURIER, the world's top two players.
But the 296th-ranked Krishnan, who along with LEANDER PAES this year upstaged Switzerland, the 1992 runner-up, and France, the 1991 champion, has spotted a disturbing trend among United States players: "For some reson, Americans don't take Davis Cup that seriously, maybe because there's such an abundance of good players that it's easier for them to pass the buck and not go," said Krishnan.
As for India's interest in the March 25-27 match, said the 32-year-old player, "The whole country will be aware of it."


Pillowtex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Atchison Casting Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lynch Honored by N.C.A.A.
NNENNA LYNCH, Villanova's cross-country runner and Rhodes Scholar, won the N.C.A.A.'s Woman of the Year award.
She was one of 10 finalists chosen for athletic, academic and community achievement from a group of 51 national semifinalists.


Eating Well
WHO says people watching their diets, watching their fat, watching themselves, can't enjoy gifts of food at Christmas?
Everything for the holidays is not made with cream and butter and chocolate.
These mail-order items, however, are not diet food.
Everything here will appeal even to those who cannot get their fill of cream and butter and chocolate.


L.I. Nanny, A Newlywed, Is Arrested
A nanny left two children, 1 1/2 and 3 1/2 years old, in her employer's home here today while she went to Brooklyn to get married, the police said.
The woman returned to find the police waiting.
The woman, Mary Charles, 24, of 700 Ocean Avenue in Brooklyn, was still wearing a white satin wedding dress when the police charged her with endangering the welfare of the children, who had been found playing unattended outside.


Thermo Instrument Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Holyfield Gets an $11 Million Golden Paraglider
He has knots in the back of his neck.
His hands hurt.
His elbow smarts.
His wrists, his ankles, his thighs -- they still throb.
All for $11 million.


Never Too Young for Tennis Millions
Over the summer, she completed her second season as the prime phenomenon-in-residence at Rick Macci's cozy, well-regarded tennis academy in Delray Beach, Fla.
During the United States Open, she suddenly moved to the sprawling high-tech, Marine-paced training facility operated by Nick Bollettieri, where she jostled for court space with a handful of the planet's hottest prodigies.
Then two weeks ago, while other kids her age were busy carving Halloween pumpkins and creating costumes, she turned up in her tennis whites here on this tropical playground south of Miami to carve out groundstrokes under the eagle eye of half a dozen national coaches during an intense four-day camp sponsored by the United States Tennis Association.


APS Holding (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Span-America Medical Systems Inc. coei&gt;(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


News Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Not Much New for Prodigy
Although the opening screen is noticeably improved, the "new" Prodigy on-line service looks much the same as it did before the Prodigy Services Company, the struggling joint venture of I.B.M. and Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, ballyhooed the change in a multimillion-dollar publicity campaign that began this week.
Prodigy is the largest computer information network for consumers in the country, but has yet to make a profit in nine years.
Prodigy plans to promote the changes in more than 280 live television commercials before the end of the year.


International Aluminum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Evans Environ. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rebounding From Crises, New York Hospital Changes Its Ways
At a time when New York Hospital, like nearly all others in the city, was facing an acute financial crisis, the mysterious death of Andy Warhol after a routine operation in 1987 added yet another jolt.
But in the end, the tragedy helped shock the entire staff of the institution into accepting the need for a sharp change in direction.
New York Hospital -- which, in conjunction with Cornell Medical Center, is among the most distinguished teaching hospitals in the nation -- brought in a new president, introduced modern business practices and, perhaps most importantly, took the lead in looking for innovative ways to escape the fiscal traumas that continue to plague nearly all hospitals in the area.


Yeltsin Promotes a Charter That Is Very Much His
President Boris N. Yeltsin went on national television tonight to open his campaign for a new constitution that he promised would help restore "law and order" to a country that has seen little of either in the last two years.
"We need order, but not the horrible repressive order of the Stalinist camps," Mr.
Yeltsin said.
"Russia needs a steady, law-based order badly," he added, not an "iron hand" but a "democratic state that will insure progress toward a normal and worthy life for citizens, toward prosperity for a single, integral Russia."


'Nutcracker' Soldiers Stand at Attention for Costume Inspection


Bull &amp; Bear Group (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Florida State Wants To Avoid a Runaway
The concept seems simple enough: stop the run.
That has been the formula, it seems, since Dinosaurs versus Mammals, the original meeting between No. 1 and No. 2.
If Florida State intends to pass through Notre Dame Stadium this Saturday and continue on a path toward a national championship, the Seminoles must limit the Irish running game enough to create the kind of uncomfortable passing situations that can lead to mistakes.
Stop the run, and the Fighting Irish will be unable to build the time-consuming drives they are hoping will reduce Seminole quarterback Charlie Ward from a decisive factor to a frustrated spectator.


Emons Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Palestinians Kill Israeli Arab; Rabin Confers With Settlers
Palestinian militants killed an Israeli Arab in the Gaza Strip today, the police said, as Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin held a rare meeting with leaders of Jewish settlers who have protested violently after a spate of fatal Arab attacks.
Masked men reportedly commandeered a garbage truck in Gaza city and rammed it into a car with Israeli license plates, killing the driver, Suleiman al-Hawashla, 38.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Producer prices declined two-tenths of 1 percent in October, surprisingly strong reassurance that a pickup in the economy is not reviving inflation.
Except for a modest rise in September, wholesale prices have fallen or been unchanged since April.  [ Page D1. ]


Theater in Review
Who Will Carry The Word?
Judith Anderson Theater 422 West 42d Street Clinton Through Nov. 28 By Charlotte Delbo, directed by Edward Berkeley; translated from the French by Cynthia Haft; scenery by Patricia Woodbridge; costumes by Dede Pochos and Fiona Davis; lighting by Jane Reisman.
Presented by Willow Cabin Theater Company, Mr.
Berkeley, artistic director; Adam Oliensis and Maria Radman, producing directors and Annette Moskowitz and Alexander E. Racolin, on behalf of Play Producers, Inc.
WITH: Cynthia Besteman, Fiona Davis, Cecil Hoffmann, Tasha Lawrence, Angela Nevard, Dede Pochos, Linda Powell, Christine Radman and Maria Radman.


Dr. Mark Straus, 84, Adviser for Fur Trade
Dr.
Mark Straus, a medical consultant in the New York fur trade who had fought with the Loyalists in the Spanish Civil War, died on Oct. 27 at his home in the Bronx.
He was 84.
The cause was advanced prostate cancer, his family said.


Landeta Cut; Ex-Bronco Takes Over
After nine seasons as the Giants' punter, Sean Landeta was abruptly cut yesterday and replaced by Mike Horan, a nine-year veteran who played for seven seasons under Giants Coach Dan Reeves at Denver and is known for his accuracy.
"I think I'm a little bit of a scapegoat when you're averaging over 42 and netting over 35 with a lot of stuff going against you," Landeta told The Associated Press last night from his agent's office in Baltimore.
"I thought he'd see I wasn't punting that bad but I guess he wanted to make a change."


D. Martin Carter, 57, Dermatology Expert
Dr.
D.
Martin Carter, a research dermatologist and cell biologist at Rockefeller University, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 57.
The cause of death was a ruptured aortic aneurysm, said Dr.
Jules Hirsch of the Rockefeller University Hospital.


Life Can Continue After Kidney Failure
To the Editor:
"A Bleak U.S. Report on Kidney-Failure Patients," (news article, Nov. 4) is far too one-sided.
End-stage renal disease is indeed serious and disabling.
Many patients, particularly those with other major conditions (often advanced diabetes), face special problems, including exposure to premature mortality.
But a substantial part of the dialysis patient population leads reasonably productive, comfortable and long lives.


Judge Says Health Panel Erred by Withholding Data
A Federal district judge said today that the White House was improperly withholding records of Hillary Rodham Clinton's Task Force on National Health Care Reform from doctors and consumer groups that wanted to scrutinize the panel's work.
The judge, Royce C. Lamberth of the Federal District Court here, ordered the Government to provide documents needed to assess whether the more than 500 people who worked for the task force had complied with Federal ethics laws.


Grim Signs in Tokyo Stocks' Plunge
The continuing plunge in the value of shares in a huge railroad the Japanese Government recently sold to the public and gloomy economic news put the stock market into a tailspin today, turning the steady slide of the last two weeks into a rout.
The Nikkei index of 225 shares tumbled a dangerously wide 499.45 points today, or 2.7 percent, to 18,125.71, much of that toward the end of the day.


CHRONICLE
A promising Broadway moment . . . far off Broadway.
Eight of the American musical theater's legendary figures will be inducted into the new Musical Theater Hall of Fame, which is being inaugurated today at New York University.


American Biltrite Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


When the Indiscreet Senator Was Only Fiction
To the Editor:
As I watched the hearings on Senator Bob Packwood's diary (front page, Nov. 3), I couldn't help feeling that it was 1947 all over again.
There I was sitting in a local movie theater and watching "The Senator Was Indiscreet," one of the great political satires of this century (directed by George S. Kaufman, in his only venture into directing, and starring William Powell in the title role).


Cortines Calls For Standards In Teaching
Arguing that New York City's schools need more rigorous classroom guidelines, the city's Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said yesterday that he has ordered the preparation of a core curriculum that would set citywide standards for what to teach and when to teach it.
Because of the lack of standards, instruction varies widely across the city's 1,069 schools and 32 districts, Mr.
Cortines said, and children moving from one district to another often have difficulty adjusting.
"Some kids get lab science in their elementary years, other kids don't," he said.
"It depends on the school district."


Dow Drops 7.83 Points After a Run-Up Fizzles
The stock market has been yearning for more good news on the economy, but when the Government issued a surprisingly reassuring report on inflation yesterday, many investors seemed to evince only one reaction: ho-hum.
To be sure, the Dow Jones industrial average did jump more than 20 points in the first hour of the session, apparently because of the announcement that wholesale prices had declined two-tenths of 1 percent in October.
Many private economists had predicted a rise of two-tenths of 1 percent.


Ziff Resigning From Firm He Has Steered Since 1955
William B. Ziff Jr., chairman and chief executive of the Ziff Communications Company since 1955, announced his retirement yesterday.
Mr.
Ziff, 63, will be succeeded by Eric Hippeau, chairman and chief executive of the Ziff-Davis Publishing Company, a unit of Ziff Communications.


Corrections
An article yesterday about President Clinton's lobbying for the North American Free Trade Agreement referred incorrectly to the involvement of Representative Karan English of Arizona with a White House dinner on Monday night for undecided Congressional Democrats.
Although her name was on a White House list of those who would attend, Representative English said yesterday that she declined the invitation last week and did not attend.


Excerpts From Supreme Court Ruling on Sexual Harassment in Workplace
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's ruling today on sexual harassment in the workplace.
The Court ruled unamimously that workers suing their employers for sexual harassment need not show that they suffered psychological injury.
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor wrote the opinion, Harris v.
Forklift systems.
While joining the opinion, Justices Antonin Scalia and Ruth Bader Ginsburg also filed separate concurring opinions.
BY JUSTICE O'CONNOR, For the Court
In this case we consider the definition of a discriminatorily "abusive work environment" (also known as a "hostile work environment") under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.


Female Crew II in Whitbread Race
A new group of women has taken over the U.S.
Women's Challenge, the 60-foot yacht that NANCE FRANK had entered in the Whitbread Round the World Race.
The women's original Whitbread team withdrew from the race last month after the team arrived at its first port-of-call, Punta del Este, Uruguay.
The 32,000-mile competition started Sept. 25 from England.
Although a lack of finances was given as the team's reason for quitting, an internal rift that tore apart crew solidarity also contributed to the campaign's demise.


Metropolitan Diary
THE place: Waterbury, Conn.
The time: Next to the last banking day before Halloween.
The sign, spotted by Jack Manning, is posted in the lobby of the Bank of Boston, Connecticut branch, at Colonial Plaza:
WE WILL BE UNABLE
TO TRANSACT BUSINESS
FOR ANY CUSTOMER
WEARING A MASK
OR FACIAL DISGUISE
. . .
Halloween in Connecticut, continued:
During a parade at Toquam Elementary School in Stamford, Christie Fountain chanced upon this innocent comment on violence and small children.
A kindergartner hid behind her teacher as a fifth grader marched by, draped in black and sporting a ghoulish red rubber mask.
"I'm afraid of that costume!" the youngster wailed.
"Oh, don't be afraid of him," the teacher said. "It's only David Stein."
The little girl peeked out from her hiding place.
"I haven't seen that movie," she said.
. . .
Noon.
In the semidarkness of the Murray Hill theater on East 34th Street, Marcella Waldman waits for "Son of the Pink Panther" to start.
Two women enter and look around at the empty theater.
"I guess the next showing gets a bigger crowd," one says hopefully.
"No," Ms.
Waldman replies.
"This picture is a flop. I'm just killing time while my apartment is being cleaned."
"Oh?" The tone of the third woman's voice chills the theater.
"I can't wait to see it. My daughter and son-in-law wrote the script with Blake Edwards."
Just then the lights go out and the picture begins. And not a moment too soon.
. . .
NOVEMBER November, that old crone, with eyes bleak as milk,  squats on the cracked ground and picks at her tatters,  Scatters of dust curls and dead leaves.
She barks her hoarse cough to the demented wind,  Shrieking and keening, careening the sodden clouds.
With thin fingers she scratches the trees.
Etching frail filigree of branch and twig,  Frost-lacquered and stiff, nervously scraping the sky.
MARJORIE K. BERNSTEIN
. . .
Dear Diary:
Strolling through Central Park, I overheard a fragment of conversation between a young couple heading toward Tavern on the Green.
She to him: "How could he live without me? How could anyone live without me?"
Fortunately, it was at that point our routes diverged. MICHAEL RONALL
. . .
Another autumn afternoon in Manhattan finds Norman Berg heading downtown on a Fifth Avenue bus.
Somewhere in midtown, a woman of a certain age climbs aboard.
She is wearing an attention-getting straw hat with a large red ribbon that matches her red tennis shoes.
She immediately becomes chatty with her fellow passengers.
Several stops later, a serious-looking fellow gets on.
He wears boots, faded blue jeans and a smashing cowboy hat.
"Are you a cowboy?" the woman in the hat wants to know.
"Where are you from?" she persists.
No answer.
Long pause.
Finally he stares down at her.
"Madame," he says, "I'm from 57th and Park." He strides down the aisle to a vacant seat.
. . .
The flight was from Milan, Italy, to New York; the movie shown was "Indecent Proposal," starring Robert Redford.
The after-the-film dialogue between passengers included this across-the-aisle query from one silver-haired woman to another.
"So tell me. Would you have done it?"
. . .
Elizabeth Wright O'Connor of Mount Laurel, N.J., is a volunteer in a night class for adults.
The students, whose native languages include Polish, Spanish, Arabic and Urdu, are learning English as a second language.
Ms.
O'Connor was helping Nela, a recent emigre from sultry Pakistan; she was showing her illustrations from a child's dictionary that matched "A," "B," "C "with "Apple," "Baby," "Cat," etc.
The "E" showed a pair of big, furry earmuffs.
Nela hesitated, frowned, thought hard.
Finally, with raised eyebrows, she ventured an answer.
"Walkman?" she asked.
Ms.
O'Connor patted her pupil's hand and assured her she was learning about America fast.


Corrections
A headline on Monday about a study of three drugs used to treat heart attacks overstated the findings.
As the article stated, two drugs, magnesium and nitrates like nitroglycerin, showed little or no benefit; the third, captopril, showed a small benefit.


Studies Suggest Estrogen Lowers Alzheimer's Risk
Women who take estrogen after menopause appear to reduce their risk of getting Alzheimer's disease and, if they do get it, to have milder symptoms, scientists reported today.
The findings were among several results on aging and the brain presented at the annual meeting of the Society for Neuroscience here.
In another report, scientists said that for the first time they had found a link between chronic stress and poorer mental performance.


Which Mayor Created That Big Deficit?
To the Editor:
Richard Ravitch (Op-Ed, Nov. 3) repeats inaccurate statements by former Mayor Ed Koch, that "in 1978 Ed Koch inherited a billion-dollar deficit" from me.


Books of The Times; The Oeuvre of That Lyricist Who Got Rhythm
The Complete Lyrics  of Ira Gershwin
Edited by Robert Kimball.
414 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $45.
The bards of Broadway and Tin Pan Alley didn't make art for art's sake; they made art for commerce and for pleasure's sake.
The worst of them were hit-mongering hacks; the best made hits and great songs simultaneously.


Blazers' Dudley Fractures Ankle
Trail Blazers 109, Lakers 102
Cliff Robinson led a trio of Portland reserves with 22 points each and the Trail Blazers overcame an injury to center Chris Dudley for their first victory, defeating the Los Angeles Lakers, 109-102, last night in Inglewood, Calif.


Terris Moore, Educator And an Adventurer, 85
Dr.
Terris Moore, a mountain climber and a former president of the University of Alaska, died on Sunday at Mount Auburn Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 85 and lived in Cambridge.
The cause was a heart attack, said his wife, Katrina.


COURT, 9-0, MAKES SEX HARASSMENT EASIER TO PROVE
Ruling with surprising speed and unanimity, the Supreme Court today announced a broad definition of sexual harassment in the workplace that will enable workers to win suits without having to prove that the offensive behavior left them psychologically damaged or unable to do their jobs.
In an opinion by Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, the Court rejected a standard adopted by several lower Federal courts that required plaintiffs to show that sexual harassment made the workplace environment so hostile as to cause them "severe psychological injury."  [ Excerpts, page A22. ]


Court Rules For Parents In Training Of Disabled
A unanimous Supreme Court decision today strengthened the hand of parents in disputes with school boards over what education program is appropriate for their handicapped children.
The Court ruled that parents who unilaterally take children with disabilities out of public school may be entitled to reimbursement for their private school tuition, even if the private school has not been approved by the school district or does not meet state standards.


AST Research Will Eliminate 1,050 Jobs
AST Research Inc. said today that it would eliminate 1,050 jobs, or 16 percent of its work force, as it consolidated its acquisition of the Tandy Corporation's personal computer manufacturing business.
The acquisition, which was completed June 30, made AST the fourth- largest personal computer company in the nation and sixth-largest in the world.


CREDIT MARKETS;
Corporations sold about $1.95 billion of new debt yesterday, according to MCM/Corporate Watch, a new issue research firm.
A $500 million offering by the CNA Financial Corporation, the big insurance company, was among the larger investment grade deals of the day.


Access Health Marketing (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Enterra Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nordstrom Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Gordon Ramsey, 63, A Singer and an Actor
Gordon Ramsey, an actor and a singer, died on Friday at his home in Grymes Hill, S.I.
He was 63.
The cause was cancer, said a family friend, who did not wish to be named.


Review/Theater: A Quarrel of Sparrows; Lo, It's Armageddon in an Old-Fashioned Comedy
It has gotten to the point where specters of the apocalypse should probably form their own theatrical union.
Over the past year, they have tirelessly stalked the stages of New York in works as different as "Angels in America," "Marisol," "Pterodactyls" and "The Twilight of the Golds," reflecting and enhancing millenarian jitters in their audiences.
Now there is "A Quarrel of Sparrows," by James Duff, a small, chipper comedy that seems to have been created as an antidote to such anxieties.
The spirit of Armageddon again plays a major role here, but it has been domesticated and deflated, cast in the hopeful, common-sensical tradition of the old-fashioned, all-American comedy of manners.


In America; Nafta And the Elite
The intellectual and political elite have lined up in support of the North American Free Trade Agreement, but it's the grunts, the ordinary working men and women of America, who will face the consequences in the form of wage contraction, lost jobs and reduced standards of health and safety.
It's too bad Ross Perot is the leading opponent of Nafta.
Working people deserve better.
When Mr.
Perot starts waving his arms, tossing out misleading data and shrieking about "that giant sucking sound," his noise drowns out the serious discussion of the problems with Nafta.


Peekskill Legislator to Seek Governor Nomination
George E. Pataki, a little-known State Senator from Peekskill, said today that he will run for the Republican gubernatorial nomination in 1994, and he apparently will have the support of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and the state party chairman, William D. Powers.
Mr.
Pataki, 48, a lawyer and farmer who has spent eight years in the Legislature, emerged as a potential candidate after Mr.
D'Amato said last month that he would not run.


Lobbyists Woo New York Lawmakers in the Sun
For a week now, a group of New York State legislators and members of the New York City Council have been wined and dined by lobbyists as they hold a conference here that they say will help them better serve their Puerto Rican constituents back home.
The meals and receptions staged by such diverse interests as A.T.&amp;.T., Philip Morris, Banco Popular, Coors and the firm of Davidoff &amp; Malito are not unusual -- some legislators note that more lavish ones are held throughout the legislative year in Albany.
But the tropical setting is, and that has attracted some negative publicity, making it a bit more stressful for participants to sip a pina colada or swim in the tennis racket-shaped pool at the Carib-Inn Hotel, where most are staying.


John Forsyth reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Melange of Flavorings Transforms a Fish Dish
FUSION cooking seems to be the newest catchall phrase for dishes with ingredients from more than one part of the world.
Generally, one of the countries is the United States or France, and the other is Asian.
This recipe for halibut and spiced vegetables, however, puts an Italian accent on Chinese ingredients: olive oil and pine nuts are used with five-spice powder, cilantro, ginger and soy sauce.
The combination produces a dish with a delicious jolt of flavorings.


A Southern Journal; Y'all Come Back, Now, Ecoutez, Professeurs?
Sure, they deconstructed the plantation world, saw a gala screening of the Southern epic "It's Grits," heard the Swiss Alpine bluesman Walter Liniger and pondered whether Scarlett O'Hara was a feminist.
But do they have a quarterback at the Pedagogical University of Flensburg or the University of Oslo who can run the option?


Nature Food Centres (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Ben Feldman, 81, Dies; Was Premier Salesman
Ben Feldman, whom industry experts called the greatest life-insurance salesman of all time, died on Sunday in West Penn Hospital in Pittsburgh.
He was 81 and lived in East Liverpool, Ohio.
His family said he had died of a stroke.


Parents of Dead Child Say They Suspected Abuse by Nanny
The parents of a 10-month-old who died of injuries received while in a nanny's care have testified that they suspected the baby was being abused, but ignored their fears because of their trust in the nanny and the reassurances of their pediatrician and a relative.
The baby's parents, David and Peggy Leahy Dunne of Rye, testified on Monday and today in pretrial hearings at Westchester County Court.
They said that the second time their son, Kieran, received bruises that his nanny attributed to his falling on a toy, they started watching Kieran's behavior more closely but did not remove him from the nanny's care.


Haggar Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Holiday Tomorrow
Veterans Day will be observed on tomorrow. Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK
PARADE Tomorrow, the Veterans Day Parade begins at 9 A.M. at Fifth Avenue and 39th Street, going south to 24th Street.
Fifth Avenue will be closed from 9 A.M. until completion of the parade.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Alternate-side street cleaning regulations suspended.
SANITATION No pickups or street cleanings.
SCHOOLS Open.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Open.
TRANSPORTATION Buses and subways on weekday schedules.
Long Island Rail Road and Metro-North on weekday schedule.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Local option.
TRANSPORTATION N.J. Transit on weekday schedule.
CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on weekday schedule.


Corporate Management Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jordanian Vote Endorses Peace Effort
Jordanians have given a strong endorsement to the Middle East peace effort by spurning Islamic militants whose principal platform was opposition to any peace talks with Israel.
The Islamic Action Front won only 16 seats in the 80-member in elections on Monday, according to official results announced today.
The Muslim fundamentalist voting bloc, which includes two nominal independents in addition to the Action Front, thus shrank to 18, from 32 in the last Parliament.
Political parties have only been allowed since the last elections, which were in 1989.


Casino Magic Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gorky Stars as Auctions Resume
The market for contemporary art at auction is facing its own sort of Catch-22.
The audience is there and eager to buy; the only problem is finding good material to sell.
At a tepid auction at Christie's last night, art sold at every price level, even relatively insignificant art.
Of the 62 works offered, 50 found buyers.
The evening's sale totaled $15.9 million, just above Christie's low estimate of $15.3 million.
"I was mightily relieved and pleased that there was so much activity," said Christopher Burge, president of Christie's in New York.
"We saw more bidding on less valuable works than we have in the past."


60-Minute Gourmet
FEW foods are as all-American as chili, whether it is rich Texas-style chili con carne, fiery Arizona style or the myriad variations in between.
In France we had all sorts of meat pies and ground meat dishes, but nothing approximating chili.
Chili is generally agreed to have originated in Texas more than 100 years ago, in the days of cowboys.
Chili made sense for these hard-riding buckaroos, for it was quick, filled with protein and cheap -- beef was not exactly scarce for the herders.
The degree of fire in the form of hot peppers became a matter of cowboy competition.
In New Mexico, chili was made with lamb or mutton rather than beef, and red beans were popular.


Producer Prices Fell In October
Prices received by American producers declined two-tenths of 1 percent in October, surprisingly strong reassurance that a pickup in the economy is not reviving inflation, Labor Department figures showed today.
Except for a modest rise in September, prices for finished goods have fallen or been unchanged every month since April and "core" inflation -- with energy and food excluded -- has all but disappeared over the last 12 months.


Restoring Marsala's Reputation
IN kitchen lore, Marsala means a splash in the pan -- a cheap fortified Sicilian cooking wine in screw-cap bottles, often found next to the vinegar on grocery shelves.
This image appalls Marco De Bartoli, a rebel against the overcaramelized, alcoholic concoction.
Along with other Marsalas that are flavored for the mass market with chocolate or egg, it debases Marsala's historic reputation as a serious competitor of premium sherry.


Questar Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gradco Systems Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Land on This Unfinished Boardwalk and You Might Not Pass Go


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: The Overview; Gore and Perot Dual on TV Over the Trade Pact
Vice President Al Gore suggested tonight that Ross Perot opposed the North American Free Trade Agreement to win political and financial advantage for himself.
In a sour 90-minute televised debate that turned more on personality than substance, the Vice President observed that Mr.
Perot had favored the trade agreement until he began running for President, and that the Perot family had obtained special free-trade privileges for its development near a cargo airport in Fort Worth.


Russia and China Sign a Military Agreement
Russia and China signed a five-year military cooperation agreement today that is expected to broaden the transfer of military technology to China.
But the Russian Defense Minister, Gen.
Pavel Grachev, said the expanded cooperation would not be used "against any third country."
Chinese and Russian officials also emphasized that General Grachev was not here to negotiate any new sale of Russian weapons to China, which has been a matter of concern to China's neighbors and to the United States.


American Consumer Products (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Mostar's Old Bridge Battered to Death
Croatian gunners destroyed the renowned Old Bridge in the Bosnian city of Mostar today, sending one of the most graceful examples of Ottoman architecture crashing into the Neretva River.
The four-century-old arch, described by a Muslim poet as "a crescent moon in stone," was one of the most formidable metaphors for the common life that the Muslims, Croats and Serbs of the old Yugoslavia enjoyed before the country's violent breakup into separate nation-states began in mid-1991.


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: Right and Wrong; Exaggerations? Yes, Particularly by Perot
As has been the case with much of the fight over the North American Free Trade Agreement, the debate tonight between Vice President Al Gore and Ross Perot included some misleading and exaggerated arguments on both sides.
Their disagreements ranged from the sweeping (whether the pact would result in massive layoffs across the United States) to the obscure (the pact's rules on certain labels of Tennessee bourbon).
But a review of their statements on CNN's "Larry King Live" indicates that Mr.
Perot tended to stray a little further from the facts than did Mr.
Gore.


GRAZING FEES CUT FROM SENATE BILL
Unable to break a filibuster by Western lawmakers, the Senate today abandoned its effort to raise grazing fees and tighten environmental rules for use of Federal lands.
But in doing so, it freed the Clinton Administration to impose even higher grazing fees and stricter environmental regulations on its own.
The action ended weeks of bargaining that had tied up a spending bill for the Interior Department.
At the end of the bruising fight, neither side was triumphant but both claimed victory.


Thermedics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


American Natural Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Provident American Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Backtracking on the Baltics
Who's in charge of Russian foreign policy, Boris Yeltsin or the military?
That question takes on new urgency after Defense Minister Pavel Grachev challenged Mr.
Yeltsin's commitment to unconditional withdrawal of all 20,000 Russian troops from Latvia and Estonia.
Mr.
Yeltsin and Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev have sought an end to discrimination against Russians who live in the two Baltic republics, but have never explicitly linked that issue to withdrawal.
Last week General Grachev sounded an ominously different note.
"I as Minister of Defense want to link the pullout of troops to the protection of Russian-speakers," he said at a news conference.


A Wireless Upstart Gets Bigger
The revolution in wireless communications took a new turn yesterday as an upstart company acquired the capstone for a nationwide network that could give cellular phone companies and giants like A.T.&amp; T. a run for their money.
Capping a steady and often stealthy six-year buying binge, Nextel Communications Inc., of Rutherford, N.J., announced it would buy a huge collection of mobile-radio licenses from Motorola Inc. for $1.8 billion in stock.
When combined with licenses that Nextel had already acquired, the company now has the potential -- theoretically at least -- to serve 180 million people across 21 states.


McGrath RentCorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Algoma Central reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Quantum Restaurant Group Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


LIMITED INC. (N)
The slump in sales of women's clothing battered Limited Inc. in the third quarter.
The specialty-store retailer, which is based in Columbus, Ohio, and operates the Limited, Bath &amp; Body Works, Express and nine other specialty chains, yesterday reported flat sales and just the slightest increase in earnings.
The quarter's results did not include sales at Brylane, a mail-order division in which the company sold a majority stake last summer.


CHRONICLE
It may be nine years since Senator JOHN GLENN ran for the Democratic Presidential nomination, but the memories linger on, or at least the campaign debts do.
So the four-term Ohio Senator and former astronaut has found himself on what might be called a retrospective fund-raising party trail in hopes of erasing those debts.
He is coming to New York for a party on Monday at the studio of the artist PETER MAX, on West 65th Street.
Vice President Al Gore has said he will attend, and the organizers hope it will raise $400,000.
With Federal election laws barring any candidate from contributing more than $50,000 to his own campaign and limiting gifts from individuals to $1,000, the Senator has found it difficult to raise new money for the old debt.
Mr.
Glenn said he was not legally liable for the debt, since it was incurred in the name of his campaign committee.
"What do you do, walk away and say it's not my responsibility?" he said.
"I couldn't do that."


Husband Tells Court of Sexual Mutilation by Wife
John Wayne Bobbitt, whose very personal suffering has gained him national notoriety, testified today that he tried to scream but could not when his wife cut off his penis with a kitchen knife on June 23.
"I felt a pull, a jerk," he told the jury that will decide whether he is guilty of marital sexual battery.
"That hurt real bad and I sprang up -- like, silent pain.  I grabbed my groin area and held myself."


Thermo Fibertek reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Review/Cabaret; American Pop, but With a French Accent
In the most uproarious moment of "Les Incroyables," a streamlined hybrid of the Folies-Bergere and a contemporary drag show, Daniel Rohou, a portly transvestite clown who looks like Divine, leads a corps of dancers in a recreation of routines from Madonna's Blond Ambition tour.
There is something poignant as well as ridiculous in the sight of the fleshy comic performer making a deliberate fool of himself while executing a narcissistic model's poses for Vogue.
Especially in those moments featuring Mr.
Rohou, "Les Incroyables" is more than just entertaining: it feels liberating.
"Les Incroyables," which is attracting a growing cult audience in the SoHo supper club Kaptain Banana (101 Greene Street), isn't always so amusing.
But the show, which is mostly lip-synced to blaring pop music, is performed at such a breathless pace that there is little room for contemplation.
Featuring eight dancers and three drag performers drawn from the Parisian cabaret world, it offers a distinctly European view of American pop culture.
In parodying American pop sounds and images that run from Donna Summer to Michael Jackson to John Philip Sousa, it fits everything comfortably into a French music-hall tradition.


BOTH SIDES ASSERT GAIN AFTER DEBATE OVER TRADE ACCORD
The feuding over the fate of the North American Free Trade Agreement grew louder and more shrill today as the vote in Congress edged closer.
Yet leaders of the fight against the agreement distanced themselves from the activities against the trade pact by Ross Perot, who exchanged barbs with Vice President Al Gore on national television Tuesday night over the merits of the proposed accord with Mexico and Canada.


Japan Never Ceded Islands Russia Claims
To the Editor:
In "Kuriles Were Ceded to Soviets by Treaty" (letter, Oct. 22), Marvin Gregory uses the expressions "treaty," "cede" and "treaty-based seizure." Clearly, it cannot be claimed that Japan "ceded" anything in a so-called "treaty" to which Japan was not a party.
No country, according to international law, has any right to "cede" the territory of another country.
Mr.
Gregory's letter and your headline suggest this happened.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Joao Bosco  S.O.B.'s
A solo concert of bossa novas usually brings hushed, poetic ruminations, and Joao Bosco's show on Sunday night at S.O.B.'s had its share of whispered endearments.
But in its own quiet way, Mr.
Bosco's magnificent set, the first United States appearance since 1991 by one of Rio de Janeiro's finest songwriters, was also a joyful display of rhythms in which his guitar said as much as his voice did.
He sang about everything from love and longing to impressions of France to the deities of the African-Brazilian religion Candomble.


Review/Theater: Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat; Joseph And His Brothers, To Music
The most interesting fable at work in the flashy revival of "Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat," the first collaboration by Tim Rice and Andrew Lloyd Webber, isn't the familiar biblical tale from which the musical takes its plot.
It is, instead, a show-biz saga of lost innocence, the story of how a modest, tuneful little musical from the 1960's grew and grew, through successive incarnations, into an oversized, glittering symbol of the Age of Hype.
"Joseph" began life 26 years ago, when Mr.
Rice and Mr.
Lloyd Webber were 19 and 23, respectively, as a 20-minute cantata for an English boys' school choir.
In short order, it was revised and expanded, turning into the sort of unpretentious, inexpensively mounted musical that relied mostly on its infectious melodies and young, enthusiastic casts.
An understandable favorite of schools and stock companies, it received a fondly remembered, intimate production at the Entermedia and Royale Theaters in 1982.


Monk-Austin Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. and Switzerland to Share Seized $22 Million
After five years of negotiations, the United States and Switzerland are splitting $22 million in profits seized from the Swiss bank accounts of the leader of a Long Island-based hashish ring.
The case involves the largest international forfeiture ever, Federal officials said, and reflects a new willingness by the Swiss to turn over assets seized in their country.


CHRONICLE
CALVIN KLEIN sewed up the fashion industry's two most prestigious honors yesterday.
The Council of Fashion Designers of America named him the women's wear designer of the year and the men's wear designer of the year, the first time both awards have gone to one person in the same year.
The awards area to be presented at Lincoln Center on Feb. 7, 1994.
The Perry Ellis Award for New Talent will go to RICHARD TYLER, for women's wear, and to JOHN BARTLETT for men's wear.


Classical Music in Review
Yale Music Spectrum  Merkin Concert Hall
The Yale School of Music has a powerful advertisement in the Yale Music Spectrum, a chamber-music series in which faculty and students collaborate.
Its first New York concert of the season, called Concertante, offered mostly works that edged beyond the chamber-music notion of all parts being equal and flirted with the concerto form.
In selections from Francois Couperin's "Pieces en Concert" this was accomplished editorially: the original wind, string and harpsichord texture was transferred by Paul Bazelaire to solo cello, string quartet and bass.
That's a big leap, and the performance on Saturday had the kind of lush, vibrato-laden sound of 1950's-vintage readings of Baroque music.
The reading had its charms, chief among them Hae-Eun Kim's beautifully shaped solo cello line.


INSIDE
A Giant Publisher Emerges
Paramount agreed to buy Macmillan for $553 million in cash.
The deal would create the second-largest publisher in the world.
Page D1.
Is China Too Austere?
China's austerity cure may be worse than the disease, especially if it kills off the strong momentum in foreign investment.
Page D1.
House Passes Brady Bill
Lawmakers approved legislation that would require a buyer of a handgun to wait five business days before taking possession of it.
Page B16.
Judge's Conduct at Issue
A Connecticut judge's nomination to the Federal bench is in jeopardy because of questions about his relationship with a defense lawyer.
Page B1.
Auction Fever Returns
Paddles flew high and phone lines were jammed at Sotheby's sale of contemporary art.
Record prices were set for eight artists.
Page C19.


James Yates, 87, Head Of N.A.A.C.P. Chapter
James Yates, who went from the cotton fields of Mississippi to the battlefields of the Spanish Civil War and the New York civil rights fights, died on Sunday in Beth Israel Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 87.
He suffered a brief illness, his family said.


WNYC's Public Broadcast Stations Nearly Sustain Themselves
To the Editor:
Every time there is a mayoral election, little WNYC is hung out to dry, as if its tiny city budget were a solution to the city's budgetary ills.
This time Richard Ravitch, one of the best qualified people to run for mayor and chairman of the Citizens Budget Commission, has done it in "Mantra for the Mayor: Deficit. Deficit. Deficit. Deficit" (Op-Ed, Nov. 3).


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Corsican Mint
Q.
Where might I find Corsican mint, which I have searched for in vain? -- Teresa D. Marciano, Fort Lee, N.J.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Feuding over the free trade agreement grew louder and more shrill.
Leaders of the fight against the agreement distanced themselves from the activities of Ross Perot.  [ Page A1. ]
Mexican stocks had their strongest performance of the year on what many Mexicans saw as an effective defense of Nafta by Vice President Gore.
The market's main index rose 4.17 percent and exchange rates stabilized.  [ D2. ]  Some Mexicans fairly exploded at Perot's depiction of their country in Tuesday's debate.  [ A1. ]


K-Tel International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Friedman Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


If the Officials Strike, Will Mayhem Arrive?
Although there aren't any games scheduled tomorrow in the National Hockey League, the referees and linesmen will meet in Toronto to make an important judgment call.
As a union, they will vote on a "final set" of salary numbers proposed by the league.
The men in stripes say that if they turn it down, they will strike on Monday.
If they do, the league promises they will be replaced by minor league and amateur officials.
In a sport not always known for discipline, such actions could create an interesting scenario.


Contraceptive Maker to Charge Clinics Less
Under pressure from family planning groups who say that the high price of Norplant, the contraceptive implant, has prevented hundreds of thousands of women from obtaining it, the manufacturer announced today that it would sharply cut the price it charges public clinics.
In a hearing today before the House Small Business subcommittee on Regulation, a spokesman for Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories said that a primary reason the price of the new contraceptive implant had been kept high was to prevent the drug from becoming known as a poor woman's drug, and thus perhaps be shunned by middle-class women.


Many Markets Open Today
Most banks and the Treasury bond market will be closed in the United States today in observance of Veterans Day.
But the stock market and the commodity markets will be open.
And there will be limited trading in the currency markets.


Vintage Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Slain Taxi Driver Knew Danger but Drove On
If Sindulfo Perez ever felt invulnerable to the dangers of the taxi business, his fellow livery drivers were frightful reminders.
One still bore the scars from a beating over the head, and another from the time a passenger slit his throat.
Mr.
Perez never stopped feeling for his colleagues and, his friends said, he never stopped feeling afraid for himself.
Still, he had to work.


Its Economy Rising, Morocco Lures Investors
For several weeks, Kerry Yeager, a project manager for the AES power corporation of Arlington, Va., has been hunkered down in a suite at the Hyatt here hammering out the terms of the biggest American investment ever in Morocco.
"We are coming here because Morocco is pro-Western, stable and has as good and sophisticated a group of people as I've ever met," Mr.
Yeager said.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  WHITMAN, AND ROLLINS, DENY PAYMENTS New Jersey's Governor-elect, Christine Todd Whitman, said it was not true that her campaign had made payments to suppress the urban and mostly black vote in the New Jersey governor's race.
In a retraction and apology she demanded, her campaign manager, Edward J. Rollins Jr., said in a statement that he had exaggerated and that the payments "did not occur." A1.
Republican loyalists are furious at Rollins's comments.
B10.


Gilbert Associates (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Arizona Land Income Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Israel Ready to Curtail Force In Gaza Strip, the P.L.O. Says
Israel has agreed to drastically reduce its forces outside Jewish settlements in the Gaza Strip, raising hopes that the Dec. 13 deadline for carrying out limited Palestinian self-rule will be met, the chief Palestinian negotiator said today.
After two days of talks in Cairo, the P.L.O. negotiator, Nabil Shaath, said the two sides were close to agreement on details of the Israeli withdrawal.


Confronting Fires of the Heart and Mind
Six days before my home in the Malibu hills was destroyed by fire, I spent the morning hours packing for a trip to New York, occasionally pausing to watch television coverage of the first round of blazes that were still burning in Laguna Beach, 60 miles to the south, and in Thousand Oaks, nearly 30 miles north.
As I moved about the long house, I glanced at the view from the bedroom, the master bathroom, the living room, the kitchen.
It was as peaceful as always, offering the eternally spectacular sight of the Pacific Ocean framed by trees and rolling hills, a panorama unsullied by telephone poles or other structures.
No flames or smoke were visible, even from the stone deck outside my bedroom that looked out over the bluff.
I locked the doors and set the burglar alarm, reminding myself to get around to having pillows made for the window seat when I returned.


Louis Banks, 77, Dies; An Editor for Time Inc.
Louis Banks, a former managing editor of Fortune magazine and former editorial director of Time Inc., died on Sunday at his home in Naples, Fla.
He was 77.
The cause was congestive heart failure, Fortune said in a statement issued yesterday.


'Family Planning': Baby Boy or Girl?
IN the fourth month of her second pregnancy, the ultrasound screen shadows revealed an unmistakable fact: Joan Wisner-Carlson was carrying another boy.
"I guess we're going for a third child" were the first words her husband, Bob, a psychiatrist, said.
"We really wanted a girl and I was secretly hoping we'd have one, so I have to admit I was kind of disappointed," Ms.
Wisner-Carlson, a freelance writer, said one sunny morning in a Baltimore backyard strewn with toys.
Play-group parents gathered on the deck shared feelings about a subject frequently discussed and often cloaked in embarrassment: sex preference for children.


House Panel Told Alaska Pipeline Is Troubled and Risks Breakdown
The director of the Federal agency that regulates the Trans Alaska Pipeline yesterday harshly criticized the way the pipeline is run and told a House subcommittee that his agency had already taken action to correct some deficiencies.
Jim Baca, who as director of the Bureau of Land Management is one of the main regulators of the pipeline, blamed top managers of the pipeline, the consortium of oil companies that runs it and, to an extent, some of his staff for creating conditions that could lead to breakdown in the 800-mile system.
The system carries about 25 percent of the oil produced in the United States.


An American Sets Her Sights High
They're both blue-eyed blondes with short-cropped hair, and if that doesn't make it hard enough to tell them apart, consider this: Whether on the road or on the track, Anne Marie Letko and Uta Pippig often seem to be joined at the hip, running in virtual lockstep and invariably finishing within a few seconds of each other.
If you need to distinguish them on Sunday, Letko, a 24-year-old Rutgers graduate from Glen Gardner, N.J., has a hint: She will be the one in front at the finish of the New York City Marathon.


13 Parties Qualify for Russian Ballot
Campaigning for Russia's parliamentary elections began today after 13 political groups received permission to put up candidates.
The 13 groups include 5 groups backing President Boris N. Yeltsin as well as the Russian Communist Party, the centrist Civic Union and the rightist Liberal Democratic Party.


Doctor Indicted in Arson After Office Is Destroyed
A former Long Island doctor whose wife was fined $170,000 for performing faulty mammograms was arraigned today in Federal District Court in Brooklyn on a charge of setting fire to a six-story building where 70 families were sleeping.
Authorities said Dr.
Moorthy S. Ram, formerly of Muttontown, L.I., entered his basement office in Far Rockaway, Queens, about 4 A.M. on Aug. 25, 1989, and set four fires.
While no one was hurt, one room was engulfed in flames, and Dr.
Ram then tried to collect several hundred thousand dollars in insurance claims, said John O'Brien, a spokesman for the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.


Boston Globe Review Narrowed to 6 Shops
The Boston Globe said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on its estimated $4 million account to six semifinalists from a list of 16 contenders.
The account had been at Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos in Boston for 15 years, until the company and agency decided to part ways last month.


JAPANESE PREMIER FACING MAJOR TEST
A hundred days after taking office and promising the most sweeping political change in postwar Japan, Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa still enjoys the highest approval rating in the history of Japanese polling but faces a critical test within the next few days getting the first of his biggest reform plans approved by Parliament.
Mr.
Hosokawa has said that he must get a broad political reform bill approved in at least one house of Parliament before traveling to Seattle to meet President Clinton and most of the leadership of Asia at a major economic conference next week.
But the obstacles standing in the way loom large.


H&amp;H Oil Tool (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


2,200 Job Cuts Plus Charge At BellSouth
Setting the stage for its first-ever quarterly loss, the BellSouth Corporation said yesterday that it would take a $1.2 billion charge against earnings and reduce its work force by an additional 2,200 jobs by the end of 1996.
This latest sign of the pressure on telephone companies to cut costs is all the more striking because BellSouth is the largest and most profitable of the Baby Bells.


Dinkins Can't Quite Forget Politics
In a weeklong vacation here, Mayor David N. Dinkins has played up to three tennis matches a day and even lost "a pound or two."
But even as he tries to relax, politics is never far from his mind.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Beneficial Corp., Wilmington, Del., is selling through UBS Securities Inc. $100 million of 6.47 percent medium-term notes due in 2008 at various prices, initially at 100 to yield about 85 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
The notes are rated A-2 by Moody's and A by S.&amp; P. and Duff &amp; Phelps.
*
Federal National Mortgage Association, Washington, known as Fannie Mae,is selling, through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch, $600 million of 5.23 percent medium-term notes due in 1998 at a price of 100 to yield about 18 basis points more than the five-year Treasury note.


COMPANY BRIEFS
J.
I.
CASE CO., Racine, Wis., and the United Automobile Workers union, along with the Case U.A.W.
Council, jointly announced the ratification of a 16-month contract extension, which will run from Oct. 3, 1993, to Feb. 4, 1995.


Cuomo Says He Won't Support Trade Pact
After refusing for months to take a firm position on the North American Free Trade Agreement, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York said today that he could not support the proposed treaty in its current form.
Mr.
Cuomo's announcement came at an impromptu news conference a week before the House of Representatives is to vote on the trade agreement.
Almost all 31 members of the House from New York had already taken a stand on the issue.


Rutgers Is on Road to Nowhere in 1993
A visitor ran into Doug Graber earlier this week and greeted him with a cheery "How's it going?" After a half second of strained silence, the visitor caught himself and quickly revised the greeting.
"Well, how's the wife and kids?"
Indeed, for Graber, the 49-year-old head football coach at Rutgers, even simple greetings can be a source of angst.
Graber said this season has been the toughest year he has spent in sports -- covering jobs in Tampa Bay and Kansas City in the pros, and Montana, Ball State, Wisconsin and Eastern Michigan at the college level.


Judge Rules That Sheik and Two Other Defendants Cannot Share Lawyers
Ruling that Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman did not understand the peril of his lawyers' "one-size-fits-all defense," a Federal judge has decided that the Egyptian cleric charged with directing a terrorist plot to bomb New York City targets cannot be represented by the same pair of lawyers defending two others in the case.
Judge Michael B. Mukasey, citing potential conflicts of interest, said that the lawyers, William M. Kunstler and Ronald L. Kuby, could represent either Mr.
Abdel Rahman or two other defendants, Ibrahim A. Elgabrowny and Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali, but not all three, as the two law partners have been doing since September in Manhattan Federal Court.
The lawyers were given until Monday to make their choice.


Barrett Business Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Duracraft Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Editorial Notebook: Almost Forgotten on Veterans Day; Wilson's Failed Vision Still Has Wings
Just 75 years ago today, the guns fell silent in what an older generation called the Great War.
That so little has been made of the anniversary reflects the heartbreaking letdown that clings to the memory of World War I.
For Americans, the Great War was a moral crusade to establish a new world order in which democracy would finally be safe.
Even before the U.S. entered the war, Woodrow Wilson called for a peace without victory, and envisioned a time when armies and navies would become a "power for order merely, not an instrument of aggression or of selfish violence."


Stifel Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Florio's Defeat Revives Memories of G.O.P. Activities in 1981
For the second time in a little more than a decade, Gov.
Jim Florio has lost close races for governor in elections that produced charges that Republicans went to extraordinary lengths to keep black voters away from the polls.
Edward J. Rollins, Christine Todd Whitman's campaign manager, set off the latest flap on Tuesday when he said that the Republican campaign set aside about $500,000 to provide gifts to black ministers who would agree not to urge members of their congregation to vote for Mr.
Florio on Nov. 2 and to pay Democratic workers to stay home.


Classical Music in Review
Igor Kipnis  Fortepianist Kaye Playhouse Hunter College
Only a handful of listeners on Friday had the benefit of Igor Kipnis's entertaining and instructive evening of fortepiano music.
Mr.
Kipnis's Graebner instrument is exactly 200 years old this year, and the contents of his program either hovered around, or landed directly on, the date 1793.


Clinton Pushing Business With Asia
Seeking to capitalize on the world's fastest-growing economies, the Clinton Administration is pushing to topple trade barriers in East Asia, increase export subsidies and persuade United States companies to overcome their traditional reluctance to expand in the region.
While trade with Mexico and Canada dominates national debate, the Administration is orchestrating the push out of concern that businesses are not taking advantage of the huge opportunities in a region whose boom the World Bank calls the East Asian miracle.


Terex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cyclicals Set the Pace, With Dow Up by 23.48
Surmounting its gnawing fear of rising interest rates, the stock market yesterday cobbled together its first major rally in more than a week.
The Dow Jones industrial average rode a wave of buying in stocks of the cyclicals, companies whose earnings are sensitive to changes in the economy.
The index rose 23.48 points, to 3,663.55, its biggest increase since late October.
Technology issues were also strong, propelled by an encouraging report from a trade group on semiconductor sales.


Woods to Stanford
TIGER WOODS, the youngest player to compete on the PGA Tour, signed a letter of intent yesterday to attend Stanford.
Woods, 17, of Cypress, Calif., is the only three-time winner of the United States Junior championship.
A senior at Western High School in nearby Anaheim, the teen-age sensation chose Stanford over Nevada-Las Vega and Arizona State.
"School has always come first, and that meant Stanford," Woods said at a news conference at Western.


Books of The Times; A Strong Gay Dissent On Public Spectacles
A Place at the Table  The Gay Individual in American Society  By Bruce Bawer  269 pages.
Poseidon Press. $21.
Bruce Bawer, a cultural critic, is disturbed by the message he says militant gay-rights demonstrators send to the public with their exhibitionist and confrontational activities.
As he points out in his eloquent new book, "A Place at the Table: The Gay Individual in American Society," spectacles like Gay Pride Day parades, with some marchers in drag or wearing weighted nipple rings and their sometimes implicit advocacy of sexual promiscuity, project a false and damaging message of what it means to be homosexual.


Censorship Won't Make U.S. Any Less Violent; Knowing What's Fake
To the Editor:
My generation is a generation that grew up without parental control over television and movies, which is why Anna Quindlen's suggestion in "TV Guide" (column, Oct. 28), that parental control must come into play now, is a fine idea but unrealistic.


Clinton Is Asked By Rabin to Cut Spy's Jail Term
President Clinton said today that Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel had asked him to shorten the prison term of an American Jew who was convicted of spying for Israel in 1987 and sentenced to life in prison.
Mr.
Clinton said he had asked the Justice Department for a recommendation on the request, after which he will make a decision.
It is the first time a President has acknowledged considering such an appeal from Israel.


Patience Pays Off For Irish Passer
A season was about to begin, and Kevin McDougal was out of a job.
That was the coach's decision.
This was the quarterback's final chance.
McDougal had been the starting quarterback at Notre Dame, by a narrow margin, through the necessary but unfulfilling work of the spring and much of the summer.
But by the last week of August, as the highly regarded freshman Ron Powlus exhibited his rapid progress, Coach Lou Holtz informed McDougal of his decision -- if Powlus played at the same level in the third and final scrimmage, the job would belong to him.


A Big Room in SoHo, Full of Earth
THE Earth Room is a big roomful of dirt.
Dirt as in dirt farming.
Good dirt, as black as the Mississippi Delta.
It looks like a rich plowed field that has somehow flung itself onto the second floor of an industrial building in SoHo.
About two feet deep, this earth covers 3,600 square feet, and it's a work of art by Walter De Maria.
The little brass plaque on the door downstairs reads, "The New York Earth Room, Dia Center for the Arts." Just ring the bell and walk up.


Russians Wonder if Revolt's Casualties Were Higher Than Reported
In a country that voraciously devours conspiracy theories, the relatively low death toll in the showdown last month between President Boris N. Yeltsin and his opponents has become a matter of considerable conjecture.
The Main Medical Administration of Moscow says 144 people were killed and 878 wounded on Oct. 3 and 4, when rebels clashed with troops loyal to Mr.
Yeltsin.


Intergroup Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


School Aide Joins I.B.M.
Stanley S. Litow, the top aide to Joseph A. Fernandez during his tenure as New York City Schools Chancellor, will join I.B.M. as director of corporate support programs.
The company is the largest corporate contributor to philanthropy in the country.
Mr.
Litow, 47, will take over his new post on Monday.
He will also have responsibility for the I.B.M.
International Foundation and its South Africa Projects Fund, which supports education and legal reforms and promotes black enterprise there.
Mr.
Litow was brought to the Board of Education by Mr.
Fernandez in 1990 as deputy chancellor for operations.


2 AT STATE DEPT. ARE OUT OVER FILES
Secretary of State Warren Christopher has dismissed two mid-ranking State Department employees, apparently for their role in searching the personnel files of 160 former Bush Administration officials, the State Department announced today.
The two officials, Mark Schulhof and Joseph Tarver, were political appointees rewarded with State Department jobs for their work in Bill Clinton's Presidential campaign and the transition to the White House.


Paramount To Acquire Macmillan
In a merger that would bring together two prominent names in New York publishing, Paramount Communications Inc., the parent company of Simon &amp; Schuster, agreed yesterday to buy Macmillan Inc., the 150-year-old company that publishes such writers as Edith Wharton, Ernest Hemingway and F. Scott Fitzgerald.
Its list of perennially popular books includes "The Joy of Cooking" and "The Baseball Encyclopedia." Simon &amp; Schuster's best sellers range from "The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit," to "The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich" and "All the President's Men."


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Lendl Is Still Slipping  Ivan Lendl is still having trouble with that first step.
Unseeded Brett Steven of New Zealand, ranked 44th in the world, handed Lendl his 11th first-round defeat in 26 tournaments this year, eliminating the world's former No. 1 player, 6-4, 1-6, 6-1, from the European Community Championship in Antwerp, Belgium, yesterday. (AP) N.H.L.
Flyers Stymie Sabres  Mikael Renberg scored the Philadelphia Flyer's first two goals in a 5-3 victory last night in Buffalo that kept the Sabres the only team without a victory at home this season.
Gary Galley, Mike Recchi and Eric Lindros scored the other goals for the Flyers.
Buffalo, 0-7 at home this season, got goals from Derek Plante, Craig Simpson and Pat LaFontaine.
The Sabres have lost six straight in the Memorial Auditorium for the first time. (AP)


Cecilia Brinton Bogner; Psychologist, 93
Cecilia Brinton Bogner, a retired Boston psychologist, died on Oct. 31 at Sherrill House, a Boston nursing home.
She was 93 and lived in Lincoln, Mass.
She had suffered a brief illness, according to the Bell-O'Dea Funeral Home in Brookline.


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: Beyond a Trade Pact; The Issue: Should the U.S. Expand Its Economic and Political Influence?
The political debate over the North American Free Trade Agreement is not about tariffs or domestic content rules or side agreements on labor and the environment.
It is not even mostly about trade with Mexico.
The debate is about matters much larger and more important.
It is about whether, in the aftermath of the cold war, the United States will try to expand its economic and political influence around the world or whether it will withdraw within its borders and try to go it alone.
And the debate is about the fate and frustrations of American workers, who have seen the number of good factory jobs decline and family incomes stagnate.


Knicks Overcome 4th-Quarter Drought and Bullets
When the Knicks were good tonight, they were very good.
When they were bad, they were awful.
The Knicks built a 21-point lead before they temporarily forgot how to score.
That allowed them to overcome the first 5 minutes 29 seconds of the fourth quarter, when the Washington Bullets held New York scoreless.
The result was a 92-84 Knicks victory at the USAir Arena, which raised their record to 4-0, although it was a lot shakier than it should have been.
Pat Riley can accept the Knicks' 4-0 record.
He cannot accept many fourth quarters like this.


Pacific Telesis to Announce Video Network
The Pacific Telesis Corporation, the regional Bell company based in San Francisco, intends to announce a sweeping plan Thursday to spend about $15 billion over the next five years to build a network capable of delivering television and high-speed data services throughout California.
People familiar with the plan say the company has decided essentially to act on its own, rather than emulate the Bell Atlantic Corporation or U S West by teaming up with a big cable television partner to provide such services.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
2.95
2.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.09
3.05
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.25
3.24
3.26
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.27
5.20
6.45
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.20
6.14
7.66
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.27
7.22
8.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.60
5.58
6.50
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Sports of The Times; Chuvalo's Life After Boxing
HE was 34 then, a heavyweight with a chin that seemed to have been transplanted from the Canadian Rockies.
In 90 fights over 18 years, he would never be knocked down in the ring.
Not when George Foreman battered him in three rounds.
Not when Joe Frazier broke his cheekbone in four.
He had endured 15 rounds with Muhammad Ali in Toronto in 1966 and now, after 12 rounds with Ali in Vancouver in 1972, they were sitting side by side.
As Ali talked, he sat there silently, a white towel framing the bloody nicks on his swollen Croatian countenance.
George Chuvalo had lost again.
But when Ali handed him the microphone, he looked out at his listeners.


Taking Advantage of Mild Fall Day


Tussauds Considers Wax Exhibition in Times Square
Add a new ingredient to the bubbling stew on 42d Street: wax.
The Tussauds Group of London, owners and operators of Madame Tussaud's wax exhibition, said through a spokeswoman this week that it "would like to establish a project in the Times Square redevelopment area."


Anatol Dinbergs, 82, Latvia's Ambassador
Dr.
Anatol Dinbergs, who recently retired as Latvia's Ambassador to the United States, died on Tuesday at his home in Washington.
He was 82.
The cause was cancer, the Latvian Embassy said.


Penrod Scofield; Illustrator and Muralist, 60
Penrod Scofield, an illustrator and a muralist, died on Friday at St.
Johns Hospital in Yonkers.
He was 60.
The cause was cancer, said his companion, Paul Kresh.


An Auction at McDonnell Douglas in the Name of Consolidation


Vishay Intertechnology Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Market Place; A Fight for Green Point's Pot of Gold
In the 125 years since it was founded, Green Point Savings Bank of Flushing, Queens, has accumulated a giant pot of gold -- retained earnings of $758 million.
Under the arcane rules governing mutual savings banks like Green Point, the pot of gold is nominally owned by depositors, but in reality owned by no one.
The pot of gold is why Green Point is in the middle of a takeover battle with Republic New York Corporation of Manhattan.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  CLINTON WEIGHS ISRAEL SPY CASE  President Clinton said that Prime Minister Rabin of Israel had written to ask him to shorten the prison term of an American Jew convicted of spying for Israel in 1987 and sentenced to life in prison.
A1


Bridge
Everyone knows that Friday the 13th is an unlucky date, but it is not clear how this applies at the bridge table.
North-South and East-West cannot be unlucky simultaneously, and somebody must win the duplicate game.
The diagramed deal was played on Friday, Aug. 13, at the Adventures in Bridge Club in San Diego.
It was reported by Woody Douglas of that city, and although he modestly does not admit it, he was probably the declarer.
North-South arrived in an optimistic six spades after West had overcalled in clubs, and the club king was led.
South ruffed and cashed the spade ace, collecting the king.
He then made the surprising play of a heart to the ace, giving up on a heart finesse, and instead finessed the diamond queen.
When this won he threw a heart from dummy on the diamond ace and ruffed a diamond.


Different Wars, the Same Sadness
While I was researching a story in Israel and the occupied territories in 1986, I began photographing disabled veterans from Middle Eastern conflicts.
Since then I have documented the stories of former soldiers in 11 countries around the world.
Among these veterans have been Americans who fought in Korea, Dogon tribesmen in Mali who were conscripted by the French in World Wars I and II, Eritrean women who fought against the Ethiopians, Vietnamese who fought against the French, Americans and Chinese.


Thermo Electron Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


2 Held in Bombing Of Firefighter Crew
Two more people were arrested yesterday on charges they helped make an explosive that was thrown into a fire engine on July 8, injuring three firefighters in Washington Heights.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Guided by Voices  Under Acme
Guided by Voices, an eccentrically inspired rock band from Dayton, Ohio, labored in obscurity for a decade before suddenly emerging as a noteworthy presence on the indie-rock circuit last year.
Its show on Saturday night at Under Acme, part of the College Media Journal Music Marathon, displayed the post-punk inventiveness that has finally given the band a wider reputation, as well as the trenchant delivery that had it waiting so long.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Bjork  Webster Hall
Bjork, the lead singer of Iceland's best-known band, the Sugarcubes, has put the band on standby, moved to London and traded new-wave rock for sultry dance rhythms.
But her new context hasn't turned her into a standard dance diva.
Her melodies still use wide leaps and dissonant turns; her voice jumps from breathiness to laserlike focus to impassioned breaking notes.
And she often arrives at her favorite subject, desire, from a peculiar perspective: "If you ever get close to a human," she warned in her opening song on Tuesday night at the jam-packed Webster Hall, "you'd better be ready to get confused."


No Door and No Lobby
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 3 article on lobbyists incorrectly describes me as a "prominent traveler through the revolving door." As the public announcement at the formation of Hills &amp; Company stated, we do not lobby the United States Government -- either executive or legislative branches.


Classical Music in Review
Bolshoi Symphony Orchestra  Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts Brooklyn College
It is a truism of the Western concert world that jet planes and recordings have fostered an international style, and that local traits and performance traditions have been bulldozed in the process.
But the comparative isolation of Russian orchestras may have helped stave off that stylistic leveling.


Despite Cheekbone Surgery, Hasty Says He Is Ready to Play
James Hasty is either a crazy man or an iron man.
Two days after having surgery to repair a broken left cheekbone, the Jets cornerback said he wants to play against the Colts on Sunday.
"Don't count me out yet for any games," Hasty said.
"We're in a situation we haven't been in in a while and I don't want to miss being a part of that. I don't want to be the reason it doesn't happen."


MicroAge Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Deaths Involving Fireplaces And Wood Stoves Are Up
THE No. 1 cause of fatal residential fires is smoking materials' coming in contact with upholstery and bedding, said Richard Bukowski, senior research engineer at the National Institute of Standards and Technology in Gaithersburg, Md.
But, he added, "what's on the rise are fires involving heating appliances, particularly fireplaces and wood-burning stoves." Most of the problems, he said, involve improper maintenance and installation.


The Roar of Tanks Fades Out Where G.I.'s Guarded Europe
Where the largest tank brigade in the United States Army was once stationed, there is now only a vast, empty parking lot, barracks and a vacant 8,000-acre training area that the Second Brigade of the Third Infantry Division will soon turn back to the Germans.
All over Germany, the signs of Americans going home are unmistakable.


Perini Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article on Sunday about doctors' incomes misstated the affiliation of Dr.
Albert D. Roberts.
He is with the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas, not Houston.


Teva Pharmaceutical Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Thorne Rejoins Mets
GARY THORNE, who called Mets radio games from 1985 to 1988 rejoined the team yesterday and will call at least 65 games on WWOR-TV/Channel 9 and 25 to 30 on WFAN-AM radio.


Drug Found to Stall Failure of Kidneys In Some Diabetics
In a finding that elated researchers, a large study has shown that a drug used to treat high blood pressure can sharply slow progression to kidney failure in diabetics.
The drug, captopril, made by Bristol-Myers Squibb under the brand name Capoten, is one of a class of drugs that inhibit the production of an enzyme that makes blood vessels constrict.
Studies in animals had indicated that the drug could prevent kidney failure caused by diabetes, but until now there had been no definitive evidence that it had a beneficial effect in people.


Pride Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


PARENT &amp; CHILD
AFTER his mother turned down his request to buy a particular item, a 9-year-old boy approached his father and asked if they might speak privately in the kitchen for a moment.
The father, who realized what was going on, listened patiently to his son's request, and then asked him what his mother had said.
"What's the matter?" the boy asked.
"Can't you think for yourself?"
Children quickly learn the advantages of occasionally playing their parents against each other.
A child knows who is more likely to bend the rules about bedtime, come up with extra money for a treat or pay for an expensive but important fashion statement.
By the time they're a few years old, children realize that just because Mom has said no doesn't mean Dad won't say yes.


Goal: Integration by Consensus; Weak Gesture or Trojan Horse? Connecticut Is Divided
Connecticut is about to call on its 169 towns and cities to do what no state has ever asked: to cooperate in creating, from the local level up, a statewide plan for integrating public schools.
To some parents and politicians, the planning exercise, mandated by a law enacted in the spring, is a Trojan horse being hammered together to force racial quotas and busing on their communities.
To others, it is a weak gesture at bridging the racial and economic gaps that divide the state's poor cities from their wealthy suburbs.


Borg Calls It Quits
BJORN BORG says he has finally decided to quit top-level tennis after losing a tense match with ALEKSANDR VOLKOV of Russia in the latest stage of a disappointing comeback attempt.
Borg, the Swedish star who returned to the game in 1991 after eight years away but never came close to recapturing his old brilliance, said he was finally calling it a day after making an early exit from the Kremlin Cup tournament in Moscow.
Borg, 37, squandered a match point and lost by 4-6, 6-3, 7-6 to Volkov in the $325,000 tournament. (Reuters)


Review/Music: 'Cinderella'; City Opera Tries On The Famed Footwear
If there is one character in fairy- tale lore who is a prime Rodgers-and-Hammerstein-style heroine, it is Cinderella, a cockeyed optimist who climbs every mountain until she finds her dream.
That is probably why Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein 2d had to think for only five minutes before agreeing to create a musical version of the tale for CBS television in 1957.
The show was an immense success.
Rodgers noted that it reached nine times more people than had seen "Oklahoma!" during 5 years on Broadway and 10 years of touring.
The musical has became familiar to another generation through the videotapes of a 1965 television remake; it has been staged as well.


Continental Mortgage reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dudley Out 6 Weeks After Breaking Ankle
CHRIS DUDLEY, whose signing by the Portland Trail Blazers prompted a National Basketball Association challenge in court, will be out at least six weeks after breaking his ankle in only his third game with the club.
Dr.
ROBERT COOK said yesterday the injury could force the 6-foot-11-inch center to be out for as long as three months.
Dudley sustained a season-ending stress fracture in his right foot with New Jersey last season.


Emotion Rules TV Debate on Puerto Rican Vote
With Puerto Ricans set to vote on Sunday on whether they want statehood, independence or a continuation of commonwealth status, leaders of the island's three main political parties resorted to emotional appeals in a crucial televised debate on Tuesday night, their last chance to address uncommitted voters en masse.
Unless Puerto Rico becomes the 51st state, said Gov.
Pedro J. Rossello, head of the pro-statehood New Progressive Party, Congress could deprive the island's 3.7 million residents of their American citizenship.


Instrument Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tel Aviv Journal; A Spirited Play, to Rattle Israel's Religious Sabers
Aryeh Fleischer, who survived the Holocaust and fought for the young State of Israel, owns a butcher shop, and not a successful one.
Old customers have left the neighborhood, and the newcomers, all black-hatted Orthodox Jews, are not about to buy anything from a purveyor of nonkosher meat.


Atlantic Tele-Network Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Prudential Fraud Scandal Reaches to Parent Company
The fraud scandal at Prudential Securities has reached the doorstep of its parent company, the Prudential Insurance Company of America.
Agents for the insurance giant improperly sold investments for several years without the required licenses through a joint marketing agreement with the brokerage firm, documents and interviews show.
Through that program, insurance agents were paid half of the commissions for those sales, often in violation of securities laws and exchange regulations, Government officials said yesterday.


A Victory on Workplace Harassment
A victim of sexual harassment need not suffer a nervous breakdown to sue an employer for discrimination.
A worker has suffered enough, the Supreme Court asserts, if the employer has so polluted the workplace with sexual improprieties that a reasonable person would find it hostile and abusive, a disagreeable, unpromising place to work.
Seems elementary, doesn't it?
Yet since 1986, when the high court held that sexual harassment on the job amounted to job discrimination, several Federal courts have contrived to make it more complicated.
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor's plain- spoken opinion for a unanimous Court brings a refreshing end to the legalese and resistance to change the lower courts have indulged in.


Cairn Energy USA Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


I.B.M. Ships New Version Of OS/2 Operating Software
I.B.M. said today that it was shipping a version of its OS/2 operating system software aimed at customers who already own a copy of the Windows program made by the Microsoft Corporation.
Unlike previous editions of OS/2, the new product, OS/2 for Windows, does not include Windows itself, and I.B.M. said it would not pay Microsoft a royalty.


Corrections
A table on Nov. 4 headed "A Portrait of New Jersey Voters," based on a survey of voters leaving polling places around that state, mislabeled a column of figures showing the comparative size of each demographic group in a past election.
The election used for comparison was that of 1990, not 1989.


Many in G.O.P. Are Angry At New Race-Related Woe
After years in which Republicans have been portrayed by their opponents as a white people's party that practices electoral dirty tricks, party loyalists seethed with fury and frustration today over a public account by a G.O.P. renegade of campaign tactics in New Jersey.
The strategist, Edward J. Rollins, issued a statement today saying that he had exaggerated the truth when he told reporters that Christine Todd Whitman's gubernatorial campaign had paid black ministers in an attempt to suppress the black vote.


Ministers Deny Taking Money From Republicans
Black ministers across New Jersey expressed shock and anger today over the assertions, later retracted, that they had accepted up to $500,000 from Christine Todd Whitman's successful campaign for governor to remain politically neutral before last week's election.
"Five hundred thousand dollars!" said the Rev.
Raiford Wheeler of the Park Avenue Christian Church in East Orange.
"That's crumbs from Caesar's table. For us to sell out for half a million dollars is really a joke."


Thermo Cardiosystems
Shares of Thermo Cardiosystems Inc., a manufacturer of implantable devices that help ailing hearts to pump, rose yesterday after the company said Federal regulators would review its products, a significant step toward getting them approved for commercial use.
The value of the stock has doubled since June.


Perot Stake Under Pact Is Not Clear
A business owned by Ross Perot that became a central point of contention in his debate with Vice President Gore on Tuesday night told the Commerce Department earlier this year that it intended to take advantage of the surge in trading that would follow passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Questions about the venture, Alliance Corridor Inc., a 9,700-acre distribution center near Fort Worth that uses Federal tariff breaks to attract business, led to a series of testy exchanges, as Mr.
Gore suggested that Mr.
Perot stood to gain personally from his campaign against the pact.


Great Pass, Key Goal and the Unbeaten Streak Goes On
The play was one of trust as much as technique or design.
Adam Graves, his back to the goal, turned and slid a blind pass back through the slot.
Tony Amonte, not a regular on the club's top line, was where he should have been; where Graves gambled he would be.
Graves was right.
Amonte was alone.
Trust was rewarded.
The Rangers' run of perfection was intact.


BUDGET BALANCER IS FACING A DELAY
Reluctant to thwart their colleagues' desire to adjourn by Thanksgiving, supporters of a constitutional amendment to require a balanced budget have agreed to put off action on it until February.
Senators Paul Simon, Democrat of Illinois, and Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah, agreed on Tuesday to release Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the majority leader, from his promise to bring the measure up in this session.
In exchange, they won a commitment from him to bring it up on a specific date in February.
That date had not been settled this afternoon.


Home Oil Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nine U.S. Tourists Killed in British Bus Crash
A bus filled with American and Canadian tourists skidded off a major highway during a rainstorm and plunged down an embankment 10 miles west of here this morning, killing nine Americans, including three from Connecticut, and the British driver.
Dozens more were injured.
Six people, including the driver, were killed instantly.
Others died after being pinned under the side of the bus.
Thirty-four people who were injured -- two of them seriously -- were hospitalized.


New Home Option: Surviving Flames
Watching the television images of brush fires engulfing the canyons of Southern California, most viewers probably had mixed emotions: awe at the scale of destruction, and relief that they were safe from risk.
But natural fires can occur almost anywhere, especially in forested areas and during droughts.
In 1992, there were 439,000 reported brush and grass fires, according to the National Fire Protection Association.


Events: Shows, Benefits, Lectures
Antiques and Movies  Piers 88, 90 and 92, 12th Avenue between 48th and 55th streets; (212) 691-7297.
An antiques and collectibles show, featuring furniture, textiles, toys, folk art and books, will be held Saturday and Sunday.
The show will continue on Nov. 20 and 21, with a focus on the movie industry.
There will be costume displays, clips from early films, and sales of posters, autographed items and film memorabilia.
Open Saturday and Nov. 20, 9 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Sunday and Nov. 21, 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Admission, good for both days on either weekend, $10.


Daly Candidate For the Hall
By early February, the Nets could have a Hall of Famer for a coach.
Chuck Daly was one of 11 candidates announced by the Honors Committee yesterday as eligible for induction into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame next May 9 in Springfield, Mass.
The inductees, who need 18 of 24 votes, will be announced on Feb. 8.


Queens Experiment to Fight School Violence
A pilot program to reduce violence in public schools will begin early next year at five sites in Queens, New York City school and law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
The school-safety plan, they said, is generally consistent with ones made by Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani.
Part of the program, involving Far Rockaway High School and four nearby elementary and intermediate schools, includes creating a "safety zone" around each school with more police visible, and seeking more serious penalties for crimes committed in the zones.


Roger B. Dooley; Writer and Teacher, 73
Roger B. Dooley, a writer, teacher and film scholar, died on Oct. 29 at St.
Clare's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 73.
The cause was a heart attack, said his son, Roger Jr.


Landeta and Dolphins Get Together
Sean Landeta is in Florida -- and he is not going to Disneyworld.
Landeta, who was cut by the Giants on Tuesday, arrived in Miami tonight and was scheduled to work out with the Dolphins Thursday morning.
There is a good chance the Dolphins, who are starving for a good punter, could sign him within several days.


View on Sports Betting
The N.B.A. commissioner, DAVID STERN, says the entry of the new expansion franchise in Toronto is conditional on not having betting on N.B.A. games in the province of Ontario.
Stern stressed the league does not want a confrontation over the issue and added he is confident the Toronto ownership group can resolve the problem of sports betting.


More Phones for Subway Stops, But Most Will Not Accept Coins
New York Telephone will increase the number of phones in the subway system by 150 percent over the next few months, adding an average of 7 new phones per station to give subway riders better access to '911' emergency services, the company said yesterday.
But most of the phones will not accept coins; instead, they will be "Charge-a-Call" models, the small blue boxes familiar in airports.
For calls that are not free, these require the caller to have a credit card or to reverse the charges.


Review/Dance; Works by Maxine Sherman
Maxine Sherman, a former lead dancer in the companies of Alvin Ailey and Martha Graham, is a performer who seems to hold nothing back, sometimes to almost frightening effect.
And three of the four new and recent dances she presented on Saturday night at the Merce Cunningham Studio were blessed with that same open spirit.
This was Ms.
Sherman's first full evening of her own choreography.
She opened it with a charming, boisterous portrait of herself called "Me 'n' My Spider," set to a music collage arranged by Markley Boyer.
Created with Ruth Ayres, who played a variety of second-banana roles, the new duet took Ms.
Sherman from a giddily imaginative childhood through reckless adolescence and into the august world of dance.
Ms.
Sherman's moments-long take on Ailey and Graham Dance was smart, funny and loving.
Then it was back to the child, now happy company in adulthood.


McEnroe, Agassi Out
JOHN McENROE, who has not been invited, and ANDRE AGASSI, who is under suspension, won't be playing for the United States Davis Cup team in its first-round match in India next March, but captain TOM GULLIKSON didn't rule out anybody else on a list that includes PATRICK McENROE and IVAN LENDL, now an American citizen.
India will announce the site, probably Madras or Bombay, and surface, probably grass, on Dec. 3, and Gullikson will wait until then to reveal his team.


Troubled Times at Euro Disney


Power and Glory: Thomas Is M.V.P.
Although Buck Showalter, the Yankees' manager, didn't have a vote, he cast his ballot for the American League's most valuable player last August when he ordered Frank Thomas walked intentionally in the first inning.
Showalter, like other managers, didn't want to let Thomas beat him, whether it was the ninth inning or the first inning.
Managers were not the only ones who recognized Thomas's value to the Chicago White Sox in 1993.
The people who do vote, a 28-member panel of the Baseball Writers Association, officially named Thomas most valuable player yesterday in a unanimous decision.


Brascade Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A picture caption on Tuesday about an exhibition at Socrates Sculpture Park in Queens misstated the location of the park in some editions.
It is Long Island City, not Astoria.


Bonds Retreat on Price Index Rise
The bond market retreated yesterday and long-term interest rates rose after the Government reported news on inflation that disappointed traders and investors.
The rise in October consumer prices of four-tenths of a percent matched most analysts' forecasts.
It was caused mostly by a big jump in gasoline prices, which surged as Federal taxes rose 4.3 cents a gallon.


House Approves a Five-Day Wait Before Buyers Can Get Handguns
The House today approved legislation that would require a buyer of a handgun to wait five business days before taking possession of it, but only after adding an amendment that would end the requirement after five years.
The legislation, known as the Brady bill, was introduced six years ago.
It has since passed in the House twice and been killed twice in the Senate, but the attention to crime in elections this fall has improved the chances that the measure will survive the Senate's filibuster gantlet this year.


House G.O.P. Proposes 'Tough Love' Welfare Requiring Recipients to Work
House Republicans struck first today in what promises to be a divisive debate over welfare, unveiling a plan they called "tough love" to make welfare recipients spend 35 hours a week working off their benefits.
With the White House drafting its own welfare proposals, the Republicans staked out a position that portrayed the nation's five million welfare families as an indolent lot in need of a moral tonic.


U.S. and Others Press Fight for U.N. Rights Chief
The United States and a group of more than 20 Western and developing countries have decided to press ahead with a plan to create a new post of High Commissioner for Human Rights after a key United Nations committee said it was deadlocked on the proposal.
The decision appeared to put these countries on a collision course with China and a group of mainly Asian nations, led by Indonesia and Malaysia, who are critical of the plan.


United Plan to Cut Costs Without Union Aid
With time apparently running out on an effort by United Airlines' unions to take over the carrier, United executives yesterday detailed their plan to lower costs without help from labor.
In a meeting in Denver with Wall Street analysts, the company cited plans for more than 100 actions to reduce its costs, including selling its pilot training center, opening more foreign bases for flight attendants, and selling its engine repair shops.


The Nafta Debate That Wasn't
It wasn't exactly what the Founding Fathers had in mind when they spoke of reasoned political discourse, nor was it what Al Gore and Ross Perot presumably have in mind when they tout the mediating powers of the electronic town hall.
Instead, Tuesday's Big Debate over Nafta was a frightful mishmash of rhetorical false starts and logical inconsistencies.
It would be nice to say that the evening was redeemed by civility, but it wasn't.
From time to time, Vice President Gore and Mr.
Perot returned to the question at hand: Is the North American Free Trade Agreement a good deal?
Mr.
Gore said it would benefit everyone by eliminating tariffs and boosting exports.
Mr.
Perot, tapping into widespread anxieties in the labor force, argued that jobs would flee to Mexico as companies relocated in search of cheaper labor.


Executive Changes
JOY TECHNOLOGIES INC., Pittsburgh, a maker and supplier of air pollution and ash-handling equipment, named John Nils Hanson president and chief operating officer.


Hampshire Group Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Investigate in New Jersey
The very thought of Republican operatives spreading money around New Jersey's black communities to suppress the turnout on Election Day is so ugly it beggars belief.
Indeed, Christine Todd Whitman's campaign manager, Ed Rollins, now says he was not telling the truth when he confessed to that practice on Tuesday.
But it is too late for us to take Mr.
Rollins's word on anything.
Given the narrowness of Mrs.
Whitman's victory margin, state investigators and the Civil Rights Division of the Justice Department should search without delay for violations of election laws.
Mrs.
Whitman, understandably upset that her own campaign manager should taint her victory, says she will cooperate.
She should go further and insist on such an inquiry.


Balkan War Imperils 4.2 Million Lives, U.S. Says
The State Department estimated today that the lives of more than 4.2 million people in the former Yugoslavia are "at risk" this winter because of fighting, disease, malnutrition or lack of shelter.
Michael McCurry, the State Department spokesman, said 2.7 million of those considered to be at risk live in Bosnia and Herzegovina.


A 'Bazaar' Way of Rounding Up Votes
Vice President Al Gore and Ross Perot may reap credit for the success or failure of the North American Free Trade Agreement, but the truth is that its fate lies more in the hands of Florida tomato growers.
And Illinois broomcorn farmers.
And the people who bring you cream cheese, perhaps from Philadelphia.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Signed Mike Brumley, infielder, to a one-year contract.


GULF TROOPS' ILLS BEWILDER DOCTORS
The Pentagon said today that there was no connection between low levels of chemicals reportedly detected by allied forces in the Persian Gulf war and mysterious illnesses now afflicting many veterans.
Since the war ended in February 1991, several thousand American troops who served in the region have complained of memory loss, heart problems, fatigue and unusual rashes -- symptoms that have baffled doctors.


Devils, Somehow, Pull Off A Victory
The Devils had two of their defensemen ejected from the game tonight.
They fell behind by two goals.
They appeared doomed in their first game at home after four on the road.
But the Devils were playing the Islanders, and the Islanders of these days are not the Islanders of last spring.
So New Jersey came back and skated away with a 5-3 victory at Byrne Meadowlands Arena before a crowd of 13,107, about 6,000 short of a full house.


Vote by Teachers in Boston Averts a Strike
Averting a strike that had been called for Friday, the Boston Teachers union voted today to approve its first contract in three years.
The new contract will bring school-based management, which is currently in place at 36 schools, to all 117 schools in the system.
Decisions on hiring, the budget and the design of instructional programs will be made at each school by a council made up of the principal, staff members and parents.


A Court in Nigeria Declares Interim Government Is Illegal
A federal judge ruled today that the interim Government appointed by Nigeria's dictator, Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida, was illegal.
However, the crisis provoked by the general's voiding of the presidential election results in June has been accompanied by many court rulings for and against the Government, with none seeming to carry weight.


Husband Acquitted of Assault in Mutilation Case
John Wayne Bobbitt, the self-described ordinary ex-marine who found himself under a national spotlight after his wife sliced off his penis, was acquitted today on a charge of marital sexual assault.
His wife, Lorena Bobbitt, pressed the charge, maintaining that she had attacked her husband because he had sexually assaulted her.


Corrections
A picture caption on Nov. 1 about a debate between candidates for Nassau County Executive, and a correction in this space on Nov. 3, reversed the identities of some participants.
From the left were Helene B. Agatstein, Thomas S. Gulotta (the incumbent), Benjamin Zwirn, an unidentified man, at the rear, and Charles E. Holster 3d.
The caption and the correction also misstated the site of the debate.
It was Woodbury, L.I.


Questioning Focuses on One Defendant
Who exactly is Ahmad M. Ajaj and what was he doing with four passports in four different names, two photo identification cards and six large books full of information about weaponry and bomb-making?
Prosecutors have been focusing on those questions for the last four days of the World Trade Center bombing trial, trying to prove to the jury that Mr.
Ajaj, one of the four defendants in the case, played an important role in the bombing conspiracy.
Specifically, the indictment says, Mr.
Ajaj arrived in the United States from Pakistan last Sept. 1 carrying manuals for use in making the bomb that went off in the trade center on Feb. 26.


Vons Companies reports earnings for 16wks to Oct 10


China Austerity Drive Is Hurting U.S. Ventures
Last summer, when thousands of regional Communist Party bankers were printing money to finance their capitalist dreams, China's leaders in Beijing clamped down with an austerity drive to rein in a runaway economy.
Bank lending stopped suddenly under orders from central authorities to recoup tens of billions of dollars in state loans made in a frenzy of unauthorized investment.


A Slain Taxi Driver Is the 38th in New York York City This Year


Giuliani Offers an Olive Branch To Cool Views on Staten Island
Trying to cool the secessionist fever of a borough that was crucial to his mayoral victory, Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday promised an administration more sensitive to the needs of Staten Island and invited the Borough President to suggest ideas for restructuring New York City's government.
And Borough President Guy V. Molinari, while insisting he still favored secession for Staten Island, said it was possible that a more responsive administration in City Hall could persuade borough residents to give up the idea of splitting from the city.


Review/Pop; Jackson Browne Returns To the Private Domain
Unlike most rock stars' careers, which move in fairly straight lines, Jackson Browne's has taken an unusually circuitous path.
Mr.
Browne developed his reputation in the early 1970's as a folk-rock songwriter with a singular gift for describing the emotional landscapes of intimate relationships.
In language that was direct but slightly elevated, he distilled a vision that linked his faith in an idealized romantic love with the utopian post-hippie ethos of the period.
That vision had its dark side.
Songs like "Before the Deluge" and "The Pretender," which he performed on Tuesday, foresaw the dissolution of those dreams and envisaged a day of reckoning.


Economic Scene; Russia is quietly dismantling socialism at a remarkable pace.
BY some accounts, Russia's dash for capitalism has stalled.
The central bank, controlled by old-line bureaucrats, is still pumping out inflationary rubles to keep hopelessly inefficient enterprises in business.
And to judge by the soothing pre-election words from Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, fiscal cold turkey may not be on Boris N. Yeltsin's post-election menu.
But appearances can deceive.
For while Western-oriented economists and neo-Communist apparachiks are still locked in mortal combat over monetary and budget policies, the Committee for the Management of State Property (known by its Russian abbreviation, G.K.I.) is dismantling socialism at a remarkable pace.
"We've already privatized one-third of Russian industry," said Maxim Boycko, the senior economist at G.K.I., and at the current rate the job will be complete within a year or two.


U.S. to Release Data on Secret Nuclear Tests
As part of an overhaul of cold-war-era rules, the Energy Department has decided to declassify reams of previously secret information about the nation's nuclear weapons, including data about undisclosed nuclear tests, Administration officials said Monday.
Although scholars have known for some time that the United States did not acknowledge all the nuclear tests it conducted, the new information is expected to include useful data about the extent and purpose of past testing.


Mexican Stocks Soar After TV Debate in U.S.
After what was widely seen here as a tough and effective defense of the North American Free Trade Agreement by Vice President Al Gore in Tuesday night's debate with Ross Perot, the Mexican stock market today turned in its strongest performance of the year.
The market's index rose 81.49 points -- 4.17 percent -- to reach a new high of 2,035.


Paying Tribute to the Fallen


New President Hired By Saatchi Agency
Jeff Atlas, formerly the chairman at what is now Citron Haligman Bedacarre in San Francisco, yesterday landed a top position at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in San Francisco, after eight months working on his own.


Veterans Day
NEW YORK  PARADE The Veterans Day Parade begins at 9 A.M. at Fifth Avenue and 39th Street, going south to 24th Street.
Fifth Avenue will be closed from 9 A.M. until completion of the parade.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.


Turner Broadcasting System reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


PennCorp Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Censorship Won't Make U.S. Any Less Violent
To the Editor:
When it comes to saving children's souls by not allowing them to see action and adventure movies, the United States should not necessarily take cues from Europe.
In discussing television and movie violence and how it affects kids, Myriam Miedzian, author of a book on boys and violence, writes in "Americans Would Hail Laws on Movie Violence" (letter, Oct. 29) that many European countries have laws to "protect children from inappropriate entertainment."


G. F. Verbeck Jr., 80, Retired Bank Executive
Guido F. Verbeck Jr., a retired executive of the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company in New York, died on Monday at his home in West Tisbury, Mass.
He was 80.
The cause was throat cancer, said his stepdaughter, Merrill Stenbeck.


Calendar: Treasured Objects
Eye of the Beholder  Guggenheim Museum SoHo, 575 Broadway (Prince Street); (212) 423-3500.
"Industrial Elegance," an exhibition of 63 objects chosen by architects, designers, artists and others for their design qualities, continues through Jan. 23.
A statement by each participant accompanies the object he or she submitted.


Gaston de Havenon; Art Dealer, 89
Gaston de Havenon, a dealer and collector who specialized in African art, died on Sunday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 89 and had homes in Manhattan and East Hampton, L.I.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Mexicans Seethe With Anger At Perot's Depiction of Them
After weeks in which Mexicans seemed to hold their anger at criticism of their country by opponents of the North American Free Trade Agreement in the United States, they fairly exploded today at Ross Perot's depiction of Mexico the night before.
"Last night, Mexico was the object of a long series of calumnies and lies," the Government-owned newspaper El Nacional said in an editorial on Mr.
Perot's comments on the trade agreement in his debate with Vice President Al Gore.
And the accusation was echoed by many others.


WOOLWORTH CORP. (N)
The Woolworth Corporation lost $452 million in the third quarter, mainly because of its previously announced restructuring charge of $480 million.
Excluding the charge, Woolworth would have earned $28 million, or 23 cents a share.
Last year, Woolworth earned $65 million, or 50 cents a share, in the third quarter.
Sales in the quarter ended Oct. 30 fell 4.6 percent, to $2.39 billion
In the United States, Woolworth planned to close 730 stores, including 400 of its Woolworth five-and-dime stores and 300 of its Kinney and Footquarters shoe units.
In Canada, it will transform 100 variety stores into Bargain Shop! units and convert 50 specialty stores.
Woolworth plans to change about 250 units in both countries into more profitable formats.


Whitman Denies Report by Aide That Campaign Paid Off Blacks
Stern-faced and clearly angry, Gov.-elect Christine Todd Whitman said today that it was not true that her campaign had made payments to suppress the urban and mostly black vote in the New Jersey governor's race.
She demanded, and received, both an apology and a retraction from her campaign manager, Edward J. Rollins Jr., who had said on Tuesday that such payments had been made.


Pilgrimage to End With Honors
Before there was this trip to a place where their son had celebrated life, there had to be a sad pilgrimage to where Drazen Petrovic had met his tragic death.
Jolie and Biserka Petrovic, parents of the New Jersey Nets' guard who was killed June 7 when the car in which he was a passenger crashed on a slick German autobahn, insisted on going the moment they landed in Munich, Germany, almost three weeks ago.
They had flown from their their home in Zagreb, Croatia, having accepted an invitation to dedicate the McDonald's Open most valuable player trophy.
The award for the tournament, which pioneered international basketball competition among professionals, had recently been named for their son.


TV Debate Set A Cable Record
The debate over the North American Free Trade Agreement on CNN was seen in 11.2 million homes, the largest audience for any regularly scheduled program in the history of cable television, according to the A. C. Nielsen rating service.
The debate, which was held on CNN's "Larry King Live" received a rating of 11.9 in the nationwide survey, with each rating point representing 942,000 homes.
No estimate was available on the number of viewers.


Kukoc's 3-Pointer Gives Bulls Victory
Bulls 91, Bucks 90
Tony Kukoc hit a 3-pointer with1.9 seconds left last night as the visiting Chicago Bulls won for the third time in four games, beating the Milwaukee Bucks, 91-90.
Two free throws by Brad Lohaus with 5.2 seconds left put the Bucks ahead, 90-88.
But after a timeout, Kukoc got the ball at the top of the key and sank the 3-pointer to give the injury-depleted Bulls another victory.
Milwaukee tried for a final shot, but Lohaus was called for walking.


Records Set for 8 Artists as Auction Fever Returns
The collectors and dealers at Sotheby's sale of contemporary art last night went to shop.
And a determined group they were.
As at Christie's on Tuesday night, even insignificant artworks sold, and sold well.
But last night, prices often soared to more than double the estimates, setting records for eight artists.
"There has been an injection of money and confidence in the market," said Lucy Mitchell-Innes, Sotheby's director of contemporary art worldwide.
"What has shifted this fall is the volume of bidders and the fact that there was buying at every level."


Public &amp; Private; Over and Out
I've got an idea for a modification to the North American Free Trade Agreement: we'll send Ross Perot to Mexico and in return we'll give the Mexicans anything they want as the gift of a grateful nation.
After Tuesday's Nafta debate with Vice President Al Gore, Mr.
Perot's career as a pundit without portfolio -- and without specifics -- should be over for good.
During that 90 minutes, in a charmless version of his old cracker-barrel act, dogs didn't hunt, lines in the sand were drawn and the tooth fairy was mentioned twice.
"It'll only take a minute to kill this snake." "If you believe that, I got a lot of stuff in the attic I can sell you." You know.
Ross Perot's easier to imitate than Jimmy Durante.


Gold Adds Glitter to Remote Russian Region
On Kamchatka, a peninsula on Russia's Pacific coast, a tin of caviar costs three cents.
But that's just for the empty tin.
Since the strategic outpost, long closed by the Soviet military, was opened to visitors two years ago, Russian and foreign businessmen have been coming here to get rich quickly.
One way, local residents say, is to fill the tins with home-salted roe or "God only knows what" and sell them on the mainland, where Kamchatka caviar goes for as much as $7 a pound.
The other way is to invest in a gold mine.


State Dept. Seeking Funds of Other Agencies
Faced with the erosion of its foreign aid budget, the State Department has begun a campaign in the Administration to direct funds from other Federal agencies into foreign assistance programs.
A proposal being drawn up by top officials in the State Department will recommend to President Clinton that the Federal budget be revamped to channel funds from agencies like the Defense Department and the Drug Enforcement Agency into international programs.


Belden &amp; Blake Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Essay; Gore Flattens Perot
Are you going to keep interrupting, or can I finish this column?
In a classic rendition of "Mr. Nice Guy Goes for the Jugular," Vice President Al Gore poked, prodded and needled Ross Perot into revealing himself as a bossy old billionaire bully who blows his cool when confronted in a fair fight.


Farm Credit System reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mayor Enjoys a Transition With No Politics Involved


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the repair of a boardwalk on the New Jersey shore misidentified the locale.
It was Ocean Grove, not Bradley Beach.


FEDERATED DEPARTMENT STORES INC. (N)
Excluding one-time tax adjustments, Federated Department Stores milked more profits out of lackluster sales in the third quarter than analysts had expected.
Wall Street had expected the retail company, which operates nine regional department store chains including Bloomingdale's and Abraham &amp; Straus, to post a net income, excluding extraordinary charges, of about 21 cents a share.
Federated's net profit, excluding one-time charges, was $35.3 million, or 28 cents a share, up 11.7 percent from the comparable period a year ago.


A Judge Finds His Credibility Is Questioned
A year and a half ago Justice Flemming L. Norcott Jr. of the Connecticut Appellate Court enjoyed an embarrassment of judicial riches.
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker wanted to elevate him to the state's Supreme Court, and Senator Christopher Dodd was equally eager to place him on the Federal District Court in Connecticut, where he would be its first black ever.
Justice Norcott eventually joined the Supreme Court, the state's highest court, in June 1992, only to decide a few months later to take the Federal post.
But before he can make the move, he has been battered by questions of credibility and judgment.
His prospects for a seat on the Federal Court are fading fast, and with the state's largest newspaper, The Hartford Courant, calling for his resignation, he is fighting to keep the job he has.


Nuclear Storage Divides Apaches and Neighbors
The laser-guided saws at the Mescalero Apaches' lumber company turn out 16 million board-feet a year.
The tribe's cattle company raises 7,000 head.
Ski Apache draws 250,000 visitors annually, and the 440-room Inn of the Mountain Gods, with a convention center, golf course, Casino Apache and two artificial lakes, is humming.
What's next?
A company that will store nuclear waste, if tribal elders get their way.
The Governor of New Mexico, both houses of the Legislature, both Senators and all three Representatives are adamantly opposed, but because the tribe is a sovereign nation, such opposition may not stop them.
There is little open opposition to the idea on the reservation, which expects enormous profits.


SunAmerica Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Eagles Claim Perry
The Philadelphia Eagles claimed tackle WILLIAM (REFRIGERATOR) PERRY yesterday in an effort to bolster their leaky rushing defense.
The Chicago Bears waived the 335-pound lineman Tuesday after nine years with the team.
Eagles Coach RICH KOTITE said Perry would play Sunday against the Miami Dolphins. (AP)


Canstar Sports (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Battle Over Whitbread Women's Boat
The takeover on Tuesday of the U.S.
Women's Challenge, the 60-foot yacht entered by Nance Frank in the Whitbread Round the World Race, has produced a bitter struggle ashore over rights to the boat.
Deposed as skipper by New Zealand financiers, Frank arrived yesterday at her home in Key West, Fla.
She was served with legal papers on Monday in Punta del Este, Uruguay, the first stopover in the 32,000-mile Whitbread race.
The documents instructed her to leave the boat.


2 Roster Cuts Send A Message To Giants
The Giants' weight room is normally a loud and raucous place, but players said it was unusually quiet -- and tense -- this morning.
Many were in shock about how suddenly two veteran teammates, punter Sean Landeta and linebacker Steve DeOssie, were cut from the team.
It happened so suddenly some players didn't even know.
So even though Dan Reeves said no message was intended, the players clearly thought their coach had reinforced one sent right before the season, when Pepper Johnson got the ax: If you don't do the job, you're gone.
Period.


Swann Lost for Season
ERIC SWANN, the Phoenix Cardinals' most dominant defensive lineman, will miss the rest of the season after undergoing arthroscopic surgery yesterday to repair cartilage in his right knee.
The Cardinals said their estimate of a four-week recuperation period had to be lengthened after the team orthopedic physician, RUSSELL CHICK, discovered and repaired lateral meniscus cartilage torn Sunday during a 16-3 victory over Philadelphia. (AP)


Moynihan Recommends 3 to Be Federal Judges
A former state judge, a top Federal prosecutor and a lawyer in private practice were recommended by Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan yesterday to become Federal judges in the Southern District of New York.
The three candidates, whose names were submitted for nomination to President Clinton, are Harold Baer Jr., a former justice of State Supreme Court in Manhattan and now a top official of the private Judicial Arbitration and Mediation Services; Denise Cote, head of the criminal division for the United States Attorney in Manhattan, and Barrington Daniels Parker Jr., a lawyer in private practice and son of the late Barrington Daniels Parker, a Federal judge who served in Washington, D.C.
Arrangement With Javits
If nominated by the President, the three candidates face investigations by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and confirmation hearings before the Senate Judiciary Committee.


Review/Dance; Joffrey Offers a Rock Ballet to Songs by Prince
"Billboards" is four choreographers' ballets rolled into one, danced magnificently by the Joffrey Ballet to the recorded music of a composer identified in the Brooklyn Academy of Music's current program as Prince Rogers Nelson.
Yes, that's how he wishes to be billed, although an asterisk on the same program reveals the open secret that he uses the "stage name, Prince."


Diana Corp. reports earnings for 12wks to Oct 16


A Sure Sign of the Season to Come


No Headline
"How is it possible that he can say everyone lives in poverty here? Before he opens his mouth, he ought to come down here and take a look." -- LUIS ESTRADA, a Mexico City lawyer, on Ross Perot.  [ A1:5. ]


RHI Entertainment Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


AT WORK WITH: Paul Binder; A Big Top With a Vision to Match
FADO, the 5-year-old chestnut Lusitano stallion that had the impertinence to bite the founder and artistic director of the Big Apple Circus, was behaving himself this afternoon.
Fado was floating proudly in a slow practice canter under a near-empty circus tent, kicking up a tracery of sawdust in the ring.
"That's where he took a bite out of me," Paul Binder said, rolling up his sleeve to reveal a large arm marked with a large dark bruise.
The insult to both the epidermis and the dignity of the circus's top-hatted boss man, master of ceremonies and principal public symbol, was the product of a freak accident during a preview of Big Apple's new show at Lincoln Center, "Carnevale in Venice," a boisterous commedia dell'arte celebrating the revelry and mystery of Venice's pre-Lenten carnival.


Enforcement Problems May Help Cable Systems Sidestep Rate Rules
Thousands of cable television systems across the country may escape new Federal price regulations because many cities and towns are afraid that enforcing the rules will create more problems than it solves.
Alarmed by the possibility that cable operators in many cities might be free to raise prices as high as they want, the Federal Communications Commission decided today to extend a temporary revenue freeze on cable companies for three months to give cities more time to study the new regulations.


Interco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Consumer Prices, Reflecting New Gasoline Tax, Rise 0.4%
Reflecting a higher gasoline tax and other special factors, consumer prices climbed four-tenths of 1 percent in October, the biggest advance in six months, the Labor Department reported today.
The rise in the Consumer Price Index, which followed an unchanged reading for September, was widely regarded as a statistical anomaly and not a sign that the recent pickup in economic activity was heating up inflation.


One Generation's Icons
To the Editor:
"The Young Prove Mortal Again," your Nov. 3 editorial on the death of River Phoenix, is an inappropriate projection of baby boomer sensibilities, complete with embarrassingly forced comparisons to the big J's of youth culture (James Dean, Jim Morrison, Janis and Jimi).
While I am sad that I will not be able to grow up with River Phoenix, I resent it when journalists try to pick our generational symbols for us.
We are different people in a different time.
As for confronting our own mortality, we get a daily dose of numbing symbolism every time a beautiful young person is gunned down on one of our city streets.
BRIAN C. ZUMHAGEN  San Francisco, Nov. 3, 1993


Sam Davidman; Hotelier, 71
Sam Davidman, a retired Catskills hotelier, died on Sunday at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He was 71 and lived in Forest Hills, Queens.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


CHRONICLE
ALFRED EISENSTAEDT, the photographer, turns 95 on Dec. 6, but the flurry of celebrations and tributes is already under way.
Tonight, for example, the American Jewish Committee will present him with its 1993 Human Relations Award at a dinner in the New York Hilton Hotel.
More parties are on tap for Dec. 4, 6 and 7, two of them at the Circle Gallery in SoHo, where 95 of his photographs will be on display.
, Vanity Fair magazine had ANNIE LEIBOVITZ photograph the photographer in September for a tribute in its December issue.
"He was telling me what to do during the entire shoot," she said the other day, "but then he'd say, 'This is your picture, do whatever you want.' "


Dr. Richard H. Thurm; Heart Specialist, 67
Dr.
Richard H. Thurm, a retired medical internist and heart specialist who helped develop drugs to regulate blood pressure and control other problems of hypertension, died yesterday at his home in Princeton.
He was 67.
Dr.
Thurm collapsed on the street, according to a son, David, who said the cause was not known.


U.S. Robotics (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Future Now Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wainoco Oil reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


When Voters Tell Polls They're Undecided
To the Editor:
A Nov. 4 article on the apparent disparity between pre-election polls and New Jersey election results asks the wrong question.


Gielgud's Inspiration
To The Home Section:
Mel Gussow's interview with Sir John Gielgud at his home in England  [ "His Own Brideshead, His Fifth 'Lear,' " Oct. 28 ]  brought back memories of the first time I saw him perform live and how it inspired me to become a teacher of English in the New York City schools.


BellSouth Deal on QVC Is Said to Be Imminent
QVC Network Inc. and the BellSouth Corporation are expected to announce as early as today that BellSouth has agreed to invest $1.5 billion in QVC's hostile bid for Paramount Communications Inc., according to several executives with knowledge of the discussions.
Although the exact terms were not available last night, it appeared that as much as $1 billion of the BellSouth investment could be used to buy out QVC's largest stockholder, the Liberty Media Corporation.


Obscure images in Metropolitan Home's campaign may be art, but can they convert the clueless?
ALL right, let's try to figure out what's going on here.
In three full-page advertisements in The New York Times, Adweek and other trade publications, people's body parts are shown in familiar domestic settings:


Lands' End Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Nuevo Energy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Town Is Hopeful That a Girl Still Lives
Almost three months after 12-year-old Sara Anne Wood disappeared while riding her bicycle, residents of this small community say they still believe she will be found alive.
They also say their sense of security may never return.
Some parents no longer let their children walk unaccompanied to friends' houses.
The school system has tightened security.
And the police and community leaders said solitary bike rides for children are probably a relic of the past.


ACE Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dorel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Dance; On Soaring and, Inevitably, Falling
The Paul Taylor Dance Company closed its engagement at City Center on Sunday night with a program that began as a celebration, turned into a memorial and concluded as an affirmation.
Everyone looked splendid in Mr.
Taylor's "Images" and "Company B." Because of its gusto, "Company B" usually ends programs so that the audience will go home in high spirits.
But on Sunday it was followed by the season's only performance of Christopher Gillis's moody "Icarus at Night." The evening thereby became a tribute to Mr.
Gillis, who joined the company in 1976 and who died of AIDS in August at the age of 42.


Salvador Is Accused of Reneging on Police Pledge
The Government of El Salvador is resisting the dissolution of the country's paramilitary National Police and its replacement by a new civilian police force, a change agreed to in the peace accord that ended 12 years of civil war here, diplomats say.
They say that while continuing to promise to disband the National Police, President Alfredo Cristiani's Government has added officers to the force, which was implicated by United States officials in political killings and corruption during the war.


Vista Resources Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Television; To Let a Thousand Bull Markets Bloom
After watching Adam Smith's two-part series on the Chinese economy, the first impulse is to invest, to get in on the ground floor of China's booming, astonishing economy.
That is not an unreasonable impulse.
On Channel 13 tonight and on Nov. 18, Mr.
Smith offers a vivid glimpse of China's emerging middle class, now 200 million people and climbing rapidly.
Supplying them makes China a golden market, not only for American companies with products to sell but also for Americans with money to invest in the Shanghai and Hong Kong stock markets.


All American Semiconductor Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Naples Ready to Elect a Mayor, but Does It Matter?
It's voting season here, and everywhere the Neapolitans look they are being offered a choice for Mayor -- a neo-Fascist or an ex-Communist or a candidate from one of the many hybrid tickets reflecting Italy's confusion-of-the-hour.
Underlying the election on Nov. 21, though, the question is not so much who will govern the city but whether it can be governed at all?


Washington Memo; Still Waiting for the Real Health Care Shoe to Drop
The Clinton Administration's health care plan has been leaked, launched and relaunched, but it has yet to be formally introduced in Congress.
The reasons for this, like everything else in the health care debate, are complex.
But the delay in introducing a bill that was formally announced last month is a source of anxiety among some of the Administration's allies and a source of chiding for its critics.


Euro Disney '93: $901 Million Loss
The Euro Disney theme park today announced a disastrous loss for its first full fiscal year of 5.3 billion francs -- the equivalent of $901 million -- and raised for the first time the possibility of a financial crisis at the 18-month-old park.
The loss gave the parent Walt Disney Company a $77.8 million loss for its fourth quarter, reflecting a one-time charge of $350 million related to its 49 percent stake in Euro Disney.
In the 1992 fourth quarter, Disney earned $223.7 million.


Is It Art? Just Ask Any Child
NEW YORK CITY, very early Saturday morning.
The parents of young children have awakened to the alarming sound of a clock that's signaling a dash toward a little-league soccer game, or to the cheerful, high-pitched plaints of you-know-who.
A long day looms.
Didn't we used to look at art on Saturdays?
Yes, dear, we did, but the museums are too crowded for our merry band now, and gallery workers frown audibly at small bodies sliding across those shiny floors.
And besides, Morley Safer indicated recently on "60 Minutes" that we're suckers for believing that anything made in our 40-ish lifetimes might be art.
Sure, the question "Is it art?" is a loutish exercise in reductive reasoning, but quickly following are the slightly more respectable, "If it's art, is it a good painting or sculpture, i.e., better than that one over there?" and, "Why is it worth $275,000?"


Legal Memo; Acquittal in Sex Mutilation Case Alarms Women's Advocates
Struggling to be heard above the din of wisecracks, lawyers and counselors for battered women are worried about the effect that John Bobbitt's acquittal for marital sexual assault will have on other women trying to press similar charges.
Marital rape cases are more difficult to prosecute than other rape cases, they said yesterday, largely because the public still finds the concept of marital rape to be inherently contradictory.


United Airline's Union Plan Names Greenwald as Chief
The pilots and machinists unions of United Airlines submitted a proposal late yesterday to gain majority control of the carrier.
If they succeed, the labor groups have chosen Gerald Greenwald, the former vice chairman of the Chrysler Corporation, to run the airline.
The choice of Mr.
Greenwald as chief executive, disclosed by people with knowledge of the labor groups' plan, gives the unions' latest proposal a familiar ring.
They had selected Mr.
Greenwald to lead United as part of a previous buyout proposal made in 1990.


Barringer Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


One Runner Who Has Logged His Miles
Ted Corbitt will walk the New York City Marathon on Sunday, his fifth official walk over a course he helped lay out and measure.
His target time is 5 hours 30 minutes, which is faster than many people run the marathon, but then Corbitt, who is 74 and has run 198 marathons and ultra-marathons, has come to regard 26.2 miles as a middle-distance event.
Twenty years ago, for example, while preparing for a 24-hour race in England, he decided to run 100 miles around his neighborhood in upper Manhattan.
He told only his late wife, Ruth, and only because she would worry if he didn't come home to sleep.
He started out at 9 A.M., and except for "toilet stops" and "the last time I had ice cream" he didn't stop running until the following morning at 7 A.M.
He was never more than five miles from his apartment, and he was only worried that drunks might harass him when the bars closed.
It was a typically uneventful and painful 101.5-mile run in which he thought about "opponents," felt the addictive rise of endorphins and self-esteem and considered new techniques of measuring road race courses, which he considers his legacy.


Weatherford International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


PMC Capital Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Uno Restaurant Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


LVI Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dr. Nicholas A. Rango, 49, Dies; Built New York's AIDS Program
Dr.
Nicholas A. Rango, who built New York State's AIDS Institute into the nation's largest state AIDS program while struggling with the illness himself, died on Wednesday at home.
He was 49 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was AIDS, the State Health Department said.


Stock Action Subdued; Dow Closes Down 1.12
With banks, government offices and the Treasury bond market closed, the Veterans Day holiday muffled stock trading yesterday, giving rise to a quiet session during which many issues seemed stuck within narrow ranges.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose more than 15 points soon after the opening bell but then slid back, closing down 1.12 points, to 3,662.43.
Other indicators were also static.
Declining stocks led advancing stocks on the New York Stock Exchange by about 11 to 9.


Reviews/ Film; Once More Into the Fray For Athos, Porthos et al.
It's a little-known fact that the Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtles once romped through 17th-century France, and that when they took off those green masks they looked like long-haired, teen-throb movie stars.
That seems to be the point of "The Three Musketeers," a big, swashbuckling Disney version that manages to incorporate explosions, martial arts and wise-guy dialogue into what's left -- not too terribly much -- of the classic Dumas story.
This "Three Musketeers" was directed by Stephen Herek, whose credits include "Bill and Ted's Excellent Adventure" and "The Mighty Ducks." It was written by David Loughery ("The Good Son"), whose idea of a witty line is "I hope your sword is as good as your mouth!" Together, their efforts do little more than summon fond memories of other, more amusing Musketeer films (like Richard Lester's from the mid-1970's), but this latest retread doesn't really care about such comparisons.
It has been tailor-made for young viewers who think of Aramis as the name of an aftershave lotion for Dad.


Workers Ponder Future After Sale of Macmillan
A day after Paramount Communications Inc. announced that it planned to spend $553 million to buy Macmillan Inc., the distinguished publishing house that is the last vestige of Robert Maxwell's collapsed media empire, worried employees at Macmillan said they had not yet been told what would happen to the company's future books or its 600 workers.
Employees at Macmillan received vague "Dear Colleague" letters from Paramount yesterday, welcoming them to the company, which has publishing operations of its own, but said they had not met with Paramount officials.


Alexander Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Zurich Reinsurance Centre Holdings Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Art in Review
Cy Twombly 'Photographs'
Matthew Marks Gallery  1018 Madison Avenue (near 78th Street)  Through Dec. 4
Photographs by Cy Twombly?
Well, yes; it seems that Mr.
Twombly, renowned for his distinctive and beautiful scribble-covered paintings, has taken photographs on occasion over the last decade and is exhibiting them here for the first time.


Books of The Times; Into the Unknown to Find Herself
The Holder of the World
By Bharati Mukherjee
286 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $22.
In such earlier books as "Jasmine" and "The Middleman," Bharati Mukherjee drew a jazzy, impressionistic portrait of contemporary America as a land of immigrants, a land of new money, easy sex and endless possibilities for transformation.
America, in her telling, is a place where people can reinvent themselves, shed old lives and don new ones, shuck off the past and embrace the future.


Tribute for Janos Scholz
A musical tribute to Janos Scholz, the cellist and scholar, is to be presented by the Violoncello Society at the Kosciuszko Foundation, 15 East 65th Street, at noon on Sunday.
Among the scheduled performers are Bernard Greenhouse, Zara Nelsova, Barbara Stein Mallow and Jerry Grossman.
Mr.
Scholz, who was also a benefactor of the Pierpont Morgan Library, died on June 3 at 89.


There's Always Room for One More


Amerifax Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Oct. 29, about a Securities and Exchange Commission investigation of current and former executives with Prudential Securities, referred incorrectly to the status of Robert J. Sherman, a former head of retail sales.
Mr.
Sherman says the S.E.C. has not informed him of any recommendation by the enforcement staff for charges against him.


Polluters Don't Rate As Superior Criminals
To the Editor:
"Let's Hear the Rocky Flats Jurors" (editorial, Nov. 1) criticizes the philosophy of Barry Hartman, former head of the Justice Department's Natural Resources Division, that "With environmental crimes, you have decent people doing bad things," in contrast to organized crime and the drug trade.


Du Pont-Merck Head Quits
The Du Pont Merck Pharmaceutical Company, a partnership of Merck &amp; Company and E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company, said yesterday that its president and chief executive, Joseph A. Mollica, would retire on Dec. 1.
He will be replaced by Kurt M. Landgraf, Du Pont Merck's executive vice president and a Du Pont manager for 13 years.


Hope for a Crime Bill
Fresh bulletins from voters that crime and personal safety preoccupy many Americans have found a receptive Senate.
The result this week has been a frenzy of round-the-clock legislating, with senators outdoing each other to make a Federal case out of every public safety problem in sight.
For all the demagoguery, the Senate is producing a crime package that could prove acceptable.
The bill offers a $22 billion program for police and prisons.
It may even slow the proliferation of assault weapons.
Along with separate action on the House-passed Brady handgun bill, and an agreement to consider the contentious habeas corpus issue separately, the Senate has advanced a bill with some virtues and endurable flaws.


W.T.A. Hires Attorney
The Women's Tennis Association has hired a German attorney to try to overturn the suspended sentence of the man who stabbed MONICA SELES.
"Our players were outraged by the decision made in the German court, not only because of Monica but also because of their concern for worldwide security measures," GERARD SMITH, W.T.A. executive director and chief executive officer, said yesterday in St.
Petersburg, Fla.
"Clearly the court's decision sends a terrible message with wide-ranging impact."


CHRONICLE
"This is so much better than the wrap party for 'South of Sunset,' " HOWARD STRINGER, president of the CBS Broadcast Group, said from a stage in the Metropolitan Museum of Art on Wednesday evening during a celebration of the 25th anniversary of "60 Minutes."
No one disputed him.
"South of Sunset," a detective show, was canceled last month by CBS after one program.
"60 Minutes" has lasted as a top-rated show for quarter of a century, or as LAURENCE A. TISCH, chairman of CBS put it, "58,500 minutes."


CS Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Amerihost Properties (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Limits of Ad Hockery
The sports cliche has it that since owners cannot fire a team, they fire the manager.
Politics is a little different.
Entire teams are seldom fired, but players do get dismissed precisely so that the failings of their managers seem less glaring.
So it came to pass that the Clinton Administration dumped its Deputy Secretary of State, Clifton R. Wharton.
The forced resignation was designed to make it appear that Secretary of State Warren Christopher is setting his department in order.
This, in turn, is meant to foster the impression that the Administration has a coherent foreign policy and that the President therefore does not need to sack more important people like Mr.
Christopher, Secretary of Defense Les Aspin or Anthony Lake, the national security adviser.


Can Money Buy Safety?
There is more than a little political grandstanding in the anti-crime bill now sailing through the Senate, like the talk of expanding the death penalty by 47 Federal crimes and the speeches about banning assault weapons when there are already enough M-16's on the streets to supply a third-world army.
But the heart of the package is money, $22.3 billion for programs that might touch people's lives.
There is $8.9 billion to help cities hire additional police officers, $3 billion for 10 high-security prisons, another $3 billion for boot camps for nonviolent prisoners and other unorthodox correctional programs.
Keeping Youths Occupied
In addition, there are billions more for other programs, like counseling and recreational activities -- an enticement for young people to do something at night beside rob candy stores -- and for drug rehabilitation for prison inmates to relieve the addictions that revolve the doors on their cells.


Cautious Optimism as Fall Art Auctions End
As the two most important weeks of the fall art auctions in New York ended on Wednesday night, it wasn't high prices but a new infusion of energy that stunned the art world.
Not since the heady years of the 1980's had there been so much enthusiasm and so many determined bidders.
But these buyers weren't going crazy and paying ridiculously high prices.
Indeed, the last two weeks have been less about conspicuous consumption and more about a sense of renewed confidence.
"It's fashionable to buy art again," said Diana D. Brooks, who heads Sotheby's auctions worldwide.
"We've turned an important corner this fall. After a difficult few years when people were scared away, they now feel good about buying art again." She cited lower interest rates and strength on Wall Street as having helped make the difference.


General Magnaplate Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rise in New York Taxes Is a Suicidal Proposal
To the Editor:
While I hesitate to differ publicly with an old friend, Richard Ravitch's suggestion in "Mantra for the Mayor: Deficit, Deficit, Deficit" (Op-Ed, Nov. 3), that the best option for dealing with New York City's deficit is an increase in the New York State personal income tax, is so misguided that it impels me to speak out.


Boole &amp; Babbage reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Art in Review
Norman Lewis
Berman/Daferner Gallery  568 Broadway (at Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Jan. 15
In the famous 1950 closed-door sessions where artists and curators like Robert Motherwell and Alfred Barr wrangled over the parameters of Abstract Expressionism, the only black among the 35 artists invited to participate was Norman Lewis.
The year before, he had the first of what were to be nine solo shows at the Willard Gallery, whose stable also included David Smith and Mark Tobey; in 1951, he was included in a show of abstract art organized by the Museum of Modern Art.


U.S. Acts to Ban Radar Detectors in Big Trucks
The Transportation Department has recommended to the White House final regulations that would prohibit radar detectors in 2.5 million big commercial trucks that roar along the nation's roads.
The ban, which would apply to all trucks weighing more than 18,000 pounds, requires only the approval of the White House Office of Management and Budget before taking effect.
That approval is expected, and the ban could be in effect by the end of the year.


Sports &amp; Recreation Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Buckle Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Accounts
*
The American Dairy Association, Rosemont, Ill., and the National Dairy Research and Promotion Board, Arlington, Va., to Impact, Chicago, as the first agency to handle marketing communications for the associations' joint frozen dairy account.
Billings were estimated at $3 million to $4 million. *
London Drugs, Richmond, British Columbia, to Young &amp; Rubicam Vancouver, British Columbia, to handle the drugstore chain's account, previously at Equity Communications, Vancouver.
Billings were estimated at $3.5 million.


Individual Investor Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Quad Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


COMPANY BRIEFS
HAYES WHEELS INTERNATIONAL INC., Romulus, Mich., said it would sell its minority interest in a joint venture, Metalurgica FPS do Brazil Ltd., which makes cast aluminum wheels in Sao Paulo, Brazil.
Terms were not disclosed.


Cobra Electronics (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.N. Tightens Sanctions Against Libya
After weeks of haggling and delay, the Security Council finally carried out its threat to tighten sanctions on Libya today.
The Council said Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi had defied its order to surrender two Libyans accused in the destruction of a Pan American airliner over Lockerbie, Scotland.
The downing of the plane, in 1988, killed 270 people.
Eleven of the Council's 15 members voted for the resolution, which is to freeze Libya's overseas assets, ban some sales of oil equipment and tighten an earlier decision to end commercial air links with Libya.
China and the Council's three Islamic members, Djibouti, Pakistan and Morocco, abstained.


Review/Pop; Shunning Extremity for the Real
Everything about Garth Brooks gives off decency.
In concert, he thanks his road crew and brings them out on stage.
He constantly thanks the audience, and rolls his head back in amazement when the crowd roars its approval.
He appears so egoless he refers to himself as "we," not in the royal sense but in the collaborative sense, as if his achievements were a group effort.
And he sings songs like "We Shall Be Free," which includes the lines: "When the last thing we notice is the color of skin/And the first thing we look for is the beauty within."
It's the realism of American middle-class decency, of politeness enacted in a public arena.


Walshire Assurance Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Russians Capture Seats In Estonian City Voting
Barely two years after Estonia wrested itself free of the old Soviet Union, Russian influence is returning through the first free municipal elections in this Baltic nation since World War II.
While Estonian nationalists still run the Government, many of them keen to erase every legacy of 50 years of Moscow's rule, the new 64-member City Council in Tallinn includes an ethnic Russian as deputy chairman, a former editor of the Estonian Communist and 25 others who owe their political success to bloc voting by Estonia's disgruntled Russian minority.


City Opera and Keene Settle Dispute
A serious rift between Christopher Keene, the general director of the New York City Opera, and the executive committee of the company's board was healed at a special meeting of the board yesterday afternoon, Mr.
Keene and members of the board said afterward.
The meeting, held in a conference room of the Empire Hotel, just across the street from the company's home at Lincoln Center, lasted only 30 minutes and ended in applause when Mr.
Keene dropped what only days ago had been vehement objections to the committee's decision to engage Mark Weinstein as executive director.


Parrot May Have the Answer to a Killing
A defense lawyer in a Northern California murder case says he believes Max the parrot may be more than just an ordinary bird -- that Max may, indeed, hold the answer to who smothered Jane Gill to death in her bedroom two years ago.
Max, the lawyer says, may be a witness.
But the jurors in the trial in Santa Rosa, 55 miles north of here, will not hear from Max.
An attempt to get the African gray parrot's testimony -- rather, testimony about the bird's testimony -- into evidence last week was blocked by the judge.


Seattle FilmWorks (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Choose Your Reason: Redskins Are in Cellar
Talk to a dozen people in Washington and environs and you will get two dozen reasons why their beloved Redskins are buried in the division cellar.
Like these:
*Richie Petitbon, their new head coach, is no Joe Gibbs (who is?).


Market Place; Profits are slowing in credit cards, but First USA does well.
THREE years after interest rates on credit cards began to fall, the credit card business is less profitable than before, but still lucrative enough for some companies to produce extraordinary returns, despite new competition from industrial giants like A.T.&amp; T., Ford Motor, General Motors and General Electric.
One of the most successful is First USA, a Dallas company that issues cards through a Delaware bank subsidiary of the same name.
Since its first public stock issue in May 1992, the earnings of First USA have been growing at an annual rate of more than 100 percent, and its stock has increased nearly sevenfold.
First USA closed yesterday at $66.25, down 25 cents, and well below its peak of $79.625 in October.


Mary A. K. Callahan, Volunteer Worker, 68
Mary Agnes Kiernan Callahan, who devoted more than four decades to volunteer work, died yesterday at her home on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
She was 68 and also had homes in Hobe Sound, Fla., and Oyster Harbors, Mass.
The cause was cancer, her family said.


Jaclyn Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Restaurants
San Domenico is a hard restaurant to love.
The room is dignified, comfortable in a serious sort of way, but without a trace of romance.
The menu descriptions are long and complicated ("thin slices of beef fillet and fresh duck foie gras with raspberry essence").
The wine list has the weight of the Manhattan phone book.
The service is sedate.
Eating here can be an extraordinary experience, but nobody would call it fun.
At least at first.
The restaurant's lofty attitude has not worked in its favor; Americans fell for Italian food because it is such a cozy cuisine.
They loved the warmth of the trattorias, the bold flavors of regional rustic cooking, the simplicity of the service.
When more ambitious restaurants came along, many people simply thought they were pretentious.


Winston Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sybron Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Stadium Waiting Game Adds a Pair of Players
Surprise!
There's still no word from George M. Steinbrenner 3d about keeping his Yankees in the Bronx or packing them up for New Jersey.
About all we know for sure in Bossville is that Gene Michael will stay as Yankees general manager and Steinbrenner's company, American Ship Building, is bankrupt.
How long Steinbrenner will coquettishly hide his preference depends on how much more bistate dancing and romancing he wants and whether the continuing courtship is actually moving toward engagement, or simply more dating.


Tom Brown reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Abroad at Home; Devil in the Details
The Israel-P.L.O.
Declaration of Principles signed on Sept. 13 calls for all implementing plans to be agreed by Dec. 13 and the Palestinians then to assume authority in Gaza and Jericho.
A month before that date, with Prime Minister Rabin again in the United States, the necessary agreements are far from completion.
In the declaration the two parties took the essential step of mutual recognition.
But all the details of how to govern a dense urban population like Gaza's -- the size and powers of a Palestinian police force, for example -- were left to be negotiated.


Verdix Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The High Price of Protectionism
Ross Perot and other critics of the North American Free Trade Agreement have hammered away at how many American jobs will be lost if the United States lets down barriers to Mexican imports.
What has gotten much less attention is the cost of keeping those barriers: how much Americans pay in higher prices when tariffs and other barriers are used to protect jobs, and how effective such protection is in shielding workers from job losses.


ARX Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Entree Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 16


Investors Insurance Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Alamco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


LeShon Johnson's Land Rush of 1993
At halftime of the Iowa-Northern Illinois football game last Saturday afternoon Ed Podolak, the former Kansas City Chief running back and a former star halfback at Iowa, was a guest at Northern's radio station and was asked about LeShon Johnson.
Johnson is Northern's candidate for the Heisman Trophy who, over the past several weeks, has seemed to rise from obscurity to national prominence.
"He's one of the three best running backs in the nation," said Podolak, in the broadcast booth in Kinnick Stadium in Iowa City, "but Tyrone Wheatley is better."
Wheatley, who plays for Michigan and is one of the favorites for the Heisman, had run for 113 yards against Iowa four weeks earlier.
Johnson had gained 85 yards by the half against Iowa, respectable if not outstanding.
But then something remarkable happened in the second half: Johnson proceeded to run into, around, over and through the Iowa defense, including an 81-yard touchdown run from scrimmage, his second touchdown run of the game.


Aquila Gas Pipeline Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Performance Art; John Kelly as a Parisian Legend
In the most indelible image from "Light Shall Lift Them," John Kelly's theatrical homage to Barbette, the transvestite music-hall star who inspired Jean Cocteau, Mr.
Kelly, coiled around a trapeze, floats like an apparition over the stage of the Majestic Theater of the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
As he languorously stretches his legs, the performer, wearing full makeup, a woman's marcelled wig and a glittering circus suit, is a dead ringer for the Parisian legend as pictured in well-known photographs taken by Man Ray.
But he is also more than that.
In the show's exquisite lighting, Mr.
Kelly glows like a human jewel radiating a mysterious brilliance in a luminescent purple haze.
That visual payoff, as haunting as it may be, is a little late in arriving in the leisurely paced 90-minute collage, which had the first of four performances at the Majestic on Wednesday evening.
What Mr.
Kelly, who wrote, choreographed, and directed the piece, has created is an often lovely but overly drawn-out meditation on muses, ghosts, Paris in the 20's, transvestism, and the art of Jean Cocteau.


Courts Also Must Take Battering Seriously
To the Editor:
"Whose Shocking Crime?" (Op-Ed, Nov. 5) by Annie Gottlieb puts the case of the severing of a batterer's penis in perspective.
Battering of women results in severe physical and emotional harm to millions of women in the United States.
However, Ms.
Gottlieb, like many others, has been misled by exaggerated reports that police studies prove that arrest does not deter batterers.


Memorial for a Slain Cabdriver


Penn Treaty American Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tadeusz Pankiewicz, 85, Pole Who Helped Jews
Tadeusz Pankiewicz, a Polish pharmacist who was widely credited with helping Jews escape from Krakow in World War II, died there last Friday.
He was 85.
The cause was kidney failure, said his wife, Selena Pankiewicz.


Golden Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article in The Living Section on Wednesday about mail-order foods misstated the telephone number of Divine Delights, which makes tea cakes.
It is (800) 443-2836.


Wood to Be Earlier
The $500,000 Wood Memorial, New York's final prep race before the Kentucky Derby, will be run at Aqueduct on April 16, three weeks before the Derby instead of the traditional two.
The date for the Wood, a Grade I race for 3-year-olds run over a mile and an eighth, was released yesterday by the New York Racing Association, along with the remaining stakes schedule for the first two winter meetings of 1994.


Home Is Where the Hurt Is: Nets Overcome by the Pacers
The Nets paid tribute tonight to their former teammate Drazen Petrovic in an emotional pregame ceremony before 16,151 fans at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Then they went out and played an intense game against the Indiana Pacers.
Unfortunately, they couldn't overcome the hot shooting down the stretch by the Pacers' Reggie Miller.
By scoring 17 of his 28 points in the fourth quarter, including the 15-foot jumper from the left side to tie the score with 2.0 seconds left in regulation, Miller beat the Nets in their home opener tonight.
It ended with a 108-105 overtime victory for the Pacers, the first of the season for Indiana after three losses.
The Nets' won-lost record dropped to 2-2.


Voting Furor Leaves Mark In New Jersey
Conflicting accounts on whether there were efforts to suppress the black vote in the election for governor last week have rekindled some of the rancor of the campaign, renewed the clamor for revisions in election law and produced an endless string of rumors.
Whatever the outcome of a pending court action and a budding investigation by Federal officials into the claims initially made by Edward J. Rollins, the controversy is certain to leave a permanent mark on New Jersey politics.


Executive Changes
ADIDAS AMERICA, Portland, Ore., the United States subsidiary of Adidas A. G., appointed Peter Moore president and chief executive.
ARCTURUS PHARMACEUTICAL CORP., Woburn, Mass., named Dr.
Richard J. Sharpe, president and chief executive.


Euroamerican Group reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Cortines May Curtail School Asbestos Work
After a review of the mounting costs of the New York City school asbestos cleanup, Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said yesterday that he was considering curtailing all further asbestos work that is not necessary to protect students and employees.
That may mean leaving closed indefinitely some rooms that are not heavily used, like closets, and that have been sealed off pending asbestos abatement, Mr.
Cortines said.


Stores Shy Away From Book Written by Radio Personality
With 1.14 million copies in print, "Private Parts," the raunchy autobiography of a foul-mouthed radio personality, Howard Stern, has been getting a lot of public exposure.
But its publisher says it is nowhere to be found at several large discount department-store chains.
Three large warehouse chains -- Price Club, Sam's and BJ's -- have refused to sell the book, officials at the publisher, Simon &amp; Schuster, said yesterday.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption yesterday about this year's Rockefeller Center Christmas tree misspelled the first name of a donor in some copies.
She is Marie Cronin, not Margie.


Beria Had No Liberalization in Mind
To the Editor:
Amy Knight's "Beria, the Reformer" (Op-Ed, Nov. 3) presents "another side to this evildoer," to persuade us that after Stalin's death Lavrenti P. Beria, chief of Stalin's secret police, wanted to introduce liberal reforms into the Soviet system.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  CORTINES TO CLOSE 2 HICH SCHOOLS
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said that he planned to close two failing New York City high schools, as part of an effort to improve instruction and to hold educators more accountable.
Mr.
Cortines declined to name the schools, but other educators identified them as Andrew Jackson in Cambria Heights, Queens, and James Monroe in East Tremont, the Bronx.
A1.


Lone Star Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Small City Takes Pride As the TV-Listing Capital
This small city on the banks of the upper Hudson River is the world capital of television program listings.
Glens Falls (population: 15,000) gained this distinction because of a young man who wanted to live in a rural atmosphere near Lake George, where his family had a summer home.


Maurice Cranston; Briton, 73, Wrote On Political Theory
Maurice Cranston, a British professor who was a leading interpreter of the political philosophers of the 17th and 18th centuries, died last Friday in London.
He was 73.
He had a heart attack while recording a television program for the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation about the recently published memoirs of former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher.


Benefit at the Beacon
Iris Dement, Nanci Griffith, Jenny Muldaur and John Prine are to perform tonight in a Food and Hunger Hotline benefit, at 7:30 P.M. at the Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street.
Proceeds will help establish One City Cafe, a nonprofit restaurant for the homeless.
Tickets: $25 and $35; $125 for priority seating and a reception with the artists after the show.
Information: (212) 366-5400.


A Belated Salute to the Women Who Served
Marion Birkhimer had been waiting 25 years for this day, ever since she returned from a two-year tour as head surgical nurse on the hospital ship Repose off the Vietnam coast.
In 1968, Americans did not want to hear about the pains soldiers were suffering in an unpopular war, Ms.
Birkhimer said.
And they especially did not want to hear from the women who served in Vietnam and later became a forgotten part of the conflict's forgotten corps.


Reviews/ Film; Ernest P. Worrell Battles A Slew of Inanimate Objects
He is Jerry Lewis with rubber lips, Don Knotts as a plucky yokel, Lou Costello with a knack for mimicry.
As long as zany situations can be dreamed up to entangle Jim Varney's character, Ernest P. Worrell, with inanimate objects that have a will of their own, there can be no end to the popular "Ernest" series.
In "Ernest Rides Again," Mr.
Varney is pursued by a power tool, gets his head stuck in the barrel of a cannon and dons the crown of Britain only to have it fit on his head so tightly that even a cranial saw can't remove it.
In the movie's most extended gag, Ernest, his head unstuck, rides the cannon over the fields and roads of Virginia as it coasts out of control, squashing everything in its path.


Art in Review
George Segal
Howard Greenberg Gallery  120 Wooster Street (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Nov. 27
The sentiment-tinged realism that characterizes George Segal's sculptures can also be found in his photographs, presented here for the first time in a one-person show.
Best known for tableaux in which white plaster figures are caught in moments of loneliness and anomie, Mr.
Segal began to make photographs several years ago after suffering a back injury.


Review/Cabaret; 'Forbidden Broadway,' A New Round of Spoofs
Robert Goulet may not have been the toast of Broadway when he played King Arthur in the recent revival of "Camelot." But the star, as parodied by Brad Oscar in the new edition of the long-running comedy revue "Forbidden Broadway," nearly walks off with the show.
Wearing crudely pasted-on facial hair and flashing a facetious grin, he belts the title song for "Camelounge," which catalogues the glitzy production values of a revival that he hopes will "jump start" his career.
"I had a high school techie paint the scenery/'Cause when it came to cash we had to scrounge," he boasts.
"Now Merlin's forest looks like Vegas greenery/called 'Camelounge.' " The list of the revival's attributes goes on to describe a production stocked with "chorus girls from Caesar's Reno," and a revamped story in which King Arthur runs an Atlantic City bar named Camelounge.


Discovery West reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Builders Square Picks Fogarty Klein
Builders Square, the San Antonio-based home improvement products retail chain owned by the Kmart Corporation, said yesterday that it had selected Fogarty Klein &amp; Partners in Houston to handle its account, previously at Ross Roy Communications Inc. in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., for five years.
Billings were estimated to exceed $30 million.


Kohl Defends European Unity to Doubters
Rejecting skepticism about the European Community in his supporters' ranks, Chancellor Helmut Kohl told Parliament today that for Germany there was "no alternative" to closer European unity.
"In the long term, I am firmly convinced that this is also a question of war and peace," he said.
"It's a grave mistake if people think the horrific pictures from the former Yugoslavia are limited to that area of Europe, or that racism, nationalism, chauvinism and xenophobia in other parts of Europe and in Germany have been banished once and for all."





Charles Coe Townsend; Financial Consultant, 76
Charles Coe Townsend, a New York financial consultant, died yesterday at Kershaw County Hospital in Camden, S.C.
He was 76 and lived in Manhattan and Germantown, N.Y.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.
He was on vacation at the time, they said.


Lifschultz Industries Inc. reports earnings for Year to July 31


Chief of Olivetti Is Set Free In Corruption-Case Inquiry
The head of the Olivetti company, the Italian computer and office equipment giant, was released from house arrest today but remained under investigation in the country's corruption scandal, accused of trading million-dollar bribes for Government contracts.
Carlo De Benedetti, one of the most prominent Italian businessmen to be accused in the scandal, said the move left him feeling "a lot stronger" than a week ago after Rome magistrates ordered his detention and questioned him in prison before agreeing to house arrest.


Barr Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; 3M teams up with Junior Achievement to create an interactive magazine ad with Post-it notes.
EVERY now and then an advertisement actually conveys information, a concept or a telephone number worth keeping.
But you know how it is, with one thing or another.
The newspapers pile up.
The magazines get lost.
You can't find the scissors when you want them.
Now where was that advertisement, anyway?


Brantly Learns the Kenyans' Way of Marathoning
Yes, there have been silver linings -- Mark Plaatjes won the 1993 world championship and Steve Spence finished third at the worlds in 1991 -- but United States marathoning still lingers under a cloud of unfulfilled expectations.
In New York, the years click by like miles, 5, 10, 11, until memory drifts as if it has hit the wall.
Not since Alberto Salazar completed his splendid triple in 1982 has an American man won the New York City Marathon.
This year, there is fresh incentive.
Any American man or woman who finishes first Sunday will receive a $120,000 bonus.
And Keith Brantly, 31 years old, of Daytona Beach, Fla., could be the American rabbit who chases down this financial carrot.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
BellSouth will invest $1.5 billion in QVC's bid for Paramount Communications.
But the F.T.C. told QVC to cut its ties with Liberty Media, its largest shareholder, if it wants antitrust clearance to buy Paramount.  [ Page D1. ]  MCA's president expressed irritation that Matsushita, MCA's parent, had talked with John Malone of Tele-Communications about acquiring 50 percent of MCA.  [ D5. ]
Pacific Telesis announced a $16 billion plan to build a high-speed video and data superhighway in California by itself, failing to team up with a big cable television operator or programmer.  [ D1. ]


Woman Stabbed to Death
A 74-year-old woman was found dead in her Bronx home yesterday, stabbed repeatedly by an unknown assailant, the police said.
The woman, Freda Peters, of 3426 Dekalb Avenue, had returned home after meeting her sister for lunch, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.
The sister, who was not identified, waited for Mrs.
Peters to visit her at 5:30 P.M. to watch the evening news, as was her daily custom, Sergeant McCluskey said.
When Mrs.
Peters did not come, the sister went to her home and found her dead, the sergeant said.


Eicon Tech reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Weyco Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Film; Radio Show Is the Link For 3 Comic Vignettes
There is a touching innocence to Jose Luis Saenz de Heredia's 1955 film, "Radio Stories," three small comic vignettes linked by a radio show that keeps the Spanish populace enthralled.
Made in the quaint old days before television had entirely usurped radio's place as the center of home entertainment, it is an agreeable reminder that not too long ago a mellifluous voice from an electronic box could cast a spell as potent as any telegenic image.
The movie, which opens today at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, is the first in a series, "Spanish Eyes: Classics of the Spanish Cinema (1935-60)," which the theater is presenting through the end of this month.
Its 11 films offer a revealing look at Spanish movies made during the repressive years of the Franco regime.


The Future Is Coming
Why doesn't America know where it is going?
U.S. foreign and military policy is swerving like a drunken driver without a map. . . .
We are undergoing the deepest rearrangement of global power since the birth of industrial civilization.
-- Alvin Toffler and Heidi Toffler, Op-Ed page, Oct. 31, 1993.
Why is American foreign policy lurching like a drunken driver without a map?
To answer that vital question, we need to set aside the obsolete world map that befuddled policy makers have been consulting and turn to a new map -- specifically, the 1993 Universal World Globe.


Thermo Power Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Acceptance Insurance Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Edusoft Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Symmetricom
Shares in Symmetricom Inc., an electronics manufacturer specializing in telephone equipment, plunged yesterday in heavy trading after the company said its earnings would be lower than expected for the 1994 fiscal year because of reduced demand for its products.
The stock had slumped in early October before rebounding recently.


Dundee Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Taylor Says, 'Play Me.' Reeves Replies, 'Show Me.'
Lawrence Taylor said today that he should have played more against the Dallas Cowboys last Sunday.
But Coach Dan Reeves, who has shown little patience with struggling veterans, defended his decision to keep the former All-Pro linebacker on the sideline for most of the game.
"Last week, I felt really good, and I think I should have played," said Taylor, who was suffering from a pulled hamstring and didn't start for the first time this season.
"I didn't play as much as I would have liked."


They'd Go a Mile (or 26) For Just the Right Cause
Charity may begin at home, but for certain well-heeled philanthropists it also starts on Staten Island, winds through all five boroughs and ends in Central Park.
The New York City Marathon has become a magnet for fund-raisers.
Nobody knows how many of the 26,000 runners will be pounding the pavement for contributions on Sunday.
But among the causes that will benefit are hospitals, children's aid groups, medical research, a program for the homeless and at least one college.


Tetra Tech Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Perrigo Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Secretive Sect Is Testing Judicial Authority Over Religion
A case that is climbing the Pennsylvania appellate ladder may help clarify the judiciary's authority in religious disputes, constitutional scholars say.
The case involves a struggle for the leadership, and control of $5 million in assets, of the Fraternitas Rosae Crucis, a small and secretive Christian group that has a rose and a cross as its symbol.


In Haiti's Army, Business Is the Order of the Day
The civilian Government of Prime Minister Robert Malval works most days at Mr.
Malval's home in the capital, where it meets when the ministers feel safe enough to make the trip.
Underscoring who really runs the country, however, a letter arrived this week for the Defense Minister, Jean Beliotte, from the army Chief of Staff, Gen.
Philippe Biamby, calling the minister a "crudely fashioned marionette" and threatening to throw him in jail.


For Better Living reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Central Pennsylvania Financial Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Zoll Medical Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Mestek Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rag Shops Inc. reports earnings for Year to Aug 28


People
*
Charles Lutz was named president of the Hively Agency, Houston, succeeding Charles Hively, who continues as chief executive.
Mr.
Lutz was previously the president and chief operating of Penny &amp; Speier, a Houston agency that has since gone out of business.


At the Bar; Court asks a lawyer, If a computer is doing most of the work, why the big fee?
"Some will rob you with a six gun, and some with a fountain pen," Woody Guthrie warbled in "Pretty Boy Floyd." And, according to a California judge, were Guthrie around today, he might have added that some lawyers use CD-ROM.
Craig Collins, a lawyer in San Mateo, Calif., specializes in family law.
Recently he was representing a woman who hoped to move across the country with her 7-year-old son to White Plains.
Her former husband, who was also the boy's stepfather, wanted to keep the boy in California.


A Disneyland of History Next to the Real Thing
To the shock and utter exuberance of many in this thoroughly rural village 35 miles from the White House, the Walt Disney Company unwrapped plans today for a new amusement park that would relive the grand sweep of American history.
Only better, of course.
On 3,000 verdant acres abutting a busy Interstate highway, Disney will split the American story into nine playlands which, planners declared, will let visitors participate in the nation's creation but without getting shot, or even dirty.


Lemieux Is Out Again
Pittsburgh Penguins star MARIO LEMIEUX, still not healed from off-season back surgery, plans further rehabilitation for "weeks, maybe months" and probably won't play again until at least mid-to-late January.
Sources close to the team, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the Penguins will announce before tomorrow's home game with Detroit that Lemieux won't play again until he is 100 percent ready.


Bond Panel Shifts Approach On Political Donations Ban
The Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board made a switch yesterday in the way it will try to stop the flow of political contributions from bond dealers to the local officials and candidates who can award them lucrative underwriting business.
The board, the self-regulatory organization for municipal bond dealers, decided not to impose an outright ban on contributions made with the intent of winning municipal bond business.
Instead, it will ban bond dealers from doing business with any state, local government or authority if certain members of their firms have made political contributions to officials who are involved in selecting underwriters.


Pytka Wins Top Ad Honors
Pytka, a commercial production company in Venice, Calif., took top honors at the first annual Cresta International Advertising Awards honoring consumer and business-to-business communications, sponsored by Creative Standards International and the International Advertising Association.
At the show Tuesday night in Budapest, Pytka won 14 Crestas for television commercials produced for BBDO New York for clients including Pepsi, and for Nike, a client of Wieden &amp; Kennedy in Portland, Ore.
Lewis Moberly in London had the next highest number of awards, with four in packaging for clients like Zeiss Beer.


Industrial Training Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Family and Nets Bid Another Farewell
For the Nets and a near-capacity crowd at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, it was another home opener, another small step early in the new basketball season, another chance to publicly mourn and salute a former player.
But for the family of Drazen Petrovic, it was a closing of sorts, another step toward coming to grips with the sudden death of a son and a brother.


CareNetwork Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


SMB Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Even Brazil Is Shocked: State Is One Family's Fief
With her gold earrings glinting and high heels sinking in the mud, Denilma Bulhoes roams her domain, bringing what she calls a message of hope to the peasants and shantytown dwellers in Brazil's impoverished northeast corner.
Underscoring the mixed message, her husband, Geraldo, the Governor of Alagoas State, appears before photographers in dark glasses and releases a white dove.


Cortines, Citing Litany of Failure, Plans to Close 2 Big High Schools
Hoping to improve instruction and make educators more accountable, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said yesterday that he planned to close two failing New York City high schools, replacing them with networks of smaller schools.
Mr.
Cortines declined to name the troubled schools, out of concern that the disclosure would stir opposition among alumni, teachers and students.
But other educators identified the schools as Andrew Jackson in Cambria Heights, Queens, and James Monroe in the South Bronx.


Diner's Journal
Reviving the Monkey Bar
The Monkey Bar in the Elysee Hotel, at 60 East 54th Street in Manhattan, a venerable watering hole dating from the mid-1920's where Tallulah Bankhead cavorted, Douglas Fairbanks Jr. sipped his Scotch and Tennessee Williams did more than sip, closed about two years ago.
Those who loved it mourned the loss of the murals, the light fixtures decorated with monkeys, the leopard-pattern carpet, the red leather banquettes and the wall covered with Hirschfeld drawings of the famous regulars.


IRT Property Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Swap Cigarettes for Trade Votes? No Deal
Lawmakers from tobacco-producing states have asked the Clinton Administration to reduce the cigarette tax increase in its health care plan in exchange for their votes on the North American Free Trade Agreement.
But after considering the idea, Administration officials said today that they had rejected it.
William Daley, the White House coordinator for the trade agreement, said the idea had been rejected without serious consideration.
"That has been tossed around like one million other things," Mr.
Daley said.


Medical Diagnostics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Art in Review
Martha Rosler
Jay Gorney Gallery  100 Greene Street (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through tomorrow
In her latest documentary project, Martha Rosler treats airports as emotional wastelands, interchangeable parts of a hellish modern limbo.
Her large color photographs present details of these soulless spaces, from a baggage carousel that gleams beneath fluorescent lights to a row of black plastic chairs, each fitted with a rental television set, lined up beneath a poster for the Cable News Network.


Air Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Samuel Brown, 76, Health Food Merchant
Samuel Brown, who with his wife, Edith, operated one of Manhattan's first and best-known health food restaurants and stores, died Monday in New York Hospital.
He was 76 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was a heart attack, said Dr. Karen Brown, his daughter.


M.D.C. Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Supercuts Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pitt-Des Moines Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


I.B.M. May Sell Federal Systems Unit
I.B.M. said yesterday that it was exploring the sale of all or part of its Federal Systems Company.
Federal Systems, based in Bethesda, Md., provides both conventional data processing and specialized computing for aerospace applications -- primarily to the Defense Department and other Federal agencies, including the Federal Aviation Administration.


Marquette Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Philippine Revival
With Corazon Aquino no longer President and the big U.S. military bases at Subic Bay and Clark Field shut down, many Americans have lost interest in the Philippines.
But this onetime U.S. colony, which under Ferdinand Marcos degenerated into the sick man of Southeast Asia, may now be poised for a modest economic revival.
And even without the U.S. bases it could play an important new role in America's post-cold-war Pacific strategy.
Much of the credit for this goes to President Fidel Ramos, now on his first official visit to the United States.


U.S. TO GIVE ISRAEL INCENTIVES TO SEEK A BROADER PEACE
President Clinton is planning to present Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel with a package of military and economic incentives that he hopes will both reinforce the Israeli leader's political standing at home and make him and the Israeli public more willing to deal with Syria.
Among the items Mr.
Clinton plans to discuss with Mr.
Rabin during their talks on Friday, American and Israeli officials said, is how to help Israel meet an estimated $250 million in costs for roads and military bases required for redeploying Israeli troops from Gaza and Jericho as part of its accord with the Palestine Liberation Organization.
One idea is for the Administration to consult with Congress about allowing Israel to use some of the $10 billion in American loan guarantees extended last year for absorbing Russian Jews to pay for redeployment projects in the West Bank and Gaza.


No Headline
"It's long overdue. We were supposed to be the brave ones and not have emotions. Military nurses have repressed so much." -- MARION BIRKHIMER, a veteran Navy nurse, at the dedication of the memorial to women who served in Vietnam.  [ A1:2. ]


Some Trading During Holiday
Most banks and the Treasury bond market were closed in the United States yesterday in observance of Veterans Day.
But the stock market and the commodity markets were open.
And there was limited trading in the currency markets.


RehabClinics Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Natural Wonders Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


American Nuclear Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CII Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gund Chosen as Modern's Chairwoman
The Museum of Modern Art has announced the election of Agnes Gund as chairwoman of the museum.
She succeeds David Rockefeller, who was elected a life trustee and chairman emeritus.
Mr.
Rockefeller had served five consecutive one-year terms as chairman, the maximum allowed under the museum's bylaws.
He has been a trustee since 1948 and will continue to participate actively in the affairs of the museum, the announcement said.


Inter-City Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American Israeli Paper Mills Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Supply of Nissans Awaits Demand for Sales


Wedco Technology (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sbarro Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 10


Milgray Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Consumers Gas reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Irish Hope To Remove Seminoles' Fast Track
The paradox of Notre Dame football is that the intense followers of an institution with enormous resources, a deeply rooted tradition and a nationally recognized standard of excellence can consistently consider themselves underdogs in big games.
This week, for once, that premise does not sound so silly.
Notre Dame is attempting to restrict a top-ranked Florida State team that has averaged 44 points and 561 yards per game.
Working with a potentially decisive lack of speed at the inside linebacker position -- an area where short gains become big ones -- the Fighting Irish understand that their margin of error is shrinking fast.


Holnam Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Talks About Sale of MCA Anger Company President
A top executive at MCA Inc. said yesterday that he was furious that the movie studio's parent, the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company, had talked with John C. Malone, the cable entrepreneur, about acquiring a 50 percent stake in MCA, which owns Universal Pictures and Universal Television.
Mr.
Malone, who controls Tele-Communications Inc. as well as the Liberty Media Corporation, a cable programmer, had been eager to buy into a movie studio because films are the staple of cable programming.


Cambex Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Suicide Ruling Leaves Family in Doubt
On the last night of his life, William Short, 18 years old, walked about one mile from his barracks at the Coast Guard base here to the pier where the 210-foot cutter Alert was tied up.
It was Feb. 8, 1992, and Mr.
Short, a member of the Alert crew, was scheduled to go on leave the following week to visit his family in Lincoln, Neb.


Review/Film; Learning About Living, the Hard Way
That faint, terrified cry you hear in the distance is the sound of the baby-boom generation experiencing its mid-life crisis on screen.
Bit by bit, the current crop of middle-aged film makers has begun to explore the thought of mortality, though the idea is not necessarily couched in the greatest candor.
Films about stopping to smell the roses often have their sobering side, as do uplifting tales of learning to enjoy life after a terrible scare.
Not surprisingly, the D-word has yet to turn up in the advertising campaign for any such story.
But Bruce Joel Rubin, the screenwriter who makes his directorial debut with "My Life," has made death his dramatic specialty.
"Ghost" was Mr.
Rubin's romance about a love that transcended mortality, in so many audience-pleasing ways.
And "Jacob's Ladder" presented the writer's strange, hallucinatory vision of one man's demise.
Now Mr.
Rubin has imagined a loving young family coping with terminal cancer, in a film well poised to kick the yuppie audience squarely in the solar plexus.
The imminent death of Bob Jones (Michael Keaton) is linked heartbreakingly with the birth of a child he may never know.


BitWise Designs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Amonte's Food for Thought Better Not Be Fattening
Eddie Olczyk put a pastry in Tony Amonte's locker this afternoon at practice.
It was a thank-you present for Amonte, who scored the game-winning goal in the Rangers' 2-1 victory over the Winnipeg Jets Wednesday night at Madison Square Garden.
The problem was, Howie Wenger spied it first.
Wenger is the team physiologist and a close ally of Mike Keenan, the Rangers' fitness-obsessed coach.
And Amonte only happens to be one of his projects.


Andres Wines reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gelman Sciences Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Graf Goes for Icing on Cake
She has won the event twice, but when Steffi Graf opposes Natalya Zvereva in the opening round next week, she will be seeking her first Virginia Slims Championships title in four years.
Her quest shapes up as a solid bet, especially with Monica Seles absent.
Seles won the season-ending tennis tournament at Madison Square Garden the last three years, but has not played since being stabbed by a spectator during a tournament in Hamburg, Germany, on April 30.
The top-seeded Graf, who has won three Grand Slams this year, was the Virginia Slims winner in 1987 and 1989.


Subway Crime Declining, New Transit Figures Show
Paralleling a citywide decline in reported crimes, subway crime over the first nine months of this year decreased by 12.1 percent from a year earlier, the New York City transit police announced yesterday
The drop continued a trend that has seen crime in the city's vast underground transit system go down markedly during the last three years.
Over all, crime rates have fallen by 35.9 percent since 1990, when there were nearly 14,000 felonies in the subways, compared with about 8,916 for the first nine months of this year.


QVC Wins BellSouth's Help in Bid
After round-the-clock negotiations that ended yesterday afternoon, the BellSouth Corporation agreed to invest $1.5 billion to back QVC Network's bid for Paramount Communications.
But just as QVC made a new alliance, it lost an old one.
The Federal Trade Commission, which has been investigating antitrust issues in QVC's proposed hostile takeover of Paramount, has insisted that QVC sever its ties with Liberty Media, its largest shareholder, to get a green light from the Government.


Foul Woes For O'Neal A Big Woe For Magic
Hornets 120, Magic 87
Alonzo Mourning took advantage of Shaquille O'Neal's foul trouble, scoring 18 points and grabbing 10 rebounds last night in Charlotte to lead the Hornets over the Magic, 120-87.


Misconduct in Science Is Not Rare, a Survey Finds
The first detailed national survey of misconduct in science has shown that it is not as rare as many scientists have said it is.
The study, published today in American Scientist magazine, showed that 43 percent of students and 50 percent of faculty members reported direct knowledge of more than one kind of misconduct in their labs, from faking results to withholding findings from competitors.


Customedix Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Novo Nordisk reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Why Americans Distrust Clinton on Trade Pact; Past Promises Unkept
To the Editor:
In the heated debate over the probable economic consequences of the North American Free Trade Agreement with Mexico, surprisingly little attention has been paid to the accuracy of past predictions about development along the border.
In 1965 business leaders lobbied successfully for a border industrialization program, predicting that factories would spring up all along the United States side of the border in tandem with Mexican border development: the twin plant concept.
On the other hand, Ernesto Galarza, farmworker chronicler, was skeptical.
In 1967 he requested in vain that the Border Commission include in its membership Mexican labor people from both sides of the border to work toward raising "Mexican levels of income to American standards," not "lowering American to present Mexican ones." Otherwise, he predicted, "goods will be manufactured at Mexican wages and reimported for sale at American prices."
Given past misguided business predictions, why should we rely on the assurances about the trade agreement?
JULIE LEININGER PYCIOR  Assistant Professor of History Manhattan College Bronx, Nov. 3, 1993


Corrections
Theater listings in the Arts and Leisure section on Sunday, for a new SoHo arts center named Here, at 145 Avenue of the Americas, have become outdated because of a shutdown for further construction work.
There will be no performances today, tomorrow or Sunday at the center; activities will resume on Wednesday.
Camryn Manheim's play "Wake Up, I'm Fat!" scheduled for today, tomorrow and Sunday, has been moved to the CSC Theater, 136 East 13th Street.


Why Americans Distrust Clinton on Trade Pact; Retraining's Failure
To the Editor:
The views expressed by Tony Snow and James Carville in "Victory Made (Sort of) Easy" (Op-Ed, Nov. 2) are loaded with pro-North American Free Trade Agreement and pro-business arguments.
What happens if the rewards outlined by these two insiders aren't harvested?
Maybe earning the equivalent of their Mexican counterparts would be their reward.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "THE TWILIGHT OF THE GOLDS," Booth Theater, 222 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
A comedy by Jonathan Tolins about an expectant couple who learn the sexual orientation of their child through prenatal testing; directed by Arvin Brown.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $40 and $45.
Information: (212) 239-6200.


Esquire Communications Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Voting Complaints Lead to Investigation
The Federal Bureau of Investigation is conducting what an official called a routine inquiry into a complaint that there had been an attempt to keep some minority-group voters from casting their ballots in the New York City mayoral election, the Justice Department said tonight.
The department's spokesman, Carl Stern, said the complaint had asserted that signs had been posted in the city suggesting that immigration agents might be at polling places and advising voters to bring their passports with them to the polls.


Crown Resources Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Art in Review
Robert Kushner
Holly Solomon Gallery  172 Mercer Street  SoHo  Through Nov. 20
It's odd that the Pattern and Decorative movement of the 1970's is so little valued at present.
Its challenges to male-dominated, Western high art anticipated exactly the issues many younger artists are grappling with today.
Robert Kushner was a founder of the movement.
His paintings of two decades ago, done on unstretched cloth and sometimes worn as costumes in performances, suggested a zany combination of Islamic pattern, French modernism and suburban wallpaper.
Both opulent and funny, they were among the most delightful images of their day.


Sweet Dreams of Ireland
SME years, fall really lives up to its name.
As one hectic day replaces the next, I find myself turning a blind eye to the orange leaves, pulling my sweater tighter around me and pining for July.
Any of it.
Especially the few days I spent in Ireland: two in Dublin, working, one in the country, all of it glorious.
And green -- hypnotic, mesmerizing green.
Maybe that's why I can't see autumn this year.
I also liked the candid Irish humor, often dark, and the sweet national belief in redemption through the written word.
Instinctively, they seem to understand that life is hard after you die, too.
So when I heard about the Fitzpatrick Manhattan, only a year and half old and owned by an Irish family with hotels in Dublin, Bunratty and Cork, I found it hard to resist.
Actually, I had had some contact with the Fitzpatrick, on Lexington Avenue near 57th Street, a few weeks before checking in myself.
I needed to call a guest there and, in my haste, asked only for Rusty, omitting the last name.
I was put through immediately, but no one answered.
I called back.
"Listen," I told the woman at the front desk, "you just put me through to someone named Rusty, but I didn't give you the last name, and no one answered and maybe the room wasn't right." Well, she knew exactly who Rusty was, where she was, and why she wasn't answering.
Rather than connect me to voice mail, she took a message.


BHA Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dekalb Energy Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gap's 3d-Quarter Earnings Climbed 27.3%
Gap Inc. said yesterday that its third-quarter income rose 27.3 percent because of leaner inventories, fewer markdowns and the addition of fashion merchandise for women.
The results were a record for the San Francisco-based company and exceeded expectations of some industry analysts.
Gap shares rose $3.125, to $39.50, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Pactel Plans Big Project On Its Own
With huge new rivals hungrily eyeing its lucrative territory, the Pacific Telesis Group drew a $16 billion line in the sand yesterday by announcing it would build a high-speed video and data superhighway in California.
Pacific Telesis made its move after failing to team up with a big cable television operator or a big programmer, as several other regional Bell companies have done lately.
But company officials said yesterday that they had been "very close" to two different deals in recent months, and they made it clear that they were still looking for partners.
A Vulnerable Feeling
Pacific Telesis, which provides telephone service in California and Nevada, is feeling particularly vulnerable to the competitive threat posed by cable-telephone alliances like Bell Atlantic's pending acquisition of Tele-Communications, the nation's -- and California's -- largest cable operator.


Alba-Waldensian reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


CHRONICLE
Organizers of a benefit for the American Ballet Theater on Monday are billing it as a "family party," but the evening will hardly be a couple of relatives around the kitchen table.
What the family -- "board members, dancers, longstanding contributors" -- will have besides dinner at the Four Seasons restaurant is a preview of the company's new production of "The Nutcracker," said PETER JOSEPH, the new chairman of A.B.T.
They will also see the "Puss in Boots" sequence from "The Sleeping Beauty" and an excerpt from "Coppelia."


Universal Foods Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


M/I Schottenstein Homes Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Goodwill for Raveling
GEORGE RAVELING of the University of Southern California, entering his 22d season as a college coach, was named yesterday as head coach of the United States basketball team for the Goodwill Games next summer in St.
Petersburg, Russia.


Clinton Calls for Expansion Of Child Pornography Laws
Responding to growing criticism in Congress over a Justice Department action in a child pornography case, President Clinton has directed Attorney General Janet Reno to prepare legislation to expand the reach of child pornography laws.
Mr.
Clinton's action, spelled out in an unusual letter to Ms.
Reno that was made public today, represented the first time that Mr.
Clinton has publicly second-guessed his popular Attorney General over a legal decision by the Justice Department in a hotly debated case before the Supreme Court.
The letter was dated Nov. 10.


Bench Expects to Be Fined
Johnny Bench, who was accused last month by the city's Department of Consumer Affairs of misleading Home Shopping Network memorabilia buyers, said yesterday that "no matter how it comes out, I'm sure there'll be a fine, and if it's $10,000, it'll look like I shot the President."
Bench faces a minimum $5,000 fine and HSN faces a minimum $12,500 fine.


U.S. and China Try to End Bar to High-Tech Trade
The United States and China are negotiating to eliminate American trade sanctions on high-technology exports to China, senior Administration officials said today.
But the Administration has so far failed to persuade China to formally agree to an international accord controlling the export of missile technology.
And President Clinton's senior national security advisers agreed at a White House meeting on Wednesday to keep the sanctions in place unless China agrees.
Talks Next Week
The Administration had hoped to strike a deal with China on lifting the sanctions before Mr.
Clinton meets China's President, Jiang Zemin, in Seattle on Nov. 19, the first top-level meeting since before the June 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre in Beijing.
Unless Mr.
Clinton overrules his advisers, he will not be able to announce the end of sanctions.


Stray Bullets Hit 2 Mothers At a Bus Stop
Two women waiting at a corner bus stop for their children to come home from school were shot and wounded by stray bullets in Queens yesterday, the police said.
A 16-year-old boy, Jose Barrios, apparently the intended victim, was also injured in the shooting in South Ozone Park, not far from Aqueduct Race Track, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.
He was listed in critical condition at Jamaica Hospital.


TV Weekend; A Sprawling Sequel To a Sprawling Western
February 1989: With a noticeable absence of network fanfare, Larry McMurtry's eight-hour adaptation of his novel "Lonesome Dove," starring Robert Duvall, Tommy Lee Jones, Anjelica Huston and Rick Schroder, captures record ratings and later several Emmys and a Peabody Award.
Guess what's coming next.
Sunday at 9 P.M.: With CBS loudly sounding the publicity trumpets, "Return to Lonesome Dove" begins a seven-hour run that continues on Tuesday at 9 and on Thursday at 8 P.M.
This sprawling western picks up where the other left off, the focus now on driving a herd of wild mustangs to Montana in the 1870's.
There are the same long shots of majestic plains and dramatic skies.
There is also something else: a naggingly pervasive dullness.


INSIDE
U.S.-China High-Tech Trade
Washington and Beijing are negotiating over restrictions on high-technology exports to China as the U.S. seeks China's agreement to limits on exports of missile technology.
Page A10.
U.N.
Adds Penalties on Libya
The Security Council tightened sanctions on Libya because it had failed to surrender two Libyans in the bombing of an American jet.
Page A10.
Haiti Army Is Called a Mafia
Members of the army in Haiti operate a sprawling and violent nationwide enterprise that many describe as criminal.
Page A12.
Applying Brakes to Truckers
The Transportation Department is recommending rules to prohibit radar detectors in 2.5 million big commercial trucks.
Page A18.
Mickey Does Manassas
Five miles from the Manassas National Battlefield, lies the site of the proposed Disney America, a "historical" amusement park.
Page A14.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL REPORT
Harvard
There will be no ceremony for the retiring coach, Joe Restic, in his final home game tomorrow against undefeated Penn.
The coach wanted it that way.


Pharmaceutical Marketing Services Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pope Fractures His Shoulder
Pope John Paul II fractured and dislocated his right shoulder today after tripping on the hem of his robe, and is spending a night in a hospital, the Vatican said.
The Pope, who is 73, was given a general anesthetic while doctors at Gemelli Hospital treated him and encased the shoulder in a soft cast that he is to wear for a month, said Joaquin Navarro-Valls, the Vatican spokesman.


Review/Music; Virtuosity As a Vehicle To a Higher Realm
After Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan, perhaps the finest singer alive in the Sufi Muslim musical style qawwali, wanders onto a stage, he sits down, opens his mouth and does his best to turn the audience into a churning mass of ecstasy.
Mr.
Khan, surrounded by his band of singers and drummers and looking like a cross between a pyramid and a large man, is singing about God.
And as with much religious music, what he sings is meant to transport the audience into another realm.
Speaking recently by telephone from Paris, Mr.
Khan said he didn't use any tricks to induce an audience, but listeners on Sunday at the Avery Fisher Hall concert that is to be presented by the World Music Institute, will find out that this is not quite so.


Takatsuki Journal; In Japan's Astounding Future: Life With Father
In another era the Japanese Government came to industrial suburbs like this outside Osaka to teach workers how to make the world's best car parts or the smallest computer chips.
Now it is here to teach them how to be better fathers.
So at 7 one Friday evening, when they would usually be dutifully at their desks, 40 or so executives of Sunstar Corporation stepped into the company auditorium for the latest in Japanese employee training: a course in the art of being a family man.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about strategists in the New Jersey race for governor referred incorrectly in some copies to a Republican consultant who wrote a memo last summer urging the dismissal of Edward J. Rollins, who advised Christine Todd Whitman.
It was Roger J. Stone Jr., not Roger Ailes.


Mindful of Trade Fight, Clinton Warns of Isolationism
President Clinton used the 75th anniversary today of the armistice ending World War I to warn against a return to the economic isolationism that he said once again poses a threat to American security.
Mr.
Clinton referred only obliquely to the North American Free Trade Agreement in his Veterans Day remarks.
But his words added gravity to an Administration attempt to elevate its fight for passage of the accord to one seen as representing a momentous choice in the nation's history.


Windmere Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


On Stage, and Off
Hard to Get a Date
With nine Broadway openings this month (more than in any fall month since November 1981) and a dozen more Off Broadway, this is the New York theater's most hectic stretch in memory.
It is a circumstance that was thrown into sharp relief last week when the producers of "Perestroika," Part 2 of "Angels in America," announced they were postponing its opening from Thursday, Nov. 18, until the following Tuesday, thus upsetting what had been a rather precariously balanced schedule.
Producers of Broadway shows are required to register their opening nights with the League of American Theaters and Producers, reserving the dates as long in advance as possible so that the league can orchestrate schedules and keep conflicts to a minimum.
Less officially but for the convenience of all, the league has for the last few years also kept track of Off Broadway openings, but the Off Broadway theaters all understand that they are somewhat at the mercy of Broadway shows, which take precedence.
Indeed, weeks ago, when "Perestroika" first assumed the Nov. 18 date, it bumped the Manhattan Theater Club's production of Donald Margulies's play "The Loman Family Picnic." The theater then moved "Loman" to Nov. 23, where last Friday it found itself under the feet of "Angels" once again.


Canada Malting reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Consolidated Health Care Associates (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mere Hint of Jobs Draws Crowd in Detroit
In this city's troubled downtown, thousands of people lined up in the cold this morning to apply for jobs that may never exist.
The applicants, mostly black, were hoping to work in a casino to be run by Greek-American businessmen on behalf of an Indian tribe based in Northern Michigan.
But the casino appears to have little chance of winning approval, which means the long line probably served as little more than a gauge of the desperation of people unable to find full-time work in a city that once boomed with the auto trade.


Lottery Gets Better for Worst
Things went from bad to better for the worst in the National Basketball Association yesterday when the league's board of governors changed the rules of the league's draft lottery.
The change increases the chances of the teams with the worst records to get one of the top three picks and reduces the chances of the teams with the best records among non-playoff teams from getting one of them.
Last spring, Orlando, which missed the playoffs on the final weekend of last season, came away with the No. 1 lottery pick.
Dallas, with the worst record in the league, earned the No. 4 pick.


Business Lobbying for Trade Pact Appears to Sway Few in Congress
Sputtering for months, the business community's lobbying campaign is now running wide open, producing mailings, telephone calls, newspaper advertisements and speeches on behalf of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Hundreds of business executives are spending more time on Capitol Hill than at home, and hundreds of factory workers are being pulled off the line to visit members of Congress.
"I think we've done more on Nafta than on any legislative issue in history," said Lawrence A. Bossidy, the chairman of Allied Signal Inc. and the head of USA-Nafta, an umbrella coalition of thousands of companies and trade organizations backing the pact.


Versar Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Autostock Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Publishing Venture Formed By Three Media Executives
Three well-known media executives yesterday announced the formation of Meigher Communications, a limited partnership that will acquire and start new magazines and pursue other publishing ventures.
The executives are S. Christopher Meigher 3d, the former president of Time Inc.'s New York Magazine division; A. Douglas Peabody, a founder of America Online Inc., an interactive computer system, and Dorothy Kalins, the founding editor of Metropolitan Home magazine.


Good Guys Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Court Invalidates a Decade of Blood Test Results in Criminal Cases
Hundreds of blood tests that West Virginia prosecutors have used to link defendants to crime scenes over a 10-year period are now invalid because a former State Police serologist may have fabricated the results, the West Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals has ruled.
At the court's request, an independent team of serologists spent the last five months combing through the testimony of Fred Zain, the State Police serologist from 1979 until 1989.
In the 36 cases it investigated, the team said, it discovered that Mr.
Zain had lied about, made up or manipulated evidence to win convictions in every single case.


Knicks' Offense Taking The Back Seat Again
At some point during each of their four games, the Knicks have struggled offensively.
Some of their lapses have lasted four or five minutes.
Others have lasted an entire quarter.
The season is young and the Knicks are unbeaten, so Pat Riley took a philosophical approach today.
There was no tirade from the coach, there was no three-hour practice.
The Knicks have been hurt by careless turnovers, lack of offensive rebounding and poor shot selection during their dry spells, but those problems can be corrected.


Giuliani Calls on Rabin and Heads for a Respite
After dabbling in foreign policy and marching in the Veterans Day Parade, Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani suspended his post-election sweep of New York City and flew to Puerto Rico last night for a brief vacation.
Before leaving New York, he paid a call on Israel's Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, who is on a visit to the United States.
After the session at the Stanhope Hotel, Mr.
Giuliani said in response to questions from reporters that he thought the life sentence of Jonathan Jay Pollard, an American convicted of spying for Israel in 1987, was "disproportionate to similar cases."


Review/Theater; Iago's Subterfuge Is Made the Truth
In "Desdemona: A Play About a Handkerchief," Paula Vogel's bawdy, thunderingly ironic take on "Othello," the bride of the Moor is everything Iago pretended she was.
Well, worse, actually.
As portrayed with lascivious zeal by J. Smith-Cameron, Desdemona is a bored, promiscuous aristocrat who delights in talking like a fishwife and whiles away idle hours in Cyprus by substituting for the local prostitute.
Michael Cassio, the object of Othello's murderous jealousy, is, it seems, one of the few men in her husband's garrison with whom Desdemona did not bed down.
My, my, my.


Gymboree Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Rehability Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Advanced Deposition Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


For Children
'Chasing Rainbows'
Pushcart Players  Paper Mill Playhouse  Brookside Drive  Millburn, N.J.
(201) 376-4343  Recommended ages: 4 to 10  Tomorrow and Sunday
Kito is a Nigerian girl who wants to fly a kite in a festival during the season of the winds.
Her older siblings laugh and say she's too young.
But Kito has ambitions and slowly gathers enough fabric swatches to make the most original and spectacular kite in the sky.


LDDS Communications (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Senator Targets Bowls
At the request of Senator MITCH McCONNELL, Republican of Kentucky, the United States Justice Department has agreed to look into whether an agreement between a coalition of college conferences and major post-season bowls violates antitrust laws.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  CLINTON SEEKS TO BOLSTER RABIN  President Clinton plans to present Yitzhak Rabin with military and economic aid in a bid to bolster his political standing in Israel as it deals with Syria.
A1  U.N.
ADDS PENALTIES ON LIBYA  The Security Council voted to tighten sanctions on Libya because it has failed to surrender two Libyans accused in the 1988 bombing of a Pan Am airliner over Scotland.
A10


Review/Film; 'The Piano': Love Story With a Twist
"The Piano" was shown as part of the recent New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 16.
The film opens today in Manhattan.
Don't let the mountains of superlatives that have already been heaped on "The Piano" put you off: Jane Campion's 19th-century love story lives up to its advance notices.
Prepare for something very special.


No Headline
The authorities in Ukraine said late Wednesday that the leaders of White Brotherhood cult had been captured, ending two weeks of panic in Kiev, where it had vowed to stage a crucifixion today.
Maria Devi Khristos, who describes herself as the cult's messiah, and Yuri Krivonogov, the cult's reputed mastermind, were arrested along with a group of followers for vandalizing the 11th-century St.
Sophia Cathedral.


Rising Star


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Capitals Win Again  Rick Tabaracci stopped 33 shots and the Washington Capitals won their sixth straight game, a 4-1 victory over the Tampa Bay Lightning last night in St.
Petersburg, Fla.
After losing its first six games of the season, Washington has won nine of its last 10.
Tampa Bay, last in the league with 35 goals, is 0-8-1 in its last nine games.
Peter Bondra opened the scoring by tipping home a shot by Sylvain Cote for a power-play goal 5 minutes 47 second into the game. (AP) Bruins 5, Oilers 1: After snapping a 14-game slide without a victory, Edmonton got back to its losing ways in Boston.
Edmonton goalie Bill Ranford was beaten on a couple of 40-foot shots, and the Bruins outshot the Oilers by 42-28.
The injury-depleted Bruins added a few key players to the trainer's list.
Cam Stewart, who has a probable fracture of his left ring finger, and Ray Bourque, who strained his left shoulder, each missed the third period. (AP)


Power Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Federal Realty Investment Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Delta Natural Gas Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Matter of Time: Punters Hang Alone and Hang Together
After hearing that the Giants had cut punter Sean Landeta, the insecurity and dread that grips most kickers in the National Football League grabbed Louis Aguiar.
The Jets' punter said he thought his phone would ring on Wednesday morning and a voice would tell him to report to Coach Bruce Coslet's office.
Time to Think
"You always think like that when someone has been around the league for eight years and has always been one of the best and gets cut," Aguiar said.
"The team is always going to look to get the best punter around."


American Oil &amp; Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lindros Tears Ligament As the Devils Charge On
The Devils scored a 5-3 victory over the Flyers tonight that hoisted them into a first-place tie with Philadelphia in the Atlantic Division.
But that was not the most significant development of the game.
A knee injury to Eric Lindros that could sideline the towering second-year center of the Flyers for up to six weeks was the focus of attention.
Lindros tore a ligament in his right knee with about five minutes left in the first period on a play to the right of Chris Terreri, the goaltender of the Devils.


Salant Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


First of Michigan Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


U.S. Facilities Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


On My Mind; Female Genital Torture
On Oct. 7, H.R. 3247 was introduced, almost unnoticed, in the House of Representatives.
It is the first Congressional bill to deal with the most widespread existing violation of human rights in the world.
The bill forbids operations to mutilate female genitalia, a torture committed against millions of women abroad.
Some have already taken place in the U.S.


EZCorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Yankees Attain Dubious Advantage Over Jays
Finally, the Yankees have nudged ahead of the Toronto Blue Jays.
Sixteen times after the All-Star Game break last season, the Yankees were tied for first place with the Blue Jays but never could inch in front of the defending champions.
Now, when it no longer counts, the Yankees have edged the Blue Jays by inches, or more literally, dollars.


Art in Review
Konrad Klapheck  Edward Thorp Gallery 103 Prince Street SoHo Through Dec. 22
Konrad Klapheck is a painter of suggestively abbreviated typewriters and sewing machines whose images hover maddeningly between Pop and Surrealism.
He is also a German artist that time, at least Eastern standard time, has forgotten.
In the nearly 25 years since his last exhibition in Manhattan (at the Sidney Janis Gallery), waves of German artists have arrived on these shores, to be hailed and feted, their works bought and sold like hot cakes.
But Mr.
Klapheck, a contemporary of Gerhard Richter and Sigmar Polke, has been all but invisible.


Why Americans Distrust Clinton on Trade Pact
To the Editor:
James Carville, Bill Clinton's 1992 campaign manager, of all people, should know better than to waste his time joining Tony Snow, a George Bush speechwriter, pontificating on behalf of the North American Free Trade Agreement (Op-Ed, Nov. 2).
Mr.
Carville should have spent that time reminding his President of the reasons Americans fear the agreement to begin with, and telling him what to do about it.


Goldwyn (Samuel) Co. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kentucky Electric Steel Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Consulier Engineering Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fingerprint System Extends Arm of the Law
They thought they had gotten away with murder: the intruders who shot a Houston minister in his home in 1991; the man in Miami who ambushed a police officer in 1981; the one in Los Angeles who in 1963 strangled and bludgeoned a waitress during a burglary and attempted rape.
In each case there were no witnesses and nothing to connect the killers to the victims.
There were, however, fingerprints.
But investigators knew that it might take days, weeks, sometimes months, to identify the prints' owner -- assuming they were on file.


More Cubans Coming
The RENE AROCHA pipeline is still active.
Two more defecting Cuban baseball players arrived this week in Los Angeles, home of GUS DOMINGUEZ, the agent who represents the St.
Louis Cardinals pitcher who defected two years ago.
The new arrivals are LUIS ALVAREZ, 24, a power-hitting first baseman, and OSVALDO FERNANDEZ, 23, a left-handed pitcher with an impressive screwball.


Art in Review
Noriyuki Haraguchi
Akira Ikeda  130 Prince Street  SoHo  Through Nov. 20
The Japanese sculptor Noriyuki Haraguchi's particular gift is for making an elegant -- sometimes too elegant -- thing of industrial forms and materials, as he has demonstrated in two consecutive solo exhibitions, his first in New York.


Tapping a Rich Smoking Frontier
Andreas Gembler, the head of the Philip Morris International tobacco operations in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, points to a simple statistic to explain the company's decision to sink nearly $1 billion into the region after the collapse of Communism.
About 700 billion cigarettes are sold there annually, making the market 40 percent larger than that of the United States.
"No industry can ignore the consumer in this part of the world," Mr. Gembler said.


No Rest for Weary on L.I.: Joey 'n' Amy Show Is Back
ROLF V. MAHLER cannot pinpoint precisely when he became overJoeyed.
It might have been the first time he peered out the window of his real-estate office, across the street from Joseph Buttafuoco's auto body shop, to watch a car stop and its occupants shout, "Hey, Joey, Joey, Joey!" Or it might have been the day he arrived at work to find his tiny parking lot commandeered by a fleet of television trucks.
Or maybe, just maybe, it is a psychological threshold Mr.
Mahler continues to cross every time he turns on the set or picks up a paper or flips open a magazine and sees that face, that now-famous face.


American Vanguard (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday, about the case of a 12-year-old girl missing since August, located the abduction site incorrectly in some copies.
It is Litchfield, N.Y., not Connecticut.


G.M. Gives Its Salaried Staff Raises
The General Motors Corporation, acknowledging unrest among salaried workers about the erosion of pay and benefits, announced a pay package for them today meant to match some gains made by hourly workers represented by the United Automobile Workers union.
The package -- $1,600 lump-sum payments for each worker and an average 5 percent salary increase -- was announced on the same day the U.A.W. said it had ratified a new three-year contract with G.M., with 71.5 percent of the members approving the pact.


Clinton Bars Leader of I.R.A.'s Political Wing
President Clinton has refused to approve a visa for the leader of the political wing of the I.R.A. to visit New York, citing a law that excludes terrorists from entering the United States, The Irish Times reported today.
In a letter to Mayor David N. Dinkins, who had sought permission to invite Gerry Adams to New York at the urging of pro-I.R.A.
Irish-Americans, Mr.
Clinton said "credible evidence exists that Adams remains involved at the highest level in devising strategy" for the I.R.A.


Rivals and G.O.P. Allies Voice Disdain for Rollins
Edward J. Rollins stood on a street corner on Capitol Hill a few days after last week's elections, reveling in the accolades after engineering one of the biggest comebacks in American politics: his own.
His candidate, Christine Todd Whitman, had beaten all the odds in her upset defeat of Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey.
Mr.
Rollins joked that he would be a rich man because the Friday before Election Day, at a party in Washington, he bet several friends "hundreds of dollars" that Mrs.
Whitman would win.


Navigators Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sports of The Times; Acknowledge The Past; Pass It On
RITUAL?
Well, no.
Willard Ward wouldn't describe what she and her husband do as a ritual.
Call it nurturing.
Just two parents putting their child at ease.
Whether it was that first trip to the dentist, the first day of school.
Or the college football game of the year.
It's all the same.


Little Trading For Treasuries
Most bond traders took a holiday yesterday in observance of Veterans Day, so activity in the credit markets was subdued.
The New York cash market in United States Government securities was closed.
But trading did take place overseas and at the Chicago Board of Trade, where Treasury bond futures contracts are traded.


Review/Photography; William Eggleston's Reticent Style
In his marvelous exhibition now at the Robert Miller Gallery, William Eggleston demonstrates once again his mastery of the photographic equivalent of alchemy, by which he is able to make complex and fascinating pictures out of not much.
Mr.
Eggleston and his work have been the subjects of considerable disagreement since his first show at the Museum of Modern Art, in 1976.
In writing about that show, John Szarkowski, then the head of the Modern's department of photography, hailed Mr.
Eggleston as a pioneer of a new kind of color photography.
But critics were less enthusiastic, as were many photographers who had been working in color for years before Mr.
Eggleston's arrival.
"Banal" and "snapshots" were among the milder epithets applied to his seemingly casual images of Memphis and its surroundings.


Thousands Turn Out for Parade in Honor of Nation's Veterans
Among the thousands who lined a sun-splashed Fifth Avenue yesterday to watch the Veterans Day Parade were students from several classes at Public School 40 in Manhattan who would normally have been off from school because of the holiday.
Although Veterans Day usually means a day off for the 1 million public-school students in New York City, this year was different.
Trying to make up for the delayed opening of school caused by the asbestos crisis, the city's Board of Education decided to make the holiday a school day.
Other city workers had the day off.


LSB Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Crop Genetics International Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Home Video
Prospects of pay-per-view systems that deliver movies at the touch of a keypad understandably roil the dealers of goods that have to be lugged to and from the video store.
Pay-per-view may not be much of a force right now (less than 5 percent of the video market, by some estimates), but retailers are always wary of the competition.
This week, for example, the Video Software Dealers Association asserted that pay-per-view was particularly vulnerable to video piracy through the use of altered cable converters, mounted on the top of television sets.
The devices, called black boxes, unscramble signals and enable illegal access to movies and other programming.


Both Factions Are Rethinking S.I. Secession After the Vote
In the days since Staten Islanders voted to continue their march toward secession from New York City, a striking reversal of political situations has occurred.
Some Staten Islanders, who on the same day they voted to leave played a vital role in electing the city's new Mayor, have new reason to think twice about whether to go it alone.
At the same time, some supporters of Mayor David N. Dinkins who opposed secession now have reason to think twice about whether to try to hold onto a borough that helped oust their Mayor.


Leisure Concepts reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


When Lafayette Gave France the Tricolor
To the Editor:
In "French Tricolor Owes a Lot to the Dutch" (letter, Nov. 3), Eric Laenen states that "the French revolutionaries took the model and colors for their 'flag without feudal gew-gaws' from the Netherlands flag, shifting the Dutch horizontal stripes into vertical bands." Mr.
Laenen ventures a questionable explanation, and omits the drama and political significance in the tricolor's creation.
In the months following the fall of the Bastille on July 14, 1789, Marie Joseph Yves Gilbert du Motier, the Marquis de Lafayette of American fame, was commander of the Garde Nationale and perhaps the most powerful man in Paris.
A revolutionary who appreciated the power of symbols, Lafayette needed a new one around which Parisians could rally.


CHRONICLE
After canceling several concerts in Mexico City, MICHAEL JACKSON called a halt to all that remained of his worldwide "Dangerous" tour.
The tour has been a tough time for the singer, who has been accused of molesting by a teen-age boy in Los Angeles.
He canceled several concerts on the tour for various health problems.
Now, The Associated Press reports, he says the pressure became so great that he turned to prescription painkillers left over from his recent reconstructive scalp surgery.


Andrew Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


H. R. Haldeman, Nixon Aide Who Had Central Role in Watergate, Is Dead at 67
H.
R.
Haldeman, who spent 18 months in prison for his involvement in the Watergate scandal but said he believed his role as President Richard M. Nixon's chief of staff was the "mountaintop experience" of his life, died yesterday at his home in Santa Barbara, Calif.
He was 67.
A son, Hank, said that the cause was an abdominal tumor and that his father had been ill for a month.


High-Tech Death From Winchester
America is already the most murderous nation in the industrialized world.
The Olin Corporation's Winchester Ammunition Division has stepped up the slaughter by making a bullet equipped with claws.
Imagine it: a razor-fingered bullet that grinds up internal organs and threatens the doctors who try to remove it.
The victim dies a rapid, bloody death.
The doctors risk getting AIDS from cuts on their hands.
This grotesquely destructive bullet -- Winchester calls it the Black Talon -- represents a particularly ugly brand of corporate irresponsibility.
It's also a danger to public health.
Winchester, if it has any decency at all, will withdraw it from production.
Beyond that, Congress needs to ban such bullets from the market.


Mothers Work Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Some Wounds Were Accidental, Expert Testifies in Nanny Case
A child-abuse expert, testifying in the case of a 10-month-old who suffered a fatal skull fracture while in a nanny's care, said in a pretrial hearing today that bruises the child received on two prior occasions appeared accidental but that she could not say the same about the injury that took his life.
The expert, Dr.
Linda Cahill of Montefiore Hospital in the Bronx, said the fatal injury, because it had not been fully explained, showed "a high degree of suspicion for child abuse."


Acmat Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.91
2.85
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.09
3.10
3.07
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.22
3.25
3.33
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.22
5.27
6.44
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.15
6.20
7.52
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.22
7.27
8.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.60
5.61
6.40
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Employee Pension Plans Can Suffer From Neglect
WHEN R. Theodore Benna happened upon an obscure paragraph in the tax code 13 years ago, he made a discovery that would drastically alter pension planning in America.
"I had no idea" how big it would become, Mr.
Benna, then a little-known benefits consultant in Bucks County, Pa., said in a recent interview.
His discovery -- section 401(k) -- led to a type of pension plan that has since attracted hundreds of billions of dollars in employee retirement savings.
By the year 2000, these worker-financed plans -- the fastest-growing of defined-contribution pensions -- will be America's "largest source of personal wealth," Mr.
Benna predicts.


Classical Music in Review
David Korevaar  Pianist Alice Tully Hall
Imagine a program of piano transcriptions of orchestral music by Liszt, and you might envision billions and billions of notes raining down on a paltry 10 wearying and increasingly gnarled fingers.
The reality was different on Wednesday evening, when David Korevaar smoothly played his own transcriptions of "Orpheus" and "Festklange" and Liszt's of the "Mephisto Waltzes" Nos. 1 and 2, and the Gretchen movement from the "Faust" Symphony.
Mr.
Korevaar stressed intimacy where he could find it and rendered bravura passages with an unshowy facility.


Manya Davidson Novik, Political Campaigner, 87
Manya Davidson Novik, who was active in political campaigns in New York for more than 50 years, died on Thursday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 87.
The cause was cancer, her family said.


American Technical Ceramics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic  Avery Fisher Hall
Beginning the New York Philharmonic's second annual Conductor Debut Week on Thursday evening, Carl St.
Clair was impressive where his services were most needed, in the two big armfuls of music on the second half of the program.
In Ginastera's "Variaciones Concertantes" and Ravel's "Daphnis et Chloe" Suite No. 2, Mr.
St.
Clair, who is music director of the Pacific Symphony Orchestra in Santa Ana, Calif., showed a fine care for textural balances and a good sense of pacing.
Of the many soloists in the two works, Cynthia Phelps, the principal violist, was especially fine.


Bridge
The oldest established permanent floating bridge game in New York is played Monday nights and is in its 40th year.
It is a cut-around team game, and in 1991 it floated from the defunct Cavendish Club to the Town Club at 9 East 86th Street.
The diagramed deal was played there three months ago, and both South players reached four spades after East had opened three clubs.
East won the first two tricks in that suit, and at one table Jack Sonneblick shifted to a heart and settled the issue.


Pyramid Scheme a Trap for Many Romanians
For more than a year, a fraudulent financial scheme involving about three million Romanians paid 800 percent profits to investors who deposited money for three months.
These newly rich spent lavishly on previously unimaginable luxuries like refrigerators, washing machines and even vacations abroad.
But for the last several weeks, the Ponzi-style pyramid scheme, which economists say has pulled in the equivalent of $1 billion to $5 billion, has failed to pay back anything.
Tens of thousands of Romanians, who live in one of Eastern Europe's grimmest economies, face losing their meager savings, while the scheme's founder is said to have stashed away as much as $40 million.
Government officials, fearful of riots and protests, are reluctant to stop it.


Intercargo Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Dance; Movement and Song in 24 Short Works
Iso was founded by dancers.
But a program it presented on Tuesday night, opening a weeklong season at the Joyce Theater, suggested that the company is no longer as involved with dance or physical theater as it was at its start six years ago.
Now called Isobobs, by virtue of its collaboration with a quartet of singers called the Bobs, Iso also appears to be running out of steam.
The program of 24 smooth-flowing short pieces opened with the dramatic "In the Beginning," which immediately establishes that singers and dancers are of equal importance here and that visual effects are another important ingredient.
Most of the effects that follow are not so well conceived or executed, but there is undeniable power in the eerie shadow dancers who step through the paper backdrop in the opening number.


Spectrum Information Technologies Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reorganization Has Familiar Ring at Queens High School
Educational innovation is already proceeding at Andrew Jackson High School in Cambria Heights, Queens, one of two high schools in the city that Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines wants to phase out over the next four years.
Whether the school, which has 2,347 students, will maintain its name remains to be determined, officials said yesterday.
But the doors of the stately, three-story beige building on Francis Lewis Boulevard will still be open after the transformation.
It is the business of learning that will be different for a school that in 1991 saw only 174 students graduate, only 10 with diplomas endorsed by the State Board of Regents.


Review/Opera; A Nymph in Forbidden Realms of Desire
At the end of the Metropolitan Opera premiere of Dvorak's "Rusalka" on Thursday night, the water nymph of the opera's title slowly wrapped her diaphanous gown around the prince who had betrayed her love.
There was little doubt about the consequences of her subsequent kiss -- the legends about this fatal attraction are clear -- but in this exceptional performance of the lush opera, the death of the prince and Rusalka's sinking below the lake's surface were startlingly powerful.
Dvorak alluded to Wagner in these scenes, almost quoting "Tristan," while creating his own distinctive love-death.
Gabriela Benackova, who has made a specialty of the role of Rusalka, gave a performance that had classic status.
One wasn't conscious of individual notes, only of eloquently shaped phrases.
She sang with a natural ease that carried great authority, giving an unearthly vulnerability to her character; one chromatic sigh seemed to hover in space.
This performance was, if anything, more supple than that on her recent recording of the work on Supraphon.


Tide West Oil (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Orbit International Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Giuliani Begins Search for New Police Commissioner
Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday called the selection of a police commissioner one of his highest priorities and put his search into motion, naming Howard Wilson, a former assistant United States Attorney, to lead a nine-member committee to screen candidates.
Mr.
Giuliani, a former Federal prosecutor who made crime-fighting a cornerstone of his campaign, said he hoped to name his commissioner by Thanksgiving.
"There's so much public discussion of it," he said.
"We have to make it one of the first priorities."


Partners in Space, Not Rivals
Those who remember the terror raised in American hearts when the Soviet Union launched its first sputnik satellite in 1957, triggering the superpower race to the moon, should be pleased and relieved that the two nations are now moving toward close collaboration in building and operating the world's next space station.
The addition of Russians to a venture that already includes Europe, Japan and Canada would produce a bigger, better, cheaper space station ready to operate two years earlier than now planned.
More important, it should help focus Russia's aerospace industry and engineers on peaceful projects rather than the sale of missiles and other space hardware to nations that might use them for weapons.


Little Voices Roar in the Chorus of Trade-Pact Foes
President Clinton has been going after Big Labor for orchestrating a campaign against the North American Free Trade Agreement.
But Big Labor, meaning the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s bureaucracy in Washington and most of the 33 union presidents who lead it, is the least of his problems.


Ranger Oil reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gish Biomedical (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Trade Pact Byproduct: $10 Million in TV Ads
"It's a bad deal," the narrator intones in a commercial from the A.F.L.-C.I.O.
"Nafta will cost America 500,000 jobs."
Lee A. Iacocca says in an advertisement sponsored by big business: "It's a no-brainer. If we say yes to Nafta, we say yes to jobs."


Erskine Hawkins, 79, Trumpeter And a Composer of the Swing Era
Erskine Hawkins, the band leader, trumpeter and composer whose band was best known for its renditions of "Tuxedo Junction," "After Hours" and "Tippin' In," died on Thursday at his home in Willingboro, N.J.
He was 79.
The cause was heart failure, said his nephew, John Hawkins.


Sound Advice Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article on Thursday about Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani's plans concerning Staten Island secession and New York's budget problems referred incorrectly to the projected budget gap for the current fiscal year.
While State Comptroller H. Carl McCall estimated that the current year's budget is out of balance by about $650 million, he also said that a $125 million surplus from last year and a reserve fund of about $280 million would offset part of that shortfall.
Thus the new Mayor will have to cover a shortfall of about $246 million, according to the State Comptroller's office, not the entire $650 million.


Employee Benefit Plans Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


N.H.L. Referees Reject Contract
National Hockey League referees and linesmen unanimously rejected a contract offer yesterday and plan to go on strike after tomorrow night's games.
If they do, they will be replaced, temporarily at least, by amateur and minor league officials.
Gary Bettman, the N.H.L. commissioner, said the substitute referees would skate with radio receivers on their bodies and listening plugs in their ears so they could hear instructions broadcast to them from supervisors in the stands.


Cinemark USA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Transportation Department's proposal to ban radar detectors on 2.5 million big trucks misstated the laws of Illinois and New York.
In both states, radar detectors are illegal in commercial trucks weighing more than 18,000 pounds but are legal in cars.


Basic Petroleum International Ltd. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


International Totalizator Systems Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Beliefs
Fourteen years ago, Jack Stack, a brash 29-year-old production manager, was sent by International Harvester to take charge of a plant in Springfield, Mo., that remade heavy-duty engines.
The plant was failing.
The workers were demoralized, and productivity was dismal.
Mr.
Stack's assignment: shape it up or close it.
By 1993, the plant, incorporated as Springfield Remanufacturing, had grown to 750 employees from 170 in 1979.
Annual sales rose to $73 million from $21 million in the same period.


Irish Hope Faith Can Still Move Mountain
When Lou Holtz, the Notre Dame coach, has spoken to his players about the challenge posed by Florida State, the consensus No. 1 team in the nation, he has not been merely saying things his players want to hear.
He is also saying the things they came here to hear.
In a surprising Notre Dame season, as the work of departed, established stars has been replaced by recently discovered ones, one of the basic tenets that has defined this university -- faith -- will again be applied to the smash-mouth business built around an afternoon of nationally televised collisions for fun and profit.


American Cities Occupy a Strange Legal Limbo; Staten Island Alone
To the Editor:
The last word on Staten Island secession, if there is one, will most likely come from the courts, not the State Legislature and the Governor.
The 1989 law that set the secession process in motion was challenged at the time by New York City, which claimed that a process wherein only Staten Island residents would vote on the question of secession, without the city's consent or citywide voter participation, violated the "home rule" provision of the State Constitution, as well as constitutional guarantees of equal protection.


3 Ex-Presidents Join the Debate On Puerto Rico
Aware that Puerto Rico's fate is ultimately in Washington's hands, the two main political parties here have been busy recruiting allies from the mainland to support their opposing stands in Sunday's plebiscite, in which the voters will decide whether they want the commonwealth to become the 51st state.
Among those tapped to help plead the case for statehood are three former Republican Presidents: George Bush, Ronald Reagan and Gerald R. Ford.
Puerto Rico has been blanketed with television advertisements featuring the former Presidents voicing support for Gov.
Pedro J. Rossello and the pro-statehood New Progressive Party.


Dick Clark Productions Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


IWC Resources Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Russians Discover Capitalism's Harsher Realities
The 30 pensioners dining on a free meal at the Center for Social Protection in Moscow's Kuzminki region were complaining loudly about life since the collapse of Communism, when the waitress interrupted them.
"What are you griping about?" demanded Natasha, a stout 33-year-old already missing a few teeth.
"You are old, your life is behind you, you already have what you need. We're the ones who are the castoffs of society. Just imagine, if you can, raising a child on 15,000 rubles a month. But then, nobody thinks of us."


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball National Basketball Association  DALLAS MAVERICKS -- Signed Chucky Brown, forward, to a one-year contract.
Placed Randy White, forward, on the injured list.
Football  National Football League  LOS ANGELES RAMS -- Signed Sean Landeta, punter.
Waived Paul McJulien, punter.


Mexican Mine Interest On the Block
Asarco Inc., a major American mining company, said yesterday that it expected to be able to sell a portion of its stake in Grupo Mexico, one of the largest mining and mineral producers in the world, when that company joined the ranks of at least 30 other Mexican concerns whose shares are now traded on United States exchanges.
The Mexican concern, whose full name is Grupo Industrial Minera Mexico, S.A. de C.V., plans an international offering in the near future, although the company and Asarco executives declined to specify on what exchange the shares would be traded.
At present, Grupo Mexico shares are only traded on Mexico's stock exchange, the Bolsa.


Family Doctors Gain a Niche in New York
Dr.
John Falencki is an anomaly in a city teeming with specialists, where patients see orthopedists for ankle sprains and neurologists for headaches.
One of the few physicians in New York City with a full service family practice, Dr.
Falencki's patients include 9-day-old infants and 90-year-old great-grandmothers.
He does childhood immunizations, Pap smears and minor surgery.
Ten years ago Dr.
Falencki would have been seen as a dinosaur doomed to extinction.
But today, as health policy experts in Washington have emphasized the need for comprehensive primary care, he and others like him are regarded as a new vanguard.
After years of struggling, they have gained new respect and their practices are thriving.


NPM Healthcare reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


U.S. INVESTIGATING CLAIMS OF PAYOFFS BY WHITMAN STAFF
The United States Department of Justice and the office of the New Jersey Attorney General each began criminal investigations today into claims that Republicans funneled money into urban areas to suppress the black vote in the Nov. 2 election for governor.
An official in the Clinton Administration with knowledge of the case said today that within the next few days, Federal prosecutors would be likely to issue subpoenas compelling officials on the campaign team of Christine Todd Whitman, the Governor-elect, to turn over financial records.


Critic's Notebook; Parody, Not Smut, Has Rappers in Court
As a rap group, the 2 Live Crew is strictly mediocre.
But when it comes to raising constitutional issues, Luther Campbell's group approaches genius.
On Tuesday, the Crew had its moment before the Supreme Court of the United States.
The arguments were not related to the rappers' usual specialty, obscenity battles, but to the twilight zone of copyright law, "fair use."
Fair use is the quotation of copyrighted material (words, music, images) for purposes like criticism, news reporting, scholarship and parody, as long as that use does not usurp the market for the copyrighted original.


Good Retail Sales Data Help Dow Climb 22.08
Propelled by another report of good economic news, the stock market bounded ahead yesterday in a rally led by issues that have foundered for much of the year.
Investors flocked to forest-products, tobacco and other cyclical stocks, whose earnings are sensitive to the pace of the recovery.


Review/Theater; Honing Survival Skills in a Southern Town
Skoolie's legs may be paralyzed from a childhood fall from a tree, but she is far from incapacitated.
She has a strong mind and strong convictions.
She has a way with children.
She can style hair.
And she can perform abortions.
Skoolie is the most vivid of the three black women whose lives and problems are the focus of "Come Down Burning," a drama by Kia Corthron at the American Place Theater.
It is a work that sketches the impact of poverty and prejudice on the lives of the women and their children.


Telemundo Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Graver Jackson's Cry: Overcome the Violence!
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson's star has dimmed a bit.
At 52, he is graying at the temples, and his heart seems heavier than it was in the 1970's, when he sought to sway a generation of black teen-agers to believe, and repeat, "I am somebody." When he talks with teen-agers these days, it is not about the promise of tomorrow but about the dangers of today.
"Stop the violence!" Mr. Jackson thunders. "Save the children!"


Want to Avoid Squabbles Over the Silver? Try Putting a Personal Touch in Your Will
A will studded with personal concerns and instructions to heirs was once commonplace.
"It was as much a personal statement as it was about the passing of property," said Alexander A. Bove Jr., an estate lawyer in Boston.
Yet increasingly, people focus solely on the distribution of assets.
"The money has become more important than the communication," said Kathleen Gurney, a psychologist and founder of the Financial Psychology Corporation of Cincinnati.


Classical Music in Review
Chitose Okashiro  Pianist Weill Recital Hall
Chitose Okashiro, a Japanese pianist who studied at the Juilliard and Manhattan schools, is the director of artists and repertory for the new Pro Piano New York Recital series, a program that presents young pianists in their New York debuts.
Miss Okashiro offered her own New York debut recital on Wednesday evening, not under auspices of her series, but as part of the competing Artists International series.


Tofino Journal; Two Towns Do Battle Over Canada's Rain Forest
"It's barbaric what they're doing," Norleen Lillico, a shopkeeper, said, arguing against the decision by British Columbia's government to allow logging in the formerly protected rain forest on the craggy west coast of Vancouver Island.
"The wild places on earth are rare enough and threatened and must be protected," she said with serene firmness behind the counter of her natural foods shop, Organic Matters, on Tofino's main commercial street, a few hundred feet from Duffin Cove.


Amplicon Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Another Kind of Challenge; For Many Who Don't Run, the Marathon Still Offers a Serious Contest: Marketing
There has been a lot of talk of finishing times and "hitting the wall." Plenty of people have speculated about the seven-figure turnout of fans.
But who has considered the 30,000 sponges?


Unions' Bid For United Is Rejected
The unions representing United Airlines' pilots and machinists ended their five-month effort to buy a majority stake in the carrier last night, a move likely to usher in a period of tumultuous labor strife as the airline seeks to restructure and lower costs with broad layoffs.
The talks collapsed after the two sides traded last-minute proposals and counterproposals that both eventually found unacceptable.


Drechsler Gets Threat
The German track star HEIKE DRECHSLER has received a death threat from the home region of the man who stabbed the tennis star MONICA SELES, Drechsler's coach said yesterday.
ERICH DRECHSLER, who is also Heike's father-in-law, said the threat came after the long jumper made a comment about STEFFI GRAF's earnings.
A Graf fan stabbed Seles April 30 in Hamburg, Germany.


United Guardian Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rise in October Retail Sales Confirms Recovery's Vigor
Shoppers spent 1.5 percent more in October, the seventh straight gain and the biggest since April, the Census Bureau reported today.
The greater-than-expected advance, which lifted sales to $177.32 billion, was strong confirmation that the economy had gained momentum since late summer.
It was also regarded by some as a sign of at least a satisfactory holiday season.


Nationalism Turns Sour in Croatia
Since Croatia separated from Yugoslavia in 1991, its economy has been bled by war and its reputation soiled as Croatian militias have joined in dismembering Bosnia.
This small, poor and unstable country desperately needs friends.
Yet its leaders, notably President Franjo Tudjman, seem destructively bent on reviving the memory of Zagreb's zealous collaboration with Nazi Germany during World War II.
What makes this more baffling is that Mr.
Tudjman fought against Hitler, and his brother was killed by the Germans.
Then why does he go out of his way to link present-day Croatia with the Fascist Ustashe regime installed in Zagreb by Hitler's Reich?
At Mr.
Tudjman's instigation, Croatia calls its new currency the kuma, the name used during the Ustashe years.
Croatia's new coat of arms closely resembles the symbol of the Ustashe state.
And Mr.
Tudjman not only defends the reputation of surviving Ustashe leaders, but has named one to a seat in Parliament, and another as his Ambassador to Argentina.


Mets-Indians Talks On Saberhagen Stall
Negotiations between the Mets and the Indians on a trade that would have sent pitcher BRET SABERHAGEN to Cleveland and returned a shortstop and first baseman to the Mets appear to be dead, the teams said yesterday.
"There are other teams we are further along with, and I haven't spoken to the Mets in a week," said General Manager JOHN HART of the Indians.
"We also have started to look at free-agent pitchers."


Bad Times Get Worse at Bronx High School as Closing Looms
For David Bossman, a teacher at James Monroe High School, the issue is simple.
The way things are taught inside the red-brick building in the East Tremont section of the Bronx has remained the same year after year, while things in the community continue to decline.
Too many students, he said, are falling into the gap between the two visions of the world.
"The traditional classroom of 25 students is not working in inner cities," Mr.
Bossman said, as teachers and students gathered around him yesterday afternoon.
"You have kids growing up in a mine field. They hear shots in the night, fathers are not in the home, they are surrounded by failure and drugs. They haven't had an opportunity to see a degree of success because the job opportunites are virtually nil. Everything around the school has changed and nothing in the school has changed."


American Cities Occupy a Strange Legal Limbo
To the Editor:
"Tax Fairness for D.C." (editorial, Oct. 30) is right on the mark.
While Washington's "colonial character," as you put it, is unique in some ways, the lack of control over everyday budget decisions in virtually all of America's cities is very similar to that in the District of Columbia.
America was not an urban country in 1787.
As a result, the Constitution created a Federal system of government where cities were, and continue to remain, invisible.


QVC Raises Its Offer for Paramount
Armed with a fresh infusion of cash from the BellSouth Corporation, QVC Network Inc. increased its hostile bid for Paramount Communications yesterday to $90 a share in cash and stock.
That gives QVC the edge in its vicious bidding war with Viacom Inc., Paramount's hand-picked merger partner, which valued its bid at $85 a share in cash and stock.


ARI Holdings Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Diagnostic/Retrieval Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Judge Rules Networks Can Own Shows
A Federal judge in Los Angeles has opened the way for the three big television networks to own a financial interest in all of the programs they broadcast.
Judge Manuel Real issued the decision in a letter dated Monday and received late yesterday by studio executives in Hollywood.
The decision apparently eliminated the last barriers in the 20-year-old Federal regulations that had prevented ABC, CBS and NBC from acquiring a percentage of the profits of programs produced for them.


Just Toys reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Classical Music in Review
Bella Davidovich  Pianist Carnegie Hall
Bella Davidovich was suffering from a cold Tuesday night, and came out on stage 15 minutes late.
The Mozart Piano Sonata No. 12 in F, first on her program, seemed ill-focused and jumpy, with accents landing too abruptly in the first movement and the lyric line of the Adagio obscured.
But from there on, Ms.
Davidovich recovered concentration and delivered some remarkably well-shaped readings of shorter pieces by Brahms and Chopin.
The Brahms Intermezzos, Op. 117, were the high point: slow, elegant, perfectly poised and expressive in an understated manner.


Kloster Cruise Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Berlitz International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Top Growth Funds Load Up on Small Stocks
Growth funds typically own stocks in established companies, with a median market capitalization of $5 billion.
Those holdings make the funds less risky investments than small-company funds, which often own shares issued by new businesses with market caps of $1 billion or less.
Still, the most successful growth funds the last three years have moved toward small-company stocks, benefiting enormously from the bull market in that sector.
Unlike other growth funds, these winners own stocks with much smaller median market caps, of $500 million to $2 billion.
And Parnassus, which screens investments based on social criteria, primarily owns risky technology stocks.


Germany to Pay Victims in AIDS Blood Scandal
Germany's Health Minister announced a plan today to give up to 2,000 marks, or $1,176, a month to people who had been infected by inadequately inspected blood products with the virus that causes AIDS.
The official, Horst Seehofer, repeated advice to people who feared that they had been contaminated to have themselves tested for the virus, and said his ministry would also tighten Government controls on blood and plasma after a scandal in which two German companies have been charged with distributing tainted blood.


Young Returns, Restless No More
Lonnie Young can't remember who threw the pass in practice that day last week.
Was it Boomer Esiason?
Did it matter?
Not to Young.
Young, a Jets safety, saw a window of opportunity open when he picked off his teammates' pass.
The interception meant everything.
It meant immediate confidence.


Bill Dickey, the Yankee Catcher And Hall of Famer, Dies at 86
Bill Dickey, a Hall of Fame catcher and a member of the New York Yankees as a player, manager and coach during four decades, died Friday night at Rose Care Nursing Center in Little Rock, Ark.
He was 86.
A cause of death wasn't available, a funeral home spokesman said.
Rated by many as the finest all-round catcher in the history of the sport, Dickey was one of the brightest stars of Yankee teams that held sway over the American League between World War I and World War II.


Chester Holdings Ltd. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Business Digest
Companies
A Federal judge cleared the way for the three big television networks to own a financial interest in all of the programs they broadcast.
The decision was a blow for Hollywood studios, which had hoped to keep the networks from sharing in the profits from the programs they produce for television.  [ Page 39. ]


Southwest Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A brief report in Business Day on Wednesday, about a $500 million debt offering by the CNA Financial Corporation, misidentified the lead manager of its underwriters.
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company headed the underwriting group; Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette participated.


Federal Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Frontier Insurance Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Royal Dutch/Shell Group of Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
Scouting the Top Teams Here are the scouting reports for today's top high school football games in the Catholic High Schools Football League, Public Schools Athletic League, on Long Island and in New Jersey.
Records in parentheses.
C.H.S.F.L.
St.
Anthony's (8-1) vs.
Mount St.
Michael (6-2), semifinals, at St.
John's Univ., 10:30 A.M.
Key Players: Both teams have dominant running games led by their fullbacks: Tony Williams (138 carries for 1,398 yards, 15 touchdowns) of St.
Anthony and Homero Radway of Mount St.
Michael (117 carries for 786 yards, 6 touchdowns) getting most of the handoffs.
Dan Shea (75 carries for 657 yards, 10 touchdowns) is the perfect complement to Williams's rushing, as is Joseph Ward (51 carries for 328 yards, 6 touchdowns) to Radway.
Comment: If you like teams that throw, skip this one and go to the second game of the doubleheader: Chaminade and Farrell at St John's.
Both the Mount and St.
Anthony's quarterbacks have averaged fewer than six passes a game.


2 Defendants In Bomb Case Try Suicide
Two defendants in the World Trade Center bombing case cut themselves with razors, and one of the two tried to hang himself with a torn bedsheet in suicide attempts in their cells in the Metropolitan Correctional Center on Thursday, defense lawyers said yesterday.
Both men, Ahmad M. Ajaj, a 27-year-old Palestinian, and Bilal Alkaisi, a 27-year-old Jordanian, were revived without serious injury, the lawyers said, but a Federal prison spokesman said the incidents set off a disruption by other inmates that had to be quieted by corrections officers.


Early Morning Reverie in Chinatown


A Bad Bill for the Poor
The New York State Assembly plans to vote next week on a bill that would cut back affordable housing for New York's poor.
The bill would require contractors to pay so-called prevailing wages on "public works." That might sound innocent enough -- except that prevailing wages mean high union wages, and the definition of public works has been expanded well beyond its usual meaning of schools and bridges to include private projects, like low-cost housing, that receive tax and other public subsidies.
The bill would raise the cost of construction, undermining community groups who scrape together public and private funds to build low-cost housing.
And it would wipe out many small contractors who survive by hiring low-cost, nonunion labor and, in any case, wouldn't be able to deal with the enormous paperwork.
That's why minority contractors have organized to defeat the bill.


Ads for Postal Service Win the Big Game
Viewers of today's NBC telecast of the battle between Florida State and Notre Dame for the No. 1 ranking in college football will also see a few shots fired in the war being waged in the overnight mail business.
The United States Postal Service will be offering its services over those of its private-industry rivals in six 30-second commercials for its Express Mail and Priority Mail services.


For Early Warnings On Children's Vision
To the Editor:
We read with great interest Jane Brody's Nov. 3 Personal Health column about the need for early visual assessment of children and were delighted that she publicized the new guidelines of the American Academy of Pediatrics.
We would like to point out that several tests have been developed for early visual screening of infants, toddlers and older nonverbal children.
The pediatric visual assessment service at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center uses these tests to screen vision in infants and young children.


Clinton Extends an Unusual Offer to Republicans on the Pact
Administration officials worked today to nail down a solid base of support for the North American Free Trade Agreement as members of Congress returned to their home districts to face constituents this weekend.
President Clinton even promised to defend any Republican incumbent against a Democratic challengers' attack if it was based on the incumbent's vote for Nafta, as the trade agreement is known.


Sabatini Loses Momentum And the Match to Frazier
Gabriela Sabatini was hoping her new coaching alignment with Argentina's other most vaunted tennis export, Guillermo Vilas, would deliver her from a 24-tournament slump.
Instead, she was upset, 2-6, 6-3, 7-5, by Amy Frazier tonight in the quarterfinals of the Virginia Slims of Philadelphia.
Sabatini said her inability to follow a Vilas dictum and step up the intensity once she takes a lead cost her the match.


CHRONICLE
RONALD K. SHELP, the president and chief executive of the New York City Partnership and of the New York City Chamber of Commerce and Industry, has a particular fondness for the works of self-taught artists.
On Monday, Mr.
Shelp will give a party in his Greenwich Village apartment for one such artist, THORNTON DIAL SR., who is having exhibitions that open on Tuesday at the New Museum for Contemporary Art in SoHo and the Museum of American Folk Art near Lincoln Center.
And "Thornton Dial: Image of the Tiger," a book about Mr.
Dial, a laborer from Bessemer, Ala., who can neither read nor write, has just been published by Abrams.


Kenwin Shops Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


No More 'Probable': Hampton Is a Certainty
Rodney Hampton's burden for the first third of the season was great.
He shouldered dozens of rushes a game, led the No. 1 ground game in the National Football League and lifted the Giants to an unbeaten record.
The burden of late has amounted to carrying himself from trainer's room to surgeon's table to empty Sunday afternoons on the sidelines.


Calian Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


C.I.A. Considers Allowing Sale of Spy Technology
The Central Intelligence Agency is considering giving its consent to commercial sales of spy satellite equipment and images, agency officials said today.
While no final decisions have been made, R. James Woolsey, the Director of Central Intelligence, is giving serious thought about "advancing C.I.A.'s position from 'no, never' to considering support for international sales of hardware and perhaps imagery," said an agency spokesman, David French.


Biocraft Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


2 in Bomb Case Try To Commit Suicide
Two defendants in the World Trade Center bombing case tried to commit suicide in their cells in a Federal detention center in Manhattan on Thursday, defense lawyers said.
Neither of the two men, Ahmad M. Ajaj and Bilal Alkaisi, was seriously injured.
Both cut themselves with razors, and Mr.
Alkaisi tried to hang himself, the lawyers said.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Field Remains Open for Last ATP Spot  Cedric Pioline beat Goran Ivanisevic, 7-6 (9-7) 6-0, yesterday to reach the semifinals of the European Community Championships in Antwerp, Belgium, and keep the race alive for the last spot in the season-ending ATP finals.
Pioline's victory keeps the Frenchman on track for the ATP's season-ending event and maintains the chances of Boris Becker, also a semifinalist here, to defend his world title at Frankfurt next week.
Becker, seeded third, played his best tennis of the week to beat Magnus Larsson of Sweden, 6-1, 7-6 (7-0).
Pioline will play Pete Sampras in a replay of the United States Open final in Saturday's semifinal.
Sampras, the top-ranked American, was a 7-6 (8-6), 6-3 winner over Nicklas Kulti.
Magnus Gustafsson, playing on a sore knee, upset second-seeded Michael Stich, 7-6 (8-6), 7-5, to set up a match against Becker. (AP)


HealthInfusion (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chicago Prelate Is Accused Of Sex Abuse and Denies It
Joseph Cardinal Bernardin of Chicago, a leader in the Roman Catholic Church's recent efforts to detect and prevent sexual abuse by the clergy, was himself accused yesterday of sexually molesting a teen-age seminary student on one occasion almost two decades ago.
The accusation was leveled by the former student, Steven J. Cook, now 34, in a television interview on the Cable News Network and in a lawsuit that seeks $10 million in damages from Cardinal Bernardin, other officials of the church and the Archdiocese of Cincinnati, where Mr.
Cook says the assault occurred sometime from 1975 to 1977.
At the time, Cardinal Bernardin was Archbishop of Cincinnati.


Sports of The Times; We've Seen This Picture Before
WHEN Jerry Jones first cradled the Super Bowl trophy last January in his team's Rose Bowl locker room, it was an exhilarating reality that seemed like a recurring flashback for the Dallas Cowboys owner.
"Believe me, it seemed like it had happened before," Jones recalled.
"It was a picture I had seen in my mind a thousand times. 'Yes,' I kept thinking and clenching that trophy. 'I have seen this picture before.' "


Southwestern Property Trust Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Very Good at Leading, Working on Winning
On March 21, 1990, his native Namibia won its independence from South Africa, putting Lucketz Swartbooi happily out of the South African army and frustratedly out of any prospects for a job.
So he took up running.
"For my health," he said.


Dual Drilling (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rentrak Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Reading Lesson Amid Rancor


U.S. Drops Misconduct Case Against an AIDS Researcher
After four years of investigation, the Government today dropped all accusations of misconduct against Dr.
Robert C. Gallo, co-discoverer of the virus that causes AIDS.
The office that investigates misconduct in science, the Office of Research Integrity, which is part of the Department of Health and Human Services, said it was acting reluctantly three days before a hearing on Dr.
Gallo's final appeal on accusations that he committed misconduct by failing to give proper credit to other researchers in a 1984 paper in which he described isolating the virus.
The office said the department's appeals board was now using more stringent standards in deciding what constitutes scientific misconduct, standards that it could not satisfy.


Painful Lessons for Mexican Labor
Standing almost in the shadow of Mexico's twin volcanoes, long lines of new Volkswagen Beetles -- remarkably unchanged from those sold in waves in the United States until the 1970's -- give an impression of steadiness and continuity.
But that belies the turmoil that has shaken Volkswagen de Mexico over the last year and may be a precursor to the painful transition that all Mexican businesses are about to undergo, with or without a North American Free Trade Agreement.


Disavow Attacks on Israelis, Clinton Warns P.L.O. Chief
Worried about eroding Israeli public support for the accord between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, President Clinton and Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel called on the P.L.O. chairman, Yasir Arafat, to condemn recent Arab attacks on Jewish settlers, saying he was duty-bound to do so.
President Clinton planned to use the visit of the Israeli Prime Minister to the White House today to highlight a package of economic and military benefits that Washington was offering Israel, in hopes that it would make the Israeli public more comfortable with the notion of trading land for peace with Syria in the near future, and thereby widening the circle of peace.


Italy Accuses 18 in 1992 Slaying Of Anti-Mafia Prosecutor in Sicily
Sicilian magistrates investigating the murder of the country's top Mafia prosecutor announced today that they had issued arrest warrants for 18 suspects.
The magistrates presented a detailed picture of the way the killers staked out a hill overlooking a highway for days before they exploded a bomb as the prosecutor, his wife and three bodyguards drove along the road below.
The May 1992 killing of the prosecuting judge, Giovanni Falcone, outraged Italians.
When Mr.
Falcone's friend and colleague, Judge Paolo Borsellino, was murdered in another bombing two months later, the Government began the biggest crackdown against the Mafia in years, leading to the arrest of Salvatore Riina, the "boss of all bosses," in January.


Agency Proposes Subway and Bus Fare Discounts to Lure Riders
After years of debate over whether to offer subway and bus fare discounts, the Transit Authority is proposing them to lure new riders.
The discounts are part of the authority's budget for next year, which is subject to the approval of Metropolitan Transportation Authority, and the amount set aside for them is small.
If the whole allotment were used on discounts to people who bought tokens in bulk, the authority might give one free token for each 99 purchased.


Coleman Lonely Beneath the Basket
On the night when they honored Drazen Petrovic, the Nets showed how much they are going to miss him this season.
In their home opener Thursday night before 16,151 fans, the Nets squandered a double-digit lead and were then forced into overtime by the Indiana Pacers, who had not won a game all season.
In the overtime, the Nets could not get the ball to Derrick Coleman, who had scored a game-high 35 points.
With Petrovic last season, geting the ball to Coleman was never a problem.


From Prison, Gotti Reportedly Keeps Control of Mafia Group
A month after losing his appeal to reverse a life sentence without parole, John Gotti shows no sign of giving up control of the Gambino crime family, the nation's largest Mafia group, law-enforcement officials say.
Based on intelligence reports and information gleaned from informers, the officials said Mr.
Gotti, from his Federal prison cell in Marion, Ill., was trying to maintain his authority over the family's illegal businesses in the New York region through four close relatives and associates.


Executive Changes
KENTUCKY FRIED CHICKEN CORP., Louisville, Ky., a unit of Pepsico Inc., named Laurence M. Zwain president of its international business.
LEHMAN BROTHERS, New York, a unit of American Express Co., named Rick Reider head of corporate bond trading.


Huntco Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


NEWS SUMMARY
Erskine Hawkins, band leader.
Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials  Partners in space, not rivals.
High-tech death from Winchester.
A bad bill for the poor.
Nationalism turns sour in Croatia.
Letters  Russell Baker: The short-run America.
Caroline Alexander: The Brigadier's shooting party.
John J. DiIulio Jr.: Save the children.
Harvey F. Wachsman: Bad medicine.
Bridge 18 Chronicle 24 Crossword 16


Review/Opera; Rossini Work Overcomes Its Subject
In order to make its way in the present, Rossini's "Viaggio a Reims" has had to survive its own time and its original intentions.
For this brilliant and endearing showpiece was not written for the ages.
It celebrated a specific event: the coronation of King Charles X of France in 1825.
And as its 14-part finale testifies, it was also a form of advertisement, a way of exploiting individually the roster of singers Rossini had at his disposal at the Theatre-Italien in Paris.
The seeming inappropriateness of "Il Viaggio a Reims" for anything but its specific purposes pushed it out of sight for a century and a half.
Its music has died less easily, much of it diverted into another Rossini opera, "Le Comte Ory." But musicologists have been busy the past 20 years, and through a combination of luck and persistence, they have reassembled Rossini's original score with apparent accuracy.


Stage II Apparel Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rival Serbs Are Admitting Bosnia-Croatia Atrocities
Embroiled in a venomous election campaign, Serbian nationalist rivals have admitted publicly for the first time that fighters under the control of the Serbian Government carried out atrocities and plundered entire towns in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina over the last two years.
The descriptions of atrocities by Serbian forces appeared in articles published in Belgrade's press today and Thursday.
They include charges and recriminations by a journalist closely associated with the Yugoslav Army, and by extension with the Serbian Government of President Slobodan Milosevic, and by the leader of the militant nationalist Serbian Radical Party, Vojislav Seselj.


Advanced Logic Research (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Q and A
Shorts and Small Caps  Q. What happens when an investor takes a short position on a small-cap stock whose price falls to zero?
H.
C.
MILLER, Philadelphia  A. If a stock price declines to zero, which is rare, a short-seller's obligation to purchase stock to close out the position is effectively ended.
Short-sellers hope for this kind of decline because, in the absence of an obligation, their previous sale of a stock represents pure profit.


Ford Salaried Workers Get Raise
Thanks in part to the improving fortunes of the Ford Motor Company, its salaried workers will get raises averaging 5 percent in 1994 and benefits that shrank in recent leaner years will be restored to previous levels, the company announced today.
The changes are similar to the white-collar wage and benefit package announced Thursday by the General Motors Corporation.


Long Sues N.F.L.
Steroid use is endorsed by National Football League teams and rampant among players, TERRY LONG, a former Pittsburgh Steelers guard, charged yesterday in a lawsuit filed against the league and the Steelers.
Long's positive steroid test in 1991 led him to eat rat poison in a suicide attempt.
He charged that the N.F.L.'s steroid test is arbitrary and shortened his career, which ended months after the positive test led to an N.F.L.-imposed four-game suspension.


NATIONS BACK BAN ON ATOMIC DUMPING
Capping a series of actions hailed by environmentalists as a turning point in the protection of the world's oceans, the United States and 36 other governments voted yesterday to impose a permanent, legally binding ban on the dumping of all types of radioactive waste at sea.
The vote to ban dumping of low-level radioactive wastes came at a meeting in London of 42 of the 71 nations that signed a 1972 treaty on ocean dumping.
Five of the countries represented at the meeting -- Russia, Britain, France, China and Belgium -- abstained from the vote.


Aircoa Hotel Partners reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lindros's Knee Tested
Eric Lindros, the Philadelphia Flyers' star center, had a magnetic resonance imaging test on his right knee yesterday and it confirmed that he has a partial tear of the medial collateral ligament.


Radio Station Bans 'Harmful' Music
In the perennial national debate over censorship and artistic freedom in popular music -- most recently rap songs -- a radio station here whose audience is predominantly black has taken an unusual stand.
KACE-FM, which plays mainly rap and rhythm and blues, announced last month that it was pulling the plug on what it called "socially irresponsible music."


Don't Make Cancers Compete for Funds
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen perpetuates the common misconception that every type of cancer is a completely different disease in "Competitive Cancer" (column, Oct. 31).
The impression she gives is that research on breast cancer, for instance, will be of no benefit to someone who suffers from lung cancer and vice versa.
Many of the mutations that underlie breast cancer are commonly found in many other types of cancer, such as colon cancer.


Death of River Phoenix Is Linked To Use of Cocaine and Morphine
The sudden death of the actor River Phoenix outside a Hollywood nightclub two weeks ago was caused by "acute multiple drug intoxication" involving lethal levels of cocaine and morphine, the Los Angeles County coroner's office said today.
The office of the county sheriff said in a separate statement today that its investigation of the 23-year-old actor's death had found "no evidence of foul play," and the coroner's office ruled the death accidental.


The Brigadier's Shooting Party
Has Tanzania declared open season on its own protected wildlife?
Conservation officials and politicians in Tanzania charge that the Government has quietly granted exclusive hunting rights to one of the country's most important wildlife areas -- and part of the richest ecosystem in Africa -- to a high-ranking official from the United Arab Emirates.
Apart from the secrecy surrounding it, the agreement is disturbing for several reasons -- not the least of which are reports of past hunting practices of the official, Brigadier Mohamed Abdul Rahim Al Ali, the U.A.E. deputy minister of defense, and his guests.
Eyewitnesses say that his hunting parties in the Loliondo Game Controlled Area and elsewhere have slaughtered animals -- among them endangered species -- with automatic weapons.


Iona's Efficient Passer Outdoes St. John's Star Runner
The game belonged to the passer, not to the runner.
The passer was Iona's Tom Proudian, the sophomore quarterback from New Rochelle, N.Y., who has had such a superb, if surprising, season.
Proudian passed for 401 yards and 4 touchdowns as the Gaels defeated St.
John's, 42-30, last night before an overflow crowd of 3,025 at Redmen Field in Jamaica, Queens.
Proudian completed 33 of 44 attempts in his fourth 400-yard passing game of the season, surprising because last year he was an undistinguished reserve behind senior Bill Hyland.


Priest and Ex-Policeman Arrested In $7 Million Brink's Car Holdup
Three men -- a Roman Catholic priest, an illegal Irish immigrant and a retired Rochester police officer -- were arrested last night in the robbery of $7.4 million from an armored car service in Rochester last January, law-enforcement sources said.
It was the fifth-largest armored car robbery in American history, and Federal officials last night recovered what they called "substantial" amounts of cash hidden in four locations in New York City, including the homes of two suspects.
The officials would not say exactly how much was found.


QualMed Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lambert Davis, 88, Editor and Publisher
Lambert Davis, a former director of the University of North Carolina Press who helped publish books of social criticism by many Southern authors, died yesterday in Hill Haven Nursing Home in Chapel Hill, N.C.
He was 88 and lived in Chapel Hill.
The cause was pneumonia, his wife, Isabella Symmers Davis, said.


Alice Basto Tondel, Harvard Band Coordinator, 80
Alice Basto Tondel, coordinator of the Harvard University Band for 37 years, died on Thursday at Mount Auburn Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
She was 80 and a lifelong resident of Cambridge.
She died of respiratory failure, said Thomas Everett, the band's director.


A Spy Who Ran in From the Cold
For 13 years, Cathy Dowling of San Marcos, Tex., did counterintelligence and undercover work as part of a 20-year career in the Air Force.
Now, as a member of a college cross-country team, she continues to conquer foes who do not know her true identity.
Dowling, 38 years old, is in her first year at Southwest Texas State University.
She is the No. 1 runner on the women's squad and is believed to be the oldest woman ever on scholarship in any sport at an National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I university. (The N.C.A.A. does not keep official records that would confirm Dowling's status as the oldest female scholarship athlete.)


Ecogen Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Washington Memo; The White House's Pre-emptive Move on Child Pornography
Administration officials said today that they had publicized a letter from President Clinton ordering the Justice Department to draft tougher child pornography laws in hopes of preventing an unexpected political brush fire from engulfing the White House.
Senior Administration officials said they were taken aback by the success of Senate Republicans and conservative groups in attacking the Justice Department over the last several days for its position on a child pornography case before the Supreme Court.
The department told the Supreme Court that it no longer believed the current law allowed for the prosecution of a Pennsylvania man charged with possessing child pornography.


Grey Advertising (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Snapple Beverage Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Starting Over in Australia
Philip Bertino, 40, is fed up with crime in America and is disgusted by what he sees as a plummeting standard of living.
Instaead of complaining, he's moving to Australia with his wife, Jeanette, 41, and their 3-year-old son, Philip Louis.
In Australia, he says, his family will find a better life, a place where hiking or surfing is more important than cable TV, where families still gather for big Sunday dinners, where schools are good and where the crime rate is low.


Blimpie International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


No Headline
I'm sorry sir.
This is 1993, not 1963.
I don't know where you've been. -- DEMONE PERRY, a high school senior, on the Rev.
Jesse Jackson's advice on inner-city crime.  [ 12:1. ] I've been to a lot of teen-age funerals. -- MR.
JACKSON.  [ 12:1. ]


A Streetside Gallery Turns More Than Heads


Knicks Remain Whole (5-0) With Half a Ewing
The Knicks lost Patrick Ewing (strained neck) for most of the second half, but they did not lose the game.
Keeping their poise and an unbeaten record, the Knicks rolled to their fifth consecutive victory tonight, 103-84, over the Indiana Pacers (1-4) at Market Square Arena.
The 5-0 start equals the Knicks' best start ever, tying the 5-0 start they had during their championship season of 1969-70.


Cablevision Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


InterPharm Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
ACME-CLEVELAND CORP., Cleveland, a telecommunications and tool manufacturing concern, said its telecommunications subsidiary, Communications Technology Corp., had acquired the product line and other related assets and rights of Scientific-Atlanta Inc.'s, Telecommunications Instrumentation business.
Terms were not disclosed.
CLOROX CO., Oakland, Calif., said it had purchased 100 acres near Shelby, N.C., although it had not decided what to build there.
DRESSER INDUSTRIES, Dallas, announced that its Instrument division had acquired Ebro Electronic G.m.b.H., Ingolstadt, Germany, a manufacturer of laboratory and industrial instruments.


Succession Picture Clears at Novell
Raymond J. Noorda, who turned Novell Inc. from a struggling also-ran of the computer industry into a $1 billion software powerhouse, confirmed yesterday that he would retire as chief executive when a successor was named.
The company also confirmed published reports that Mr.
Noorda was suffering from memory lapses but said they were not significant.
It said that an executive search was under way and that Mr.
Noorda was expected to stay on as chairman, focusing principally on strategic issues.


Taiwan Cares About Protecting Wildlife
To the Editor:
I am writing to protest the irresponsible and sensationalized Oct. 31 advertisement by the endangered species project of Earth Island Institute in San Francisco.
The photo of a bound tiger in the ad was taken at Taiwan in 1984.
Since then, no incident of this kind has taken place in Taiwan due to strict laws governing wildlife protection.
To publish an obviously outdated picture and to mention this rare case misleads readers.


GERMAN OFFICIAL QUITS OVER RIOTS
The Mayor of the German port city of Rostock resigned today after reports blamed him and his aides for failing to prevent a racist riot that broke out 14 months ago.
"Mistakes and lapses were attributed to us," the Mayor, Klaus Kilimann, said in an interview after announcing his resignation, effective Dec. 1.
"The only possible reaction is for me to step down."


'Music of Our Time' Series
As part of its 25th-anniversary celebration, the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center has begun a special series of concerts of contemporary music.
Remaining concerts in the series, called "Music of Our Time," will take place on Dec. 13 and April 4 at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center.
The regular subscription concerts of the Chamber Music Society will continue at Alice Tully Hall.


Marsh Supermarkets Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 9


Observer; The Short-Run America
The bleak side of capitalism is the ruin it leaves behind after, having worked its magic, it moves on.
Backers of the North American Free Trade Agreement are naturally reluctant to dwell on this gritty historical fact, yet there is something cruel, offensive and faintly dishonest in their argument that any pain felt by the working classes will be only a "short-run" experience.
The argument comes easily to people with the financial security required to live in the "long run." Corporate America and the Washington establishment, both ardent for this agreement, consist of people who can afford to wait for the year of Jubilee.


Mashburn Shows Rare Form, Brings Dallas a Rarity: Victory
Mavericks 115, Timberwolves 99
Less than two and a half minutes into the game, Jamal Mashburn drove past Chuck Person and put a shot high off the glass for the first points in what would be the best game of his young National Basketball Association career.
About five minutes later, Mashburn caught the basketball on the left baseline, faked Christian Laettner into another county, and swished a 15-footer.
And early in the second quarter, Mashburn pulled up in front of Doug West at the top of the key and buried another jumper.


Accugraph Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


METRO DIGEST
INQUIRIES INTO WHITMAN CAMPAIGN BEGIN The United States Department of Justice and the office of the New Jersey Attorney General began criminal investigations into claims that Republicans funneled money into urban areas to suppress the black vote in the election for governor.
An official in the Clinton Administration with knowledge of the case said that Federal prosecutors would be likely to issue subpoenas for financial records of the campaign of Christine Todd Whitman, the Governor-elect.
Page 1. 3 ARRESTED IN $7.4 MILLION ROBBERY Three men -- a Roman Catholic priest, an illegal Irish immigrant and a retired Rochester police officer -- were arrested in the robbery of $7.4 million from an armored car service in Rochester last January.
It was among the largest such robberies in the country, and Federal officials last night recovered large amounts of cash hidden away in four locations in New York City, including the homes of two suspects.
All three suspects apparently had connections with the Irish Republican Army, the Federal Bureau of Investigation said.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY TWO SCHOOLS FACING EXTINCTION  The two high schools that Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines plans to close already appear to many to be at the end of their useful lives: at James Monroe in East Tremont, the Bronx, one teacher says the school has not changed with the community, and at Andrew Jackson in Cambria Heights, Queens, a transformation into four smaller schools has already begun.
Page 26.
SEARCH FOR POLICE COMMISSIONER BEGINS Mayor-elect Giuliani called the selection of a police commissioner one of his highest priorities and put his search into motion, naming Howard Wilson, a former assistant United States Attorney, to lead a nine-member committee to screen candidates.
Mr.
Giuliani said he hoped to name his commissioner by Thanksgiving.
Page 27.
AGENCY PROPOSING TRANSIT DISCOUNTS After years of debate over whether to offer subway and bus fare discounts, the Transit Authority is proposing them to lure new riders.
The discounts are part of the authority's budget for next year, which is subject to the approval of Metropolitan Transportation Authority, and the amount set aside for them is small.
If the whole allotment were used on discounts to people who bought tokens in bulk, the authority might give one free token for each 99 purchased.
Page 27.
MOB CHIEF RETAINS POWER, OFFICIALS SAY A month after losing his appeal to reverse a life sentence without parole, John Gotti shows no sign of giving up control of the Gambino crime family, the nation's largest Mafia group, law-enforcement officials say.
Based on intelligence reports and information gleaned from informers, the officials said Mr.
Gotti, from his Federal prison cell in Marion, Ill., was trying to maintain his authority over the family's illegal businesses in the New York region through four close relatives and associates.
Page 27.
REGION  PHONE COMPANY TO LAY OFF 1,500  Southern New England Telecommunications Corporation said in New Haven that it would lay off up to 1,500 employees, or 14 percent of its work force, to become more competitive in a changing market.
Page 28.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 27


Why Light-Rail Train to the Plane Won't Work
To the Editor:
If New York is to have a light-rail train to the plane (news article, Oct. 31), the site of a Manhattan terminal is only one of the problems.
Inadequate terminal facilities at the airports will doom the project.
Kennedy and La Guardia, unlike most other airports, do not have central terminals.
Passengers must go outside and try to find infrequent buses from terminal to terminal.
The proposed $2 billion project will not change this.
The Transit Authority's attempt at providing rail transit to Kennedy Airport failed because it was a train to a bus.
The proposed Federal Circle terminal at J.F.K. is no closer to the airline terminals than the Transit Authority's Howard Beach station.
Much money will be spent to link this route to rail facilities at Jamaica Station to lure passengers from Nassau or Suffolk counties.
This does not account for the infrequency of Long Island Rail Road service.
Airport service must run at least once every 20 minutes to be practical.
Non-rush-hour service on the L.I.R.R.'s heavily used branch lines is once every half-hour or every hour, not an acceptable alternative to a 40-minute car ride.


Unilab Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Farr in Fair Condition
Golfer HEATHER FARR, who has battled breast cancer and related ailments since 1989, was upgraded to fair condition yesterday as she recovered from surgery to relieve a brain hemorrhage.
Farr, 28 years old, was taken to Scottsdale (Ariz.) Memorial Hospital-North Wednesday night by family members after she complained of severe headaches.


Jan Bell Marketing reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Allied Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Prospects for AIDS Vaccine Dim As New Tests Show Wide Failures
In a setback for researchers, a wide collection of promising experimental AIDS vaccines has failed miserably in tests of whether they could protect against strains of the AIDS virus isolated from infected people.
From the beginning, the vaccine effort has been a roller coaster, and experts have acknowledged that it was not going to be easy to find the ideal vaccine, which would stimulate the body to make antibodies to fight off infection with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.


Acme-Cleveland Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Why Homeowners Stay With Low Deductibles
WHILE many people shopping for auto insurance seem to be heeding the experts' advice -- take higher deductibles and save on premiums -- most homeowners continue to prefer low deductibles, whatever the cost.
The State Farm insurance companies, for example, said 64 percent of its homeowners' and renters' policies nationwide have a $250 deductible; 11 percent, $500, and only 3 percent, $1,000.
Even more striking, of the remaining 22 percent, "most have a $100 deductible," said Jerry Parsons, a State Farm spokesman.


Arafat's Faction Tied to Suspects In Settler Killing
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin suffered a potentially serious political blow today when his army announced that five captured Palestinians suspected of killing a Jewish settler two weeks ago had identified themselves as members of Yasir Arafat's faction of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
The announcement came as Mr.
Rabin was courting United States support in Washington.
He and President Clinton both demanded that Mr.
Arafat condemn the violence, although they sidestepped a question of whether Israel should break off peace negotiations if the P.L.O. remained silent.  [ Page 7. ]


Review/Music; Premieres for Chamber Works
As part of the inaugural week of its refurbished Kaye Playhouse, Hunter College assembled a fairly starry roster for a chamber-music program on Tuesday evening.
The concert was the first of five chamber music evenings in the Playhouse's Minerva World Premiere series.
Each is to feature a new work by a female composer, in honor of Hunter College's early days as a women's school.
The program's star power was provided by the pianists Earl Wild and Gary Graffman, the soprano Benita Valente and her pianist, Cynthia Raim (who also played alone), and the flutists Ransom Wilson and Eugenia Zukerman.
There were relative newcomers, too, including the Lark Quartet and Cello (both all-female ensembles), the Manhattan Brass Quintet and Cynthia Sikes, a saxophonist.


Synalloy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Review/Film; Back to a Big 'What If?' in '43
What would America be like today if Germany had won World War II by dropping a bomb on Washington?
Much of "Philadelphia Experiment 2" is devoted to imagining that alternative, but with a paucity of wit that is mind-numbing, given the possibilities.
Instead of a sun-drenched suburban landscape, Southern California is a sprawling, heavily policed labor camp called Freedom City, which looks like an endless oil refinery.
Loudspeakers posted everywhere incessantly play a children's chorus intoning slogans like "propagate, educate, suplicate," which are also flashed on movie screens. (The repeated misspelling of supplicate seems unintentional.) There is not a swastika in sight.


Being Busy and Happy Is an Actor's Syndrome
COMPARED with a lot of other actors Chris Burke is very down to earth.
You know how at the drop of a hat some actors will tell you that they are up for this or that role or what nice thing somebody said about them, or how they have spent their whole lives suffering and preparing for the destiny that is knocking on their door?
Chris Burke is not like that.


Presidential Realty Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


INSIDE
Key Watergate Figure Dies
H.
R.
Haldeman, the top Nixon aide who served 18 months in prison for his involvement in the Watergate scandal, died at age 67.
Page 31.
Bill Dickey, Catcher, Dies
Bill Dickey, whose 30 years as a catcher, coach and manager with the Yankees stretched from Babe Ruth to Mickey Mantle, was 86.
Page 30.
Victory for 3 TV Networks
A Federal judge has opened the way for ABC, CBS and NBC to own a financial interest in all programs that they broadcast.
Page 39.
Treating the Whole Family
Family physicians, trained to treat both adults and children, are gaining new popularity in New York and elsewhere.
Page 25.


Pollo Tropical Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Northstar Health Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


International Microcomputer Software Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


What Ever Happened To Teachers Who Taught?
To the Editor:
Regarding the article "When a Product of the Private Schools Goes Public," on Sept. 19, and the related letter "Debunking the Myths About Public Schools," on Oct. 3: I have always wanted my children to get at least as good an elementary education as I received in public school in the 1920's.
My first three children's education barely measured up.
It occurred in the 1950's and 1960's at the tag end of Progressive Education.
"See and Say" and the New Math were then plunging the schools into the academic depths from which they have yet to recover.


Lesley Harris, Jay A. Palmer
Lesley Beth Harris, the daughter of Hilary and Stanley Harris of Lexington, Mass., was married yesterday to Jay Aaron Palmer, the son of Julian J. Palmer of Newton Centre, Mass., and the late Marion E. Palmer.
Rabbi Cary D. Yales officiated at the Boston Harbor Hotel in Boston.
Mrs.
Palmer is the director of the IBJ Foundation Inc. in New York, the charitable foundation of the Industrial Bank of Japan.
She graduated from Cornell University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.


Q and A
New Year's in Paris
Q.
I will be in Paris to ring in the New Year and am interested in finding out how Parisians typically celebrate the occasion and what entertainment options are available. -- A. E. McCollum, Wayne, Pa.


Sports of the Times; As Landeta Knows, Hang Time Waits for No Punter
DURING the Giants' practice last Wednesday, whenever their new punter, Mike Horan, booted a wobbler, Dave Meggett would turn to the sideline where General Manager George Young was watching.
"George," the Giant punt-returner would say slowly, "Not so good, George."


Finding Help By Phone
Some special telephone lines are dedicated to general information, some to financial data and some to what may seem like superfluous, leisure-time trivia and tidbits.
Still others are lifelines to all-night crisis services.
Here is a list, by category (* indicates a service charge for the call):  COPING IN NEW YORK
Alternate-side parking . . . (212) 566-3406 Better Business Bureau* . . . (212) 533-6200 Car-lockout locksmith . . . (212) 362-7000 Crime Stoppers . . . (212) 577-8477 Gay and Lesbian Switchboard
. . . (212) 777-1800 General Post Office . . . (212) 967-8585 Highway problems (Potholes, etc.)
. . . (212) 768-4653 Mayor's Action Center Complaints . . . (212) 788-7585 Subway/Bus Information Line
. . . (718) 330-1234 Thruway Condition Information
. . . (800) 843-7623 Travelers Aid . . . (212) 944-0013 Postal Zip Codes . . . (212) 967-8585 ENTERTAINMENT
I Love New York Information
. . . (800) 225-5697 Jazzline . . . (718) 465-7500 Movie Phone . . . (212) 777-FILM CRISIS/HEALTH
AIDS (Gay Men's Health Crisis)
. . . (212) 807-6655 Alcoholics Anonymous . . . (212) 683-3900 Alcoholism Crisis Line . . . (800) 252-2557 Child Abuse Crisis Line  . . . (800) 342-3720 Children of Alcoholics  . . . (800) 359-COAF Alcoholism Hot Line . . . (212) 979-1010 Cocaine Hot Line . . . (800) 262-2463 Crime in Progress . . . 911 Domestic Violence Crisis Line
. . . (800) 942-6908 Drug Abuse . . . (800) 522-5353 Help and Crisis Center . . . (212) 532-2400 Herpes Hot Line . . . (212) 628-9154 Medical Emergency . . . 911 Mental Health Counseling  . . . (212) 734-5876 Poison Control . . . (212) 340-4494 Rape Hot Line . . . (212) 267-7273 Runaways Hot Line . . . (212) 619-6884 Sex Crimes Crisis Lines  . . . (212) 267-7273 Vaccination Information (travel)
. . . (212) 349-2664 Victim Services . . . (212) 577-7777 RECREATION
Hayden Planetarium Sky Report
. . . (212) 769-5917 Plant Information Service  . . . (212) 220-8681 Rare Bird Alert . . . (212) 979-3070 Sports Phone* . . . (212) 976-1313 Weather . . . (212) 315-2705 MISCELLANEOUS
Dow Jones Report* . . . (212) 976-4141 Lottery Numbers and Lotto*
. . . (212) 976-2020 New York Public Library (Branch locator) . . . (212) 340-0849 OTB Results* . . . (212) 976-2121 Tax Evasion Hot Line . . . (718) 403-4310 Tax Help . . . (718) 935-6736 Time* . . . (212) 976-1616


Settling Disputes In-House
IT is tough to get along with neighbors.
That is especially true in a condominium, co-op or homeowner association where the ephemera of daily life -- from the weight of a pet to the planting of petunias -- is tightly regulated.
Little wonder that disputes between neighbors and residents and their associations have been a source of friction for years.


Be of Good Fear
THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS Written and illustrated by Tim Burton.
Unpaged.
New York:  Hyperion Books for Children. $15.95. (Ages 5 and up)


All Their Games Are Away Games
Although the new Stuyvesant High School overlooks an enticingly groomed athletic field, its football team has never played there.
Neither have its soccer, baseball and softball teams.
The fenced field, which belongs to the Battery Park City Authority, is used by Little League, community soccer and company softball teams.
The school teams would like to practice there, but officials say their repeated requests have gone unanswered.


Marble in Italy
To the Editor: Luckily we saw James Sturz's piece "Italy's Marble Mecca" (Aug. 8) before we left for our fourth trip to Italy.
Since our itinerary left open four days between Florence and our time-share in Rapallo, we decided spend them in Pietrasanta to follow some of his suggestions.
Regrettably, it was not possible to cover all of Mr.
Sturz's tracks.
What with a one-day visit to the quarries in the Carrara area and the sweeping, majestic views of the giant walls of white and blue and brown and green; one day prowling the studio labs; one day the piazza and the Museo dei Bozzetti and one day at the beach, the time was gone.


Amid the Glitter, a Strike Over Increases in Condo Fees
Heralded as a gleaming symbol of New York's rebirth in the booming 1980's, Battery Park City has lost some of its luster.
Since June, condominium owners at a 107-apartment tower in the complex have withheld hundreds of thousands of dollars in payments from the Battery Park City Authority, which owns the site.
Arthur J. Sikula, president of the tower, Hudson View West at 300 Albany Street, one of 19 residential buildings in Battery Park City, said the owners were virtually unanimous in seeking relief from soaring monthly fees that have gutted resale values.
He declined to specify what would satisfy the owners or to give details about the withheld money.


Everything Is Relative


The Mouse in the Corner, the Fly on the Wall: What Very Young Eyes See in Picture Books
A FUNNY-LOOKING bird in a tree smiles down at the young hero in a Dr.
Seuss classic, "The 500 Hats of Bartholomew Cubbins," as Bartholomew, wearing a red-feathered topper, strides along on a journey that will bring him face to face with King Derwin and 499 more hats.
If you are older than 7 or 8 you probably did not notice the bird.
That means that you did not notice it either 39 pages later when Bartholomew returns, toting a big bag of gold.
So why is that bird there?
He's there to interest younger, sharper eyes than yours.
The illustrations of picture books are alive with bit players like that bird, or the two cats who romp through the opening chapters of Attilio Mussino's illustrations for the big 1911 edition of "Pinocchio." Although they are not mentioned in the text, such actors often play significant roles.
The cats in "Pinocchio," for example, serve as tour guides, especially for nonreaders who follow the story through the pictures.
The artist David Small contributes a contemporary cousin of Mussino's cats in Arthur Yorinks's "Company's Coming." The time is 1988, the place is the suburb of Belmore, and while all eyes are riveted on the U.F.O. that has just landed in Moe and Shirley's backyard, a thin white cat sits tensed at the edge of the scene.
As the jokes grow and spin off one another, the cat acts out a running commentary.
At the sight of two aliens its eyes widen; the hair on its back stands up when the spacemen enter the house; and while all those around the cat are losing their heads at the thought of an alien invasion, it delicately licks up a deviled egg that has dropped from Shirley's hors d'oeuvre tray.


THE MEDICAL BUSINESS: Drug Companies; Pressure to Keep Prescription Prices Down
Exchanging verbal thunderbolts with the companies that make prescription drugs, President Clinton has denounced high prices that force some sick and elderly Americans to skip meals to pay for medicine.
His proposals for revamping the medical system would fundamentally affect drug companies, pressuring them to hold down prices and in some ways treating them as much like a crucial social service or public utility as private profit-seeking businesses.


Heidi Gralla and Dean Chang
Heidi Gralla, a daughter of Lawrence and Yvette Gralla of Hartsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to Dean Chang, the son of Daniel and Julia Chang of Gulfport, Miss.
Rabbi Avi Magid performed the ceremony at the Mamaroneck (N.Y.) Beach and Yacht Club.
Ms.
Gralla, who is keeping her name, is the executive editor of Shopping Centers Today, a trade magazine in New York.
She and her husband graduated from the State University at Albany.
Her father is a consultant to Gralla Publications in New York, a publisher of trade magazines; he is a co-founder and the former president.
Her mother retired from Gralla as an advertising sales analyst.


Ms. Friedman, Mr. Feidelson
Stefanie Hope Friedman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jay Friedman of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married last evening to Paul Andrew Feidelson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Feidelson of Armonk, N.Y.
Rabbi Steven Klein performed the ceremony at the Regency Hyatt in Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Feidelson, 26, is a senior account executive at Ziff-Davis, a publishing company in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father is the president of Friedman-Smith Electronic Sales and ASAP Electronics, aerospace electronics companies in Mount Vernon, N.Y.


Sandor Konya: (Sob)
To the Editor:
The record-company politics alluded to in John Rockwell's article "In a Stream of Wagner, Glints of Gold"  [ Oct. 31 ]  prevented an entire generation from hearing Sandor Konya, whose newly released "Meistersinger," which was taped in 1967, Mr.
Rockwell calls "the best of all 'Meistersinger' recordings."


What Every 10th Grader Should Know; Trade Wars Are Neat
TEARS of laughter must have streamed down the cheeks of economists across the land last week when Vice President Al Gore one-upped Ross Perot in their debate by handing him a framed picture of Smoot and Hawley.
Maybe the humor was lost on you.
Maybe that's because, back in 10th grade, you thought that Smoot and Hawley, like a lot of other fixtures of American history, aren't just dead, but deadly boring.
Well, it'll only take a minute to kill that snake.
Pay attention for once, and don't interrupt:


Where Hurley Stands Is 5-11 and in N.B.A.
He is still all skin and bones, still passes for age 17, still calls money "dough," still wears his cap backward, still eats at the nearest deli, still has the key to the gym and still can't dunk in a game.
The National Basketball Association used to have a place for people like Bobby Hurley: the 1950's.
He would not be picked to play at most city parks, but the Sacramento Kings picked him seventh over all, out of Duke, in the last collegiate draft.
He is potentially Bob Cousy in baggier shorts, although other point guards are already sending limousines for him.
Phoenix's Kevin Johnson waved over to Kings General Manager Jerry Reynolds last week to say, "I'm coming after your boy," and 32 points and 14 assists later, Reynolds admitted, "K. J. kicked his rear."


Illegalities in New Jersey?
Did Christine Todd Whitman's campaign for governor in New Jersey pay black ministers and Democratic Party workers to stanch the turnout of black voters for Governor Jim Florio?
If so, did it violate voters' rights -- or other laws?
Justice Department lawyers, the F.B.I. and the New Jersey Attorney General are on the case.
A Democratic State Committee petition will be heard in Federal court tomorrow.
In a separate action, the committee is suing for a new election.
And black ministers threaten to sue for slander.


Costa Rica
To the Editor: I commend Rebecca Johnson for "Costa Rica's Rumbling Mountain" (Oct. 24), presenting what Costa Rica has to offer -- natural phenomena and beauty, combined with community-based tourism.
This is the model that Costa Rican business and environmental organizations are promoting and working hard to sustain.
Unfortunately, some politicians and investors would like to see Costa Rica copy resort areas such as Acapulco.
It is clear that this would benefit only a small group, least of all the local population or nature-seeking tourists.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: The Sophisticated Traveler  Magazine Part 2 Special Today: Children's Books Section 7 A pullout section on the 10 best illustrated books and more than 40 other books.
Special Today: The Health Debate Section 4A A background report.


A Space Odyssey
ERIC OWEN MOSS IS something of a lone ranger on Los Angeles's architectural frontier.
His buildings cannot be classified by style or school.
They possess an off-kilter energy; at the same time, they're grounded in modernism.
However, it's modernist literature, rather than architecture, that inspires them -- Joyce's "Ulysses," as opposed to Mies van der Rohe's Seagram Building.
"I'm always looking for new ways to reshuffle reality," Moss explains.
"In architecture, as in life, the problems never change, just the solutions."
So in Los Angeles, where houses on spectacular sites are as ubiquitous as unemployed actors, Moss was confronted with a narrow shoebox lot with no views to recommend it.
The clients wanted something special, something (to use a 60's word) "mind-bending." Moss obliged with a building that looks inward.
In place of exterior views, this house has its vistas inside.


THE BEAT GOES ON
I have never been pregnant, but if my fears, hormonally induced or not, were dismissed with nothing but levity and little apparent real compassion, I'd be pretty upset (About Men: "The Beat Goes On," by Don Montague, Sept. 26).
Sure, both sides of the gender line have issues, but to complain about matters of biology where the male does make an equal contribution (she didn't get herself pregnant) is a blow below the belt.


Not So Silent Partner
To the Editor:
I should like to clarify several points regarding my involvement with Philip Johnson as touched upon in Herbert Muschamp's article "A Man Who Lives in Two Glass Houses"  [ Oct. 17 ] .
I was Mr.
Johnson's partner not only in the "boom years," as the article states but also from 1968 to 1986.
In fact, all the buildings (with the exception of the Glass House) that a caption accompanying the article refers to as "A Johnson Sampler" were done during this period with my full participation as an equal partner with Mr.
Johnson.
The name of the partnership when this work was done was Johnson/ Burgee Architects, which is not credited in the article.


THE NATION: The Post-Nuclear Family; Tell It to Mom, Dad and the Authorities
BIT by bit, the country's urge for collective child-rearing is becoming more visible.
In recent months residents in such disparate communities as Texarkana, Ark., North Arlington, N.J., Atlanta and Dallas joined in supporting municipal curfews for young people.
Last month parents cheered as Attorney General Janet Reno threatened the television industry with Government action unless it curbed its reliance on violent fare.
Parent groups also have watched with satisfaction as the record industry has adopted a uniform system of labeling recordings containing expletives or sexually explicit or graphically violent lyrics.


No Space for NASA
The Mars Observer is a spacecraft designed to map our neighboring planet in exquisite detail.
NASA spent $1 billion but failed to make the mission foolproof.
In August, just as the delicate craft neared its target, some accident disabled its communications gear, probably condemning it to snap endless postcards of Martian vistas that no one will ever admire.
The futile outcome mirrors the general state of space exploration, which also has come far with little to show.
The universe is waiting, but NASA can think solely of plumbing and aluminum, the chief ingredients of its much-redesigned space station.
The project's only evident purpose is to make work for space contractors and NASA's erratic fleet of space shuttles.
Its feeding has long starved the agency's more promising ventures.


THE BEAT GOES ON
Don Montague was not only hilarious but right on target.
I've sent a copy to my very pregnant, and normally sane, daughter whose flights of imagination in the last seven months easily rival those of Marianne's.
Did I ever behave this way?
Are you kidding?
SUSAN HAFF Ithaca, N.Y.


Art That Cast a Long Shadow
RODIN The Shape of Genius.
By Ruth Butler.
Illustrated. 592 pp.
New Haven: Yale University Press. $35.


True Crime Stories That Sell Themselves
IF Lorena Bobbitt had grabbed a kitchen knife and plunged it into her husband's heart last June 23, we might never have heard her story of fear, despair and love turned to hate.
But because she used the knife to cut off his penis, the case stands with those that make the skin crawl and knees go weak.
Shootings, slashings, stabbings -- you read about them, forget them and go to lunch.
But every so often a bloody deed touches the soul and sears itself into memory.
Perhaps the act is especially horrible.
Just as likely the event, whatever it is, stirs deep and disturbing questions:


Correction
Because of an editing error, an article on Oct. 31 about the treatment of children in hospital emergency rooms misattributed a statement that Connecticut was preparing regulations on transferring injured children to pediatric intensive-care units.
Marie Wilson of the State Office of Emergency Medical Services made the statement, not Julie Cox of the Connecticut Hospital Association.


2 More to Back Trade Pact
President Clinton collected new statements of support today for the North American Free Trade Agreement from two Tennessee Democratic members of the House as he continued a feverish campaign before next week's vote in Congress.
Representatives Jim Cooper and Harold E. Ford appeared with Mr.
Clinton at the airport in Memphis, where the President had traveled to address a gathering of black ministers.
Mr.
Ford is also a minister, and Mr.
Clinton rewarded him this afternoon by visiting his congregation at the Olivet Baptist Church.


An Investment Firm Gives Its Regard to Broadway
LOOKING westward from his office window, James Allwin has a clear view of 1585 Broadway, the three-year-old skyscraper on the west blockfront from 47th to 48th Street.
He is head of the real estate group at Morgan Stanley Group, the global financial services firm, and he salts his speech with expressions relished by financiers:
"The question was, 'Should we go long on New York City?" '


Laura Salerno, Terence Linehan
Laura Mary Salerno, a financial analyst at the I.B.M.
Personal Computer Company in Somers, N.Y., was married yesterday to Terence Linehan, a sales representative on Long Island for Pfizer Inc.
Msgr.
Daniel A. Peake performed the ceremony at the Church of the Resurrection in Rye, N.Y.
Mrs.
Linehan, 25, is a daughter of of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederic Salerno of Harrison, N.Y.
She graduated from Lehigh University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a vice chairman of Nynex and president of Nynex Worldwide Services in White Plains.
The bride's father is also chairman of the board of trustees of the State University of New York.


SUNDAY, November 14, 1993; The Milkman Always Rings Twice
Harried Manhattan families can sing the lullaby of Broadway once more, with feeling: The Milkman's on his way.
His name is Alan Newman and he's been delivering milk to the Upper West Side for about nine months.
He knows of one competitor on the Upper East Side.
Both cater to busy professionals with children who are trying to juggle child care, work and midnight milk runs, and neither brings milk in bottles.
The idea here is convenience, not esthetic satisfaction, and so it's unlikely that home milk delivery will stage a full-fledged comeback.


Disturbers Of the Peace
A PRICE BELOW RUBIES Jewish Women as Rebels and Radicals.
By Naomi Shepherd.
Illustrated. 336 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. $27.95.


HOW FASHION BROKE FREE
Amy M. Spindler's "Bringing Hollywood Home" omitted the carnage committed against the retail clothing market when Clark Gable appeared sans undershirt in the 1930's film "It Happened One Night." Sales of undershirts took a nose dive and didn't recover until the T-shirt became popular in World War II.
ALLEN BROOKINS-BROWN Minneapolis


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.
Minors: Vote to kill an amendment to a major anti-crime measure that would prohibit death sentences in cases where offenders committed the murders when they were younger than 18.
Approved 52 to 41, Nov. 8.
2.
Gangs: Vote on an amendment to a major anti-crime measure that would classify as Federal offenses a host of illegal gang activities, ranging from conspiring to join a criminal street gang to committing murder for that gang.
Approved 60 to 38, Nov. 9.
3.
Interstate Crime: Vote on an amendment to a major anti-crime measure that would make murders committed with firearms that were carried across state lines a Federal crime with mandatory death penalties.
Approved 58 to 42, Nov. 9.
4.
Carjacking: Vote on an amendment to a major anti-crime measure that would make carjacking a Federal capital crime whenever someone dies as a result.
Approved 65 to 34, Nov. 9.
Connecticut  Dodd (D) . . .
Nay Nay Yea Yea  Lieberman (D) . . .
Yea Yea Yea Yea  New Jersey  Bradley (D) . . .
Nay Nay Nay Yea  Lautenberg (D) . . .
Nay Nay Nay Nay  New York  D'Amato (R) . . .
Yea Yea Yea Yea  Moynihan (D) . . .
Nay Nay Nay Nay  House
1.
Somalia: Vote on passage of a resolution endorsing President Clinton's withdrawal date of March 31, 1994, for United States troops in Somalia.
Approved 226 to 201, Nov. 9.
2.
Gun Control: Vote on an amendment to a bill providing for a five-day waiting period for handgun purchases that would set a five-year limit for developing computerized, nationwide system of instant background checks and a phaseout of the waiting period.
Approved 236 to 198, Nov. 10.
3.
Gun Control: Vote on passage of a bill that would require a buyer of a handgun to wait five business days before taking possession of it.
Approved 238 to 189, Nov. 10.
Connecticut  1.
Kennelly (D) . . .
Yea Yea  2.
Gejdenson (D) . . .
Yea Nay Yea  3.
DeLauro (D) . . .
Yea Nay Yea  4.
Shays (R) . . .
Nay Nay Yea  5.
Franks (R) . . .
Nay Yea Nay  6.
Johnson (R) . . .
Nay Nay Yea  New Jersey  1.
Andrews (D) . . .
Nay Nay Yea  2.
Hughes (D) . . .
Yea Nay Yea  3.
Saxton (R) . . .
Nay Nay Yea  4.
Smith (R) . . .
Nay Nay Yea  5.
Roukema (R) . . .
Nay Nay Yea  6.
Pallone (D) . . .
Yea Nay Yea  7.
Franks (R) . . .
Nay Nay Yea  8.
Klein (D) . . .
Yea Nay Yea  9.
Torricelli (D) . . .
Yea Nay Yea  10.
Payne (D) . . .
Yea Nay Yea  11.
Gallo (R) . . .
Nay Nay Nay  12.
Zimmer (R) . . .
Nay Yea Yea  13.
Menendez (D) . . .
Yea Nay Yea  New York  1.
Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
Yea Nay Yea  2.
Lazio (R) . . .
Nay Nay Yea  3.
King (R) . . .
Nay Yea Nay  4.
Levy (R) . . .
Nay Yea Nay  5.
Ackerman (D) . . .
Yea Nay Yea  6.
Flake (D) . . .
Yea Nay Yea  7.
Manton (D) . . .
Yea Nay Yea  8.
Nadler (D) . . .
Yea Nay Yea  9.
Schumer (D) . . .
Yea Nay Yea  10.
Towns (D) . . .
Yea Nay Yea  11.
Owens (D) . . .
Yea Nay Yea  12.
Velazquez (D) . . .
Yea Nay Yea  13.
Molinari (D) . . .
Nay Nay Yea  14.
Maloney (D) . . .
Yea Nay Yea  15.
Rangel (D) . . .
Yea Nay Yea  16.
Serrano (D) . . .
Yea Nay Yea  17.
Engel (D) . . .
Yea Nay Yea  18.
Lowey (D) . . .
Yea Nay Yea  19.
Fish (R) . . .
Nay Yea Yea  20.
Gilman (R) . . .
Nay Nay Yea  21.
McNulty (D) . . .
Nay Yea Yea  22.
Solomon (R) . . .
Nay Yea Nay  23.
Boehlert (R) . . .
Nay Nay Yea  24.
McHugh (R) . . .
Nay Yea Nay  25.
Walsh (R) . . .
Nay Yea Yea  26.
Hinchey (D) . . .
Yea Nay Yea  27.
Paxon (R) . . .
Nay Yea Nay  28.
Slaughter (D) . . .
Nay Nay Yea  29.
LaFalce (D) . . .
Yea Nay Yea  30.
Quinn (R) . . .
Nay Nay Yea  31.
Houghton (R) . . .
Yea Yea Nay


Mary Ann Gibney, Gordon E. Loh
Mr. and Mrs.
Gerard X. Gibney of River Edge, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Mary Ann Gibney to Gordon Edward Loh, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Loh of Trumbull, Conn.
A January wedding is planned.
Ms.
Gibney is the director of research administration at the Hospital for Special Surgery in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University and received a master's degree in public health from New York University.


A Market? A Museum? Watch This Space
After two decades of conceptual differences, financial difficulties and lawsuits, a decision may be near on the fate of a plan to build a vast complex of food stores and restaurants in the empty, cathedral-like vaults under the Queensboro Bridge.
Next month, the state's highest court, the Court of Appeals, is to issue a ruling on a neighborhood group's suit to block construction of the project, known as Bridgemarket.


Stitches, a Bandage and Everything
SCOOTER Written and illustrated by Vera B. Williams. 150 pp.
New York:  Greenwillow Books. $15. (Ages 8 to 12)


A Former Coach's Unlikely Labor of Love
"HI, David. How are you this morning?"
David Jacoby, a ninth-grader at Amity Junior High School in Orange, boarded his school bus on a recent morning and was greeted cheerily by the driver, Vito DeVito.
But then Mr.
DeVito has a cheerful smile for every student who rides with him on one of his many runs between Orange and Woodbridge, and, for that matter, everyone he encounters.


Dreams Advertised Before the Curtain Rises
BOTH Nancy Coyne and Matthew Serino are fond of saying that the products they represent don't have any shelf life.
She is the creative director and chief executive and he is the president of Serino Coyne, the advertising agency that handles the majority of Broadway shows.
And the economics of producing on Broadway are more dubious than ever; it's a rare show indeed that can hang on if the promise of a sustained audience isn't established right away.
"If you were starting out in advertising and had to pick a business to specialize in, it wouldn't be theater," Ms.
Coyne said the other day from her aerie 36 floors above the theater district.
"How many products are there that can disappear in one night?"


THE IMPACT: The Providers; Reshaping the Medical Marketplace
If the health care proposals of the Clinton Administration become law, they would throw into fast forward trends that are already reshaping the fates of doctors, hospitals and the insurance companies that pay them.
Doctors would win a victory that leading medical organizations like the American Medical Association have long sought: guaranteed insurance coverage for tens of millions of the uninsured.


The Sensational Mr. Collins
THE KING OF INVENTORS A Life of Wilkie Collins.
By Catherine Peters.
Illustrated. 502 pp.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. $29.95.


HOW FASHION BROKE FREE
Fashion may have broken free, but women have not ("How Fashion Broke Free: A Special Report on a Half-Century of Fashions of The Times," Oct. 24).
The corsets may have been cast off, but the constraining images of the "ideal" woman perpetuated by television, movies and magazines are no less suffocating.
The message has always been clear: conform to this shape and you will be beautiful.
The picture and caption on your cover exemplify this: are we liberated in that we no longer lace and bind our bodies, but still are expected to fit this ideal body?
EMILY MACBLAIN New Brunswick, N.J.


Truckers' Strike Threatens to Cause Shortages


Helping All Age Groups Read and Spell
HOWARD S. RICHTER said he always had a fear of words.
Now retired from his job as a health and physical education teacher at DeWitt Clinton High School in the Bronx, Mr.
Richter said he always had trouble with reading and spelling.
He coped with his literacy problem in the best way he could.
He memorized the words he had to know and shied away from confrontations with new ones.
But on a recent evening at the Y.M.C.A. here, Mr.
Richter confidently dissected words like "audacity," "infidelity" and "oscillate" along with other students in a special reading class called Starting Over.
In the class, sponsored by the White Plains-based Multi-Sensory Learning Center, were a junior high school student, a recent high school graduate, several mothers taking the course to help their elementary school-age children and a group of teachers who said they hoped to apply what they learned here in their own classrooms.


Building's New Look Shaped by Old Zoning
ZONING calculations with a skin strapped on." That is Richard S. Hayden's description of the architecture at 320 Park Avenue, an obsolete 32-year-old office tower that he and his colleagues are redesigning from the bones out as the new headquarters of the Mutual of America Life Insurance Company.
Mutual bought the 34-story structure from the ailing Olympia &amp; York last year for $130 million and is spending $73 million to reconstruct it.
Since 320 Park Avenue was constructed just months ahead of the 1961 Zoning Resolution, it has about one and a half times as much floor space as would be allowed in a new building on the same site, making it well worth an owner's while to rebuild it rather than replace it.
Mutual plans to occupy 10 floors and lease the rest when the building reopens in the spring of 1995.


THE GUIDE
PRESERVING LANDSCAPES
Small as it is, Connecticut is generally perceived as a state rich in open space.
According to the Connecticut Trust for Historic Preservation, however, it ranks 49th among the 50 states in publicly owned open space per resident.


Husbands and Wife
To the Editor:
I was indignant to read Miranda Seymour's review of "Anais: The Erotic Life of Anais Nin," by Noel Riley Fitch (Oct. 17).
It cast dis repute on all the critics who have taken this unusual writer's work seriously as a seminal one in the history of modernity.


R. A. Marcus, J. D. Leibowitz
January wedding plans have been announced by Ruth Allyn Marcus, a White House correspondent for The Washington Post, and Jonathan David Leibowitz, the chief counsel to the Senate Subcommittee on Juvenile Justice in Washington.
Ms.
Marcus, 35, graduated cum laude from Yale University and received a law degree from Harvard University.
She is the daughter of Arnold and Judith Marcus of Livingston, N.J.
Ms.
Marcus's father retired as the director of regulatory affairs at Bristol-Myers Products in Hillside, N.J.
Her mother is an accountant in Union, N.J.


Something For Everybody In Marathon
Eight miles into today's New York City Marathon, Pam Kezios and Tom Young of Chicago will stop briefly to be married on the steps of the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
A small service is planned, but 26,000 are expected for the reception.
Everyone venturing the marathon distance of 26 miles 385 yards has made some sort of vital, if less permanent, commitment: To win, to finish, to run a personal best, to promote a cause, to prove a point.


Lauren Cahn, Eric Schoenfeld
Lauren Samantha Cahn, an associate at Rogers &amp; Wells, and Eric Scott Schoenfeld, an associate at Hofheimer, Gartlir &amp; Gross, both New York law firms, are planning a January wedding.
Ms.
Cahn, 27, and Mr.
Schoenfeld, 28, received their law degrees from New York University.
The future bride is a magna cum laude graduate of Tufts University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.


Donna Schimensky and Robert Lulkin
Donna Lee Schimensky, a daughter of Oscar and Valerie Schimensky of Morganville, N.J., was married last evening to Robert Lulkin, a son of Irving and Lillian Lulkin of the Bronx.
Rabbi Richard Chapin officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Famous Sweat
FOR Richard Russek of Great Neck sweat is good.
But blood is better.
His may be the only business where the more blood and sweat he finds on the used clothing he sells the more money he makes.
And Mr.
Russek makes a very comfortable living selling used clothing.


Times Square at the Crossroads
The plan to revitalize the crossroads of the world, Times Square, has come to its own crossroads, with a hearing tomorrow on an interim plan.
The original project called for four office towers, the restoration of nine historic theaters, a new merchandise mart and hotel, and a $91 million refurbishemt of the Times Square subway station.
But with the towers' developers asking to delay construction, and the lack of a developer for the mart, a scaled-back plan has been emerging.
It was formally presented on Wednesday to Community Board 5 by Rebecca Robertson, president of the 42d Street Development Project, a subsidiary of the State Urban Development Corporation.
Tomorrow the corporation will hold a public hearing on the plan at 4 P.M. at the Academy Theater, 219 West 42d Street.
The corporation's directors will then vote on the amendments.
Final modifications are to be submitted for public review by the end of the year.


In the Region/Westchester; After a Fallow Decade, 2 Pelham Housing Projects
THE tiny Town of Pelham, only 2.4 square miles in area, has seen very little new building in recent years.
For one thing, the oldest town in Westchester County (settled in 1654) has very little available land left to develop in its two villages of Pelham and Pelham Manor.
And for another, it seems that any project that is proposed in this affluent community is subjected to such rigorous debate that developers get discouraged and proposals change character several times before finally getting approved.


Children Who Live in Boxes
WE ARE ALL IN THE DUMPS WITH JACK AND GUY Written and illustrated  by Maurice Sendak.
Unpaged.
New York:  Michael di Capua Books/HarperCollins Publishers. $20. (All ages)


Barbara Sandy, Matthew Golub
William and Marjorie Sandy of Bloomfield Hills, Mich., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Barbara Gail Sandy, to Matthew Fader Golub, a son of Harvey Golub of Saddle River, N.J., the chairman and chief executive of the American Express Company, and Marcy Golub of Cherry Hill, N.J.
A February wedding is planned.
Miss Sandy is a brand manager at Kraft General Foods in Glenview, Ill.
She graduated from the University of Michigan, and she and her husband received master's degrees in management from Northwestern University.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the Sandy Corporation, a training and communications company in Troy, Mich.
Her mother is a librarian in the Bloomfield Township (Mich.) Public Library.


Wall Street; A Record Year at the Chicago Board of Trade
CONTRACT volume at the Chicago Board of Trade soared past its previous annual record last week, giving the C.B.O.T. an excuse to crow about the good times.
By Wednesday's close, year-to-date volume had hit 154,511,788 contracts, besting the record 154,231,583 traded in all of 1990.
The numbers show changes in the popularity of products in the last decade.
Trading in agricultural futures and options is below 1983 levels, as is trading in stock index options and futures, which have fallen since the 1987 stock market crash.
Financial futures and options, meanwhile, have soared.


Kindly Get Dressed, Mrs. Peel
There's something very Emma Peel about this sleek but subdued Italian-made quilted vest ($78), at least in its black version.
It also comes in wine and an odd shade of teal, but then the effect is more morning-talk-show-host.


Family Matters
To the Editor:
I feel I must respond to Barbara Grizzuti Harrison's remarks about John Cournos in her review of two books on Dorothy L. Sayers (Oct. 17).
She says that Sayers "fell in love with a cad" and, after describing the details of the Sayers-Cournos love affair, extrapolates, "The moral idiot had put her on probation."


A Softer Approach to Growth Problems
WHEN a particular plant fails to perform as expected, the solution sometimes is a cursory examination followed by an application from a spray can.
Much better is taking a sampling of the plant's problem to a professional consultant for a proper diagnosis and suggestion of treatment.
Many gardeners now have a handy reference library so they can do their own homework.
Greater use of town, garden and nature-center libraries has encouraged this.


Families That Rake Together. . .


Mutual Funds; Clearing Up Confusion Over 'Class'
NOT only do investors have more than 4,000 mutual funds to choose from these days, they increasingly have several types of shares they can buy within a fund.
These "multiple classes" represent different ways to pay for shares, and as the number of fund companies offering them has grown, so has confusion.
"It's becoming more evident that not only don't some of the fund companies seem to fully understand the impact of the pricing on investors, it's also obvious that a lot of brokers and clients don't either," said David J. Bruce, spokesman for Money Marketing Inc., a Brooklyn-based consulting group that specializes in marketing investment products.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a review on Sept. 19 about "Breath on the Mirror: Mythic Voices &amp; Visions of the Living Maya," by Dennis Tedlock, misstated the year of the Spanish conquest of Maya territory in what is now Guatemala.
It was 1524, not 1494.
The reviewer, who was living overseas, reported the error soon after it appeared, but her letter went astray, and she sent a second copy late in October.


A Softer Approach to Growth Problems
WHEN a particular plant fails to perform as expected, the solution sometimes is a cursory examination followed by an application from a spray can.
Much better is taking a sampling of the plant's problem to a professional consultant for a proper diagnosis and suggestion of treatment.
Many gardeners now have a handy reference library so they can do their own homework.
Greater use of town, garden and nature-center libraries has encouraged this.


Hong Kong Women Fight to Be Heirs
After the death of her parents, 56-year-old Tang Mui returned to the family farm in Hong Kong's New Territories, the hilly green lands that stretch from the edge of bustling neon-lit Kowloon up to the border of China.
Miss Tang, an only child, had been close to her parents.
But women in this part of Hong Kong cannot legally inherit property, so when she tried to take over the family land, she was turned out by three distant male cousins who claimed and won the house and farmland.


Front-Porch Seat on Backyard History
HERE is a little-known cemetery on the grounds of the State University of New York here.
A Revolutionary War hero, Col.
Thomas Thomas, was buried there in 1824, and for the few who had taken note of the site, this seemed to be its chief historical significance.
But to Dr.
Lisa Keller, director of SUNY Purchase's College of Letters and Science's new Institute for Westchester and Local History, the small burial ground can provide far richer historical insights.
The land used to be part of the Thomas family estate, Dr.
Keller said, and in a break from common custom, the family requested that their slaves be buried alongside them instead of in a separate plot.
The cemetery is one of the few integrated burial grounds in the county from that era.


There's No Simple Suicide
By the time the Rev.
Ralph Mero arrived at Louise J.'s tiny Seattle apartment, she had already emptied the contents of the sleeping pills into a small cereal bowl.
He had suggested mixing the 40 Nembutal capsules with something sweet, to make them more palatable; Louise chose a blend of applesauce and ice cream.
Years of illness had left her too weak and shaky to open each tiny pill by hand, so instead she punctured the outer coating with a hypodermic syringe.
Then she squeezed each capsule gently between her forefinger and thumb until the powder spilled out in a dusty cloud.
The resulting concoction was waiting in the refrigerator when Mero rang the bell, shortly after 8 on the brisk August night.
Louise's mother was already there, as was the one friend, a medical assistant, who had agreed to share this intimate moment.
No one but Louise had handled the pills.
Only her fingerprints were on the bowl.
It would not do to implicate her new friend Mero, or her mother, or her doctor, or the handful of others who knew about and had helped her with her plan.


Willard R. Young Jr.; Politician and Banker, 81
Willard R. Young Jr., a former political figure and banker in Hunterdon County, N.J., died Wednesday at his home in Lebanon, N.J.
He was 81.
The cause was pneumonia, said his daughter, Linda Kennedy.


Survival of Fittest
Planting a variety of species that can tolerate alkaline soil, drought and all the other harsh conditions that beset a street tree can go a long way toward a greener city.
Dr.
Nina Bassuk, director of the Urban Horticulture Institute at Cornell University, said that planting only a few species makes the tree population more vulnerable to disease and insects.
Many cities are having a problem with the honey locust, for example, because the bugs and spider mites that love this tree are finding plenty to eat.
Any monoculture -- a crop of a single species -- is more susceptible to insects and disease than a diverse population.


Conversations/Patrick O'Brian; In the Glare of the Short-Toed Eagle, Or What You Read Is All You'll Get
SOMETIMES the burdens of confessional journalism become too much.
Here in the same week was Ivana Trump out with her second novel, "Free To Love," and Fabio, the hunk model, out with his first novel, "Pirate." And Patrick O'Brian, the 79-year-old reclusive Irish scholar -- in his very first American book tour, far from his Pyrenees aerie -- out with the 16th novel in his Napoleonic sea war series about the cerebral bonhomie and cello-and-violin caperings below deck of Capt.
Jack Aubrey, the Crown's action-oriented ocean warrior, and Dr.
Stephen Maturin, the Renaissance Irishman, spy, ship's surgeon and all-round Homeric soul mate.
So many confessional insights to pry from these famous writers, so little time.
Should we, with sly fawning, seek the real story from Ivana? ("How do you answer those who say you're just a gold-digger with a ghost Muse?") Or Fabio.
I mean, what makes a male model tick?
Always wanted to ask that.


Correction
A chart on Oct. 31 with the What's Doing column, about prices in Bermuda, carried an incorrect heading.
The rental rate of $28 a day was for a single-seat moped, not for a rental car; there are no rental cars on the island.


LITTLE BIG PEOPLE
TOM GOODELL Minneapolis


Healing Herb or Narcotic? Marijuana as Medication; Underground Networks Supplying the Sick
Every two weeks, Rabbi Isaac P. Fried visits a businessman in Brooklyn who is dying of cancer.
They talk for a while, and the rabbi hands over a small bag of marijuana with a hopeful blessing.
"May these herbs," he says, "be an instrument of healing."


TRADE PACT GOING TO MEXICAN SENATE
While all eyes are focused on Washington for next week's key House vote on the North American Free Trade Agreement, the Mexican legislature also is expected to take up the pact, although the only suspense here is how long opposition parties will spend denigrating the Government before the agreement is approved.
In Mexico, the agreement is considered a treaty and would have to be approved by a two-thirds vote of the 64-member Mexican Senate.
The party of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, the Institutional Revolutionary Party, controls 61 of the 64 seats.


SUNDAY, November 14, 1993; Out of the Cellar
Remember mushrooms in the old days?
There were the round ones and whatever went into mushroom soup.
Then there was a culinary revolution.
New varieties emerged: shiitake, porcini, oysters of the woods.
Mushrooms were big; America was multifungal.
The same thing is happening with comic books.
Once Archie and Superman occupied the cellar of popular culture.
Now comics of every shape and tone are spilling forth into the light.


LITTLE BIG PEOPLE
Joshua's mother and father appear to have difficulty in distinguishing between their needs and those of their son.
Otherwise, why the new king-sized bed, the child at the party in the hip sling, the beer?


Assembly Session to Offer Sound, Fury and Politics
Shouldering a heavy load of unfinished tasks but lacking the tools to complete them, the New York State Assembly returns to the Capitol on Monday for a session that promises more sound than substance.
The Democrats who run the Assembly had scheduled the session seeking to pressure the Republican-controlled Senate to return to settle several matters, particularly revamping the state's system of financing hospitals, which is soon to expire.


Audacity, Thy Name Is Lydia
LYDIA, QUEEN OF PALESTINE By Uri Orlev.
Translated by Hillel Halkin. 170 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $13.95. (Ages 10 to 14)


The Pleasure of Their Company
"The Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides" By James Boswell This account of a trip through Scotland to the Western Islands in 1773 is a deserved classic, not only for the portrait it presents of Dr.
Johnson -- the prototypical Englishman, at the height of his fame -- but also for the vivacity, acuity and wit of Boswell's writing.
Boswell is one of those historical characters (Jean Jacques Rousseau is another) whose personality appears so contemporary -- so full of flaws and failings, so neurotically candid -- that one feels he would be entirely at home in the last decade of the 20th century.


A la Carte; Wine and Food for 'Gone With the Wind
WHEN Rhett Butler and Scarlet O'Hara walk into Danford's Inn in Port Jefferson on Friday evening, Naomi Solo will be a happy woman.
Ms.
Solo, public relations director of the restaurant went into action when she heard that Pindar Vineyards was introducing a wine called Sweet Scarlet, she was off and running.
A result of her efforts will be apparent to diners who attend the Gone With the Wind Fine Food and Wine Dinner at 7:30 P.M.
They will sip Sweet Scarlet and eat a six-course meal of Southern plantation dishes prepared by the executive chef, Chris Jehle.


On Loan: One Little Sister
BABY By Patricia MacLachlan. 132 pp. New York: Delacorte Press.


Field of Broken Dreams?
They've cleared away the weeds, stones and other rubbish, and even hired a security guard.
But efforts by people in Pelham Bay to resurrect a baseball field for their children have run into some unlikely competition: plans for a parking lot for a Smithsonian Institution research center.
The Smithsonian, which has owned the field for 11 years but never used it, agreed this spring to allow the community to use Louis Vinaccia Field, named after a founder of Little League.
The agreement reached with Bronx Community Board 10 and the Service Alliance for Youth, a community group for young people, covered May to November of this year, with an option for next year.


The Marzipan Heart of Munich
TO ESCAPE TURKEY AND stuffing last Thanksgiving, my husband, Dick, and I decided to blow some bonus mileage points on a long weekend in a favorite European city.
Munich, finally, was our choice because, although we had not been there for about seven years, we knew it well enough to fit a representative sampling of its pleasures into only four days.
It is set in the Marienplatz, the wide, handsome square dominated by the neo-Gothic New City Hall with its famed Glockenspiel, from which an extravagant parade of jousting knights and pirouetting barrel makers emerges daily at 11 A.M.


China Tries to Improve Frayed Airline Security
FLYING into and around China these days requires a little pioneer spirit.
Even with China's economic boom, there are still thousands of Chinese each year who take desperate risks to get out of their country.
Some swim, some stow away and others hijack civilian airliners.
A recent example is the case of a 29-year-old truck driver, Yang Mingde, who on Sept. 30 boarded a Sichuan Airlines flight from Jinan in Shandong Province to Guangzhou.
Traveling with his wife and 6-year-old son, he hijacked the Russian-made airliner to Taiwan, where he asked for political asylum.


Warren L. Jones, 98, Federal Appeals Judge
Warren L. Jones, who as a judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit heard many cases involving segregation, school integration and minority voting rights in the South, died on Thursday in Riverside Hospital in Jacksonville, Fla.
He was 98.
Mr.
Jones was appointed to the appeals court, in New Orleans, by President Dwight D. Eisenhower in 1955 and was almost immediately enmeshed in legal cases intended to end segregation.
In 1961, for example, he was a member of a three-judge panel that voted to quash an effort by the State of Alabama to challenge the 1960 Federal Civil Rights Act.


Bryant Park Fashion Show: Right Idea but Wrong Site
To the Editor:
The fashion industry is enthusiastic about the success of Seventh on Sixth, the celebration of Fashion Week in Bryant Park, as well it should be.
But it was in the wrong place.
For those of us who live or work nearby, it was a disaster.
The essential purpose of the park, to be a haven from the city streets, was violated.


'Animal Crackers,' Marx Fun Once More
NOW that the Paper Mill Playhouse's first musical of the season, "Paper Moon," misguidedly or perhaps just prematurely announced as Broadway bound, isn't, how about "Animal Crackers?" It's raring to go.
The 1928 Marx Brothers musical, the comic anarchists' third and last Broadway show (after "I'll Say She Is" and "The Cocoanuts"), represents the Paper Mill at its freest, with everything going sublimely, ridiculously right, under the light and flowing direction of Charles Repole, who staged the musical's terrific revival at the Goodspeed Opera House in Connecticut last year.


Sit-In Era Had an Organized Precursor During World War II
To the Editor:
Permit me to add to "How My Aunt Charlie Pioneered the Sit-In Era" (letter, Oct. 31) by Barbara T. Wilson.
She is right in asserting that her aunt's sit-in occurred a good 15 years before the one in Greensboro, N.C., at the Woolworth lunch counter in 1963, recently celebrated as the first sit-in.


Yo, Elsie!
The bullring is the centerpiece of a tour to Mexico offered by a new company, Toros Travel in Chula Vista, Calif.
Participants will fight not a bull, however -- the bulls are too dangerous and too valuable -- but a cow, which will not be harmed.
The tour leader, Peter Rombold, has been an amateur bullfighter since 1968.
The cost is $1,095 a person, double occupancy, for six nights with meals at a hacienda near Aguascalientes.
The first departure is Feb. 19.
Call (619) 425-2268.


Corrections
A report on Oct. 31 about the engagement of Rebecca Banks and Charles Zakin misidentified a Hearst publication where Miss Banks is an editor.
It is House Beautiful's Houses and Plans (not Plants).
The report omitted Mr.
Zakin's educational background.
He is a graduate of Ithaca College.


INSIDE
Arafat Condemns a Killing
Yielding quickly to demands, Yasir Arafat condemned the killing of an Israeli by P.L.O. members and urged an end to violence.
Page 7.
Victory for 3 TV Networks
A Federal judge has opened the way for ABC, CBS and NBC to own a financial interest in all programs that they broadcast.
Page 21.
Shortages of Ritalin
A blunder at the Justice Department has left thousands of parents struggling to find supplies of a drug for their hyperactive children.
Page 20.
Great Day for Fighting Irish
Notre Dame defeated No. 1-ranked Florida State, 31-24, in a matchup of unbeaten teams.
Section 8.


Some Doctors See Peril; Others Are Unworried
When Dr.
Bruce H. Berlin and Dr.
Christopher Puca finished their internal-medicine training at the Nassau County Medical Center in 1983, they set off on divergent paths.
Dr.
Berlin took $15,000 from the cash received in wedding gifts, leased a room in another doctor's office and worked nights and weekends over the next decade to build a thriving private practice all his own.
Dr.
Puca went to work for the Public Health Service in a medically underserved area in Queens and, in 1990, joined a group practice, where -- for a salary -- he takes care of patients from health maintenance organizations.


In America; The Real Mexico
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico has opened up markets and improved conditions for big business, both foreign and domestic, but he has done it by keeping the heavy boot of repression on the throat of Mexican workers.
A magazine ad sponsored by the state of Yucatan earlier this year showed an American businessman complaining, "There is no way I can get my labor costs down to $1 an hour." The ad copy below the photo extolled the availability of cheap Mexican labor and concluded, "Yes you can, in Yucatan."


Backup Quarterback Keeps West Virginia Undefeated
West Virginia 49, Temple 7
Backup Darren Studstill threw for 274 yards and 3 touchdowns yesterday in Philadelphia as West Virginia continued its unbeaten season, rolling over Temple, 49-7.


A Vote for Testing Older Voters
To the Editor:
In the Oct. 24 article "The Spouse Factor," I was repelled by the description of Mrs.
Giuliani campaigning among the elderly in Greenwich Village.
It is depressing that she, like many politicians and their spouses, cynically dredge up the gold mine of elderly voters who, as the article stated, can't remember what they ate for lunch.
If that is the case, how can they make a sound decision on election day?


Turn Down The Volume
Jesus Bulit, a banquet waiter, had a problem with noise down below.
His apartment at 82d Street and Amsterdam Avenue rested atop a bar.
The bar tended to play rock music audible in Montana into the early morning hours.
It pulsated through the floor and into Mr.
Bulit's bed and into his ears and -- aagghh!
He showed the pills he was taking for his nerves.
He showed the prescription sleeping pills.
He didn't have to.
It was enough to look at his quivery hands, the frazzle in his eyes.
The weekend before, he had gathered up his garbage, dragged it downstairs and hurled it into the bar.
He said he was contemplating drilling a hole through his floor, inserting a hose attached to his faucet and flooding the place.
"I can't stand it!" he said.
"I need help!"


Nets Fall to Bradley and Late Rally
For the second straight game, the Nets built a double-digit lead and then let the game slip away in the fourth quarter.
This time it was Philadelphia who did them in, 98-97, as the 76ers' 7-foot-6-inch rookie center, Shawn Bradley, who struggled at the outset of the season, scored 23 points.
He also hit the game-winner on a 7-foot jumper with 23.9 seconds left to play.
In helping the 76ers overcome a 16-point deficit in the final period, Bradley also had 8 rebounds over all and blocked 3 shots.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
For Poor Women, Training In Entrepreneurship
The American Woman's Economic Development Corporation and the Woman's Center for Education and Career Advancement are offering an entrepreneurial training program for poor women.
The program, financed by the city's Department of Employment, will offer students instruction in business skills as well as counseling on personal matters like child care.


Clinton Angling for Small-Business Support
While big business has aggressively lobbied in recent weeks on behalf of the North American Free Trade Agreement, small business has been conspicuously silent.
In the final days before Wednesday's House vote on the pact, President Clinton will make a last-ditch effort to lure its support.
The strategy is politically risky because it spotlights the lack of enthusiasm and even hostility of many small-business owners toward the agreement.
The National Federation of Independent Businesses, which represents small-business owners and is, at 600,000 members, the nation's largest business group, has stayed on the sidelines ever since its members voted by a slim margin in 1991 to oppose the pact.


Companies of All Sizes Tally Effects of Plan
President Clinton's plan for reshaping the health care system would cause a vast shift in financial burdens among American corporations.
Health costs would ease for companies, most of them manufacturers, that now offer generous benefits, and rise for those that do not, among them not only small neighborhood shops but also corporate giants like Wal-Mart, Sears and Wendy's.
How those burdens would be reapportioned emerges from a look at insurance costs and prospects at four companies representing the variety of corporate experiences: Ford Motor Company, an older manufacturer; Apple Computer, a young high-tech company; Lehigh Valley Racquet and Fitness Centers, a small Pennsylvania business that uses part-time instructors, and Manpower Inc., the nation's biggest supplier of temporary workers.


Boomtown U.S.A.
TO see the winding rows of new houses sprouting in former potato fields, the massive new Town Square Mall stuffed with shoppers, the parade of joggers along the river that snakes through town, it is hard to believe that less than 10 years ago people were fleeing this area and its dead-end mining and farming economy.
Now, Boise leads the nation in job growth -- 6 percent last year -- and the city is in its sixth straight year of robust economic expansion.
Construction permits are up 50 percent from 1991 -- the highest rate in the country.
High-technology employment has leaped 57 percent since 1987, while crumbling in California and in New England.


Excerpts From Clinton's Speech to Black Ministers
Following are excerpts from remarks today by President Clinton at the 86th convocation of the Church of God in Christ, held in Memphis, as transcribed by the Federal Information Systems Corporation, a private transcription service.
I guess what I really want to say to you today, my fellow Americans, is that we can do all of this and still fail unless we meet the great crisis of the spirit that is gripping America today.
When I leave you, Congressman Ford and I are going to a Baptist Church near here to a town meeting he's having on health care and violence.
I tell you, unless we do something about crime and violence and drugs that is ravaging the community, we will not be able to repair this country.


Corrections
A review on Oct. 17 about Stanley Weintraub's "Disraeli: A Biography" characterized the religious position of Benjamin Disraeli's father incorrectly.
He became largely estranged from organized Judaism but never himself adopted Christianity, though in 1817 he had his four children, including the future Prime Minister, baptized in the Church of England.


Better Uses For Advertising
To the Editor:
In "Out of the Woods" (Nov. 7), Michel Marriott describes the Timberland Company's position on inner-city consumers.
The company indicates that it is generally not interested in spending advertising money on the inner-city market because that counters its intended image.


Susan B. Tomai, Gerald Patterson
Susan Bell Tomai, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James V. Tomai Jr. of Ridgewood, N.J., and Gerald Lee Patterson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Patterson of Bloomington, Ind., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Harold Carter, a Baptist minister, and the Rev.
Joseph Moriarty, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Beck Chapel in Bloomington.
The bride, 37, is the owner and founder of Evergreen Media Counselors, a public relations concern in Washington.
She graduated from Emerson College.


Sound Bytes; He Finds Missing Children With Help From Industry
Ernie Allen is president and chief executive of the National Center for Missing &amp; Exploited Children in Arlington, Va., a private, nonprofit organization that has been called "America's high-tech search network."
Using computer networks and advanced graphics and communications technologies, the center is able to maintain a data base of more than 35,000 cases.
It is also able to disseminate information and photographs to thousands of police departments and, more recently, to millions of personal computer users over the Compuserve and Internet networks.


Amid Mountains of Paper, a War Against a Tide of Red Ink
To find the heart of Huntington Memorial Hospital these days, go upstairs from the gleaming, efficient emergency room, past the pharmacy and around the corridor to the business office.
There, in cramped cubicles, 75 be gone, eliminating a third of all hospitaltoday more a part of hospital care than surgical gloves.
Two of them do nothing but copy medical records all day for insurance companies.
Others dun insurers and patients for payment in the hospital's ceaseless battle against red ink -- $10 million in losses last year alone because of indigent and uninsured patients.


Adria Potter, W. A. Lancaster
Adria Potter, a daughter of William and Mary Potter of Hamilton, Mass., was married yesterday to William Aidan Lancaster, a son of William and Marion Lancaster of Mashpee, Mass.
The Rev.
Vincent Kelly, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at Hamilton Hall, a national historic site in Salem, Mass.
Mrs.
Lancaster, 32, graduated from Boston College.
She is a manager of Depot Liquors, a chain, in Beverly, Mass.


Recalling a Director At the Harkness Estate
The article about Eolia, the Harkness estate in Waterford (Oct. 31), reminds me of E. E. Pearce.
Miss E. (Etha) E. Pearce, known to her friends simply as Pearce (pronounced PERSE), was for many years director of the summer home for disabled children on part of the Harkness estate.
Her association with the Harknesses began when she was chief nurse at the American Hospital in Paris during World War I. She used to tell of her nursing crew, including herself, carrying wounded men on their backs off of the battlefield of the Marne.


Julie Braunstein, Barry Finkelstein
Julie Lynn Braunstein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael B. Braunstein of New York, was married yesterday to Barry Noel Finkelstein, the son of Donald Finkelstein of Norwalk, Conn., and Gail Finkelstein of New York.
Rabbi Jon R. Haddon officiated at the Waldorf-Astoria in New York.
Mrs.
Finkelstein, 26, graduated from Emory University and will enroll in January at Peter Kump's New York Cooking School.


Christine White, Daniel Palladino
Christine C. White, a manager in the cosmetics department at Saks Fifth Avenue, was married yesterday to Daniel J. Palladino, a portfolio manager in the Greenwich Street Advisers Equity Fund Group at Smith Barney Shearson.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
David Uhl, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Amelia Plantation Chapel in Amelia Island, Fla.


Gowanus Deadline Spurs Alternative Plan
Amid a torrent of community frustration and anger over the proposed 10-year reconstruction of the Gowanus Expressway, state transportation officials are developing an alternative proposal that would call for demolition of a four-mile elevated stretch of the road that cuts through the heart of Sunset Park and replacing it with a street-level highway, officials said last week.
The proposal, supported by several community leaders and elected officials, including Borough President Howard Golden, calls for the construction of a street-level highway, with traffic lights, much like Eastern Parkway or Ocean Parkway along Third Avenue -- which runs beneath the elevated structure -- from 65th Street in Bay Ridge to the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel.


Karen Jacobowitz, Jeffrey Mayerson
Karen Leslie Jacobowitz, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Walter E. Jacobowitz of Convent Station, N.J., was married last evening to Jeffrey Craig Mayerson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Victor Mayerson of Livingston, N.J.
Rabbi David Nesson officiated at the Pierre in Manhattan.
The bride, 25, is a sales manager for William Kasper Cashmere, a manufacturer of cashmere sweaters in New York.
She graduated from the University of Maryland.
Her father is an obstetrician-gynecologist in Morristown, N.J.


HOLLYWOOD LOSES TELEVISION RULING
Hollywood studios and producers have lost their last best chance to keep the three big broadcast networks out of the business of owning prime-time television programs.
A Federal judge in Los Angeles has lifted provisions of an antitrust consent decree against ABC, CBS and NBC that had prevented them from owning a financial interest in most of the programs they broadcast.


Trade Debate Rubs Salt in Canada's Wounds; Pan-American Gateway
To the Editor:
The debate between Vice President Al Gore and Ross Perot should show what kind of self-serving snake-oil salesman Mr.
Perot is.


St. Croix Adds Third National Park
On St.
Croix in the United States Virgin Islands, much is being made of the fact that today is the 500th anniversary of the arrival of members of Columbus's crew at Salt River, the only site in the United States touched by Columbus.
The landing occurred during Columbus's second voyage to the New World.
As part of the observance, the Salt River Bay National Historical Park and Ecological Preserve, the third National Park Service unit on St.
Croix, is scheduled to be dedicated this afternoon.
Covering 912 acres on the north shore of the island, the new park has the largest mangrove forest in the Virgin Islands, many endangered or threatened plants and animals and an underwater canyon popular with scuba divers.
The park remains almost totally in a natural state, having only a plaque to indicate that it is a national historical park.
As funds become available, a visitor center and a museum will be built, a spokeswoman for the Virgin Islands said.


Wall Street's Innovation and Remuneration
To the Editor:
The article demonstrates just how confused and misguided our financial and business leaders are on what really makes this country function.
The individuals on Wall Street who play with money are doing just that -- playing a shell game.


Technology; Taking the Worry Out of Paying With Plastic
STANDING in line to buy a sweater, you wait for the little credit-card machine to clear your purchase.
Finally, the machine reaches its erroneous decision: You're a deadbeat.
No sweater.
Visa and Mastercard want you never to live through that embarrassment again.
Behind the scenes, both companies have begun improving their vast credit-card transaction networks to eliminate the billing mistakes responsible for many of those checkout-counter blunders.
They also hope that better validation procedures can greatly reduce credit-card fraud.


BENEFITS
High School Arts  TONIGHT -- The actor Hal Linden will perform a Mozart clarinet concerto at a benefit sponsored by the Alumni and Friends of the Fiorello H. La Guardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts.
The event will raise money for an endowment fund.
Mr.
Linden joins other alumni, including Dudley Williams, a principal dancer for Alvin Ailey company, the actors Greg Burge and Priscilla Lopez, and current students.
Susan Stamberg of National Public Radio, also a graduate, will autograph her book "Talk" at a reception preceding the 7 P.M. concert, starting at 6 P.M.
The event, at the school's concert hall, 100 Amsterdam Avenue at 65th Street, will conclude with a reception with the artists.
Tickets, $50, or $15 for the concert alone, from (212) 714-2665.
Supporting 'The Nutcracker'  MONDAY -- A special preview of a new production of "The Nutcracker" will help to raise money for the American Ballet Theater.
The evening, at the Four Seasons, 99 East 52d Street, will also include excerpts from other ballets in the company's repertory.
Cocktails start at 6:30 P.M., followed by dinner and the performance.
There will be dancing afterward to the music of Peter Duchin, an A.B.T. board member, and his orchestra.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 477-3030.


Suffolk's Executive Building An Ode to Asbestos Legacy
THE jewel in the crown of Suffolk County real estate has become a badly tarnished monument to asbestos contamination.
Sadly, the H. Lee Dennison Building in Hauppauge is also where the County Executive hangs his hat.
The best hope -- and it is a slim one -- is that someone will offer to buy the gloomy, graffiti-marred and half-vacant 12-story tower before the county has to invest $25 million to remove the asbestos and renovate the building.


A Big Roar on Fifth Avenue


'Spike Heels' Ponders Women's Dilemmas
THE title of Theresa Rebeck's odd play, "Spike Heels," stands for women's dilemmas: ambivalence, masochism, confusion -- all represented by a pair of shoes, the more garish, the more emblematic.
Enduring pain (medieval torture is more like it, says a sympathetic male observer) guarantees allure.
And for a woman's self-image -- they make her legs look fantastic -- spike heels work wonders.
In case the audience doesn't get it, the play at Stamford Theater Works makes the symbolic reference over and over.
But not as often as Ms.
Rebeck has Georgie, a discombobulated Latin American woman, spew forth expletives.
"I wouldn't swear if I was you," she announces to Andrew, her scholarly mentor who, in a burst of altruism and hormonal sublimation, has saved her from a life of promiscuity as a member of the underclass, gets her to read Homer and has his best friend Edward, a smarmy lawyer, hire and train Georgie as a legal secretary.


Gentle Giants
THE LAST GIANTS Written and illustrated by Francois Place.
Translated by William Rodarmor. 75 pp.
Boston: David R. Godine. $15.95. (Ages 8 and up) A SMALL TALL TALE FROM THE FAR FAR NORTH Written and illustrated by Peter Sis.
Unpaged.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $15. (Ages 6 and up)


For Some New Shows, the Big Episode Is Rejection
Imagine a football team, assembled with care, equipped from helmet to cleat, coached energetically through weeks of practice and planning and then, after one game -- one crushing, demoralizing defeat -- it's over: The rest of the season is canceled, and the team is disbanded.
What would they do with all those shoulder pads?


Manager's Profile
Samuel D. Isaly  Fund: Medical Research Investment, $10 million in assets.
Manager since 1989. (Sponsor: G/A Capital, New York).
Born: March 12, 1945; Youngstown, Ohio.
Education: B.A., mathematics and economics, Princeton University; M.Sc., economics, London School of Economics.
Last Vacation: Two weeks in August visiting relatives in Ohio with family.
Fund Performance: Year-to-date through October: +21.6% (all health care funds: -0.7%); three years, annualized +21.2% (+19.5%)*
Market View: Neutral (self-rating).
Stock Pick: Schering A.G. of Germany, now 12 percent of the fund's portfolio, because "they've restructured and focused on their pharmceutical business." Current Strategy: "A lot of research behind the market capitalization" in a portfolio of 24 stocks, with about 60 percent invested outside the United States.  *Source: Morningstar Inc.


All at Once
THE NICE RESTAURANT ** (212) 406-9776; 406-9510; 35 East Broadway, near Catherine Street; $$; AE
When this restaurant opened in Chinatown nine years ago, it was among the first of the cavernous, glittery Hong Kong-style Cantonese restaurants in New York.
The menu lists appetizers, main courses and desserts together, which is the way dishes arrive.
Among the recommended dishes are minced squab; barbecued honey-glazed pork ribs; roast duck, and salt-baked chicken.
A house specialty (not always available) is roast suckling pig. (Review: 3/9/90; Revisited: 11/5/93)


Pamela Stewart, Christopher Burke
Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Nicholson Stewart of Tarrytown, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Pamela Fowler Stewart to Christopher Richards Burke, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen R. Burke of Harrisburg, Pa.
A January wedding is planned.
Miss Stewart, 27, is an assistant in the private accounts group of Dillon, Read &amp; Company, an investment banking firm in New York.
She and the prospective bridegroom graduated from Colgate University, and she is an M.B.A. candidate at Fordham University.
Her father is president and chief executive of Trevor Stewart Burton &amp; Jacobsen Inc., an investment management firm in New York.


U.S. Officials Reveal Clues That Led to Brink's Suspects
Federal investigators who seized three men and recovered millions of dollars in one of the nation's largest armored car company robberies unveiled a web of evidence yesterday linking the suspects to one another and to money orders, new bank accounts, duffel bags full of cash, a new car and sunny vacation trips.
The suspects seized in New York City and Rochester on Friday night in the $7.4 million Brinks depot holdup in Rochester in January -- a priest, an illegal Irish immigrant with a criminal record and a retired police officer who was a Brink's guard at the time of the holdup -- are known to espouse the Irish Republican Army cause in Northern Ireland.


Jennifer Weis, David Miner
Drs.
Judith and Peddrick Weis of Maplewood, N.J., have announced January wedding plans for their daughter Jennifer Carole Weis and David James Miner, a son of Martin Miner and Ilene Miner, both of New York.
Ms.
Weis, 26, is a substance-abuse counselor with Volunteers of America in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Skidmore College, and she received master's degrees in psychology and in education in psychology from Columbia University.
Her father is a professor of anatomy at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey in Newark.
Her mother is a professor of marine biology at Rutgers University in Newark.


Pins and Needles
TONY RANDALL'S black-tie benefit universe is not to be disturbed by the vagaries of fashion.
Last Monday, in his dressing room backstage at the Lyceum Theater, he was pulling on a pair of satin-striped, black trousers over a pair of long johns.
He'd be onstage soon, as host of a show featuring David Letterman, Jack Klugman, Carol Channing and others to benefit the National Actors Theater, which he founded three years ago.
"It was so cold backstage this afternoon," he said, zipping himself up over his thermals with a professional calm that his television alter ego, Felix Unger, never seemed able to maintain.


Andrea G. Lanna, Gary D. Dollens
Andrea Grace Lanna, a national accounts manager for Hyatt Hotels, was married yesterday to Gary Douglas Dollens, the general manager of the Grand Hyatt New York.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Christian Iosso officiated at the Scarborough (N.Y.) Presbyterian Church.


Linda M. Nodine, Michael G. Jacobson
Linda Marianne Nodine, a daughter of Dr.
Barbara F. Nodine of Glenside, Pa., and Dr.
Calvin F. Nodine of Philadelphia, is planning to wed Michael Gregory Jacobson, a son of Rita and Mal Jacobson of Westport, Conn.
A January wedding is planned.
Ms.
Nodine, 29, is an economist for the United States Department of Agriculture in Washington.
She graduated from the University of Connecticut, as did her fiance, and received a master's degree in agricultural economics from Rutgers University.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD: Prospect Park; African Traditions With a Modern Twist
THE Urban Bush Women will dance, speechify, holler, chant and sing their way through a performance today in the Prospect Park Picnic House in Brooklyn.
The group, based in Manhattan, improvises on traditional Afro-Caribbean dance forms to create works that address contemporary themes.
Dance and a cappella music celebrate everything from a birth ceremony to a rural church service to a teen-agers' pajama party.


William J. Hurlin and Jane A. Borns
Jane Anne Borns, the daughter of William Borns and Dr.
Patricia Borns of Philadelphia, was married yesterday to William John Hurlin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Hurlin of Andover, Mass.
The Rev.
Cynthia A. Jarvis officiated at the Nassau Presbyterian Church in Princeton, N.J.
The bride, a systems engineer with A.T.&amp; T. Bell Laboratories in Holmdel, N.J., graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received graduate degrees in management and engineering from Cornell University.
Her mother is a professor emeritus of radiology at the medical school of the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a retired president of Energy Decisions Inc., a consulting firm based in Washington.


Udder Voices, Udder Rooms
NO MOON, NO MILK!
By Chris Babcock.
Illustrated by Mark Teague.
Unpaged.
New York:  Crown Publishers. $12. (Ages 4 to 8) THERE'S A COW IN THE ROAD!
By Reeve Lindbergh.
Illustrated by Tracey Campbell Pearson.
Unpaged.
New York:  Dial Books for Young Readers. $13.99. (Ages 4 to 7)  HUNTING THE WHITE COW  By Tres Seymour.
Illustrated by Wendy Anderson Halperin.
Unpaged.
New York:  Orchard Books. $15.95. (Ages 4 to 7)


HOW FASHION BROKE FREE
Regarding "A Warhol Footnote" by Michael Kimmelman, the artist's inventive bent went beyond the delightfully decorative technique of his broken-line drawings, and even the stylized drama he injected into footwear.


In Paris, It's Time To Name Your Game
EVEN before autumn has transformed the city's leaves to a brilliant golden-orange, the markets and menus of Paris take on a seasonal air.
Wild cepe mushrooms sauteed with garlic, trim and tender roasted filets of wild boar, or a crispy, roasted wild duck set upon a bed of crunchy cabbage, become the standard feast as the game season gets under way.
Few Paris restaurateurs choose to ignore game: whether it's a local cafe catering to the busy office crowd at lunch; the staunch family bistro that attracts gastronomes from all corners of the city; a brasserie that draws diners all the way from Belgium to feast on nothing but game and wild mushrooms; or an elegant establishment near the Place Vendome, where a well-heeled international crowd tucks into chestnut soup or a flavorful wild partridge.


POSTINGS: Cobble Hill; Turning a Garage Into a House-Garage That Blends Into a Historic District
It will be a new three-story, one-family town house in the Cobble Hill Historic District in Brooklyn, and the architect, Joseph G. Merz of Merz Architects, had a problem.
The house, at 143 Kane Street, between Hicks and Henry Streets, is being built for a young married couple, Allen and Donna Hurkin.
The lot for construction is occupied by a one-story, two-car garage owned by the husband's parents, who live in the adjacent house to the east.
And the couple wanted to maintain a garage space for two cars.


SUNDAY, November 14, 1993; Into the Parlor
When the Feds put the inch-long "Delhi Sands flower-loving fly" on the endangered species list, there were protests, and not just from spiders.
Developers and others concerned with the dangers of endangerment raised incredulous voices.
The fly is actually the 25th insect to be officially endangered, just the first fly.
Gathered together, the 25 offer clear evidence that bugs are the latest invitees to the parlor of biophilia.


What's Under That Hood?
FLAPSTICK 10 Ridiculous Rhymes With Flaps.
Written and illustrated by Jon Agee.
Unpaged.
New York:  Dutton Children's Books. $10.99. (Ages 3 and up)


HOW FASHION BROKE FREE
Years ago, I asked a male friend what he liked best about me.
Surprised, he stammered, "I like your clothes." At the time, I dismissed him as hopelessly shallow.
After reading William Grimes's About Men column "Venus Envy," I realize (too late) he was merely admiring how I played the game.
ELISSA MAUTNER Minneapolis


Time to Inspect the Heating Systems
THE inspection and maintenance of a home heating system are important and should be done before the heating season begins in earnest.
For safety and to obtain the best results, have the job done by a qualified heating technician.
Finding a reliable technician often can be done by checking the furnace for the label of the company that installed it.
Invariably, companies that install heating systems are available to service them.


Uncool For School
Every weekday morning, Jermaine Smith, a boyishly handsome East New York teen-ager, awakens shortly after dawn to the street beats of his alarm clock-radio.
Like countless other American high school students, Jermaine sleepwalks through his routine of washing and dressing and heading for class.
But for Jermaine, who is known among his friends as "Killer Miller" (he formerly lived in the Linden Houses on Miller Street), the time-honed ritual of adolescent preening includes an unusual variation.
As he nears Thomas Jefferson High School, where, he says, he is a better-than-average student, he plunges his fingers into his mouth and plucks out $400 worth of gold dental caps from his teeth -- a bridge of six on the top and eight on the bottom that are inscribed with the letters K-I-L-L-E-R.


'It's the American Way'
GRABBING a microphone with evangelical zeal, In Sook Hong swept into a meeting hall of people, all of them elderly immigrants from Korea who looked on with stern expressions, and offered her usual advice: learn the ways of your new neighbors.
And then they started to cha-cha.
"It is important that they get involved with others in the community," Ms.
Hong explained later.
"It's the American way."
For more than a decade, Ms.
Hong, 49, has run a typically American institution, a Y.W.C.A. branch, in Flushing, Queens.
Under her direction, though, the institution has changed like the neighborhood around it.
It has become a vital educational and cultural hub for thousands of Koreans who have moved into Flushing in recent years.


Silly Tales on Little Cute Feet
MORE ROOTABAGAS By Carl Sandburg.
Collected by George Hendrick.
Illustrated by Paul O. Zelinsky. 94 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $18.


Less Congestion, but Not for Cyclists
Pedestrians along the Avenue of the Americas are beginning to enjoy more elbow room.
As part of road reconstruction, sidewalks on the east side between 40th and 56th Streets are being widened to 20 feet from 17.
Temporary asphalt has been put down, leaving fire hydrants, signs, bus shelters and street lights strangely distant from the curb.
Construction is expected to be completed by next summer.
Lisa Daglian, a spokeswoman for the Department of Transportation, said the expansion was in response to heavy pedestrian traffic in the area, particularly at bus stops.


The Executive Computer; Another Drop-In Guest Could Crash a Big Event in Vegas
THE heavyweights of the personal computer industry are preparing once again to slug it out in Las Vegas, Nev., where the annual Comdex/Fall trade show opens tomorrow.
The tone for this year's extravaganza was set earlier this month when a man in a powered parachute sailed down into the Las Vegas boxing ring where Evander Holyfield and Riddick Bowe were fighting for the heavyweight title.
If there is a similar disruption this week, it will be the arrival of the Power PC chip.
The chip is a new microprocessor forged by the alliance of International Business Machines, Apple Computer and Motorola.
It could drop into the ring where the Intel Corporation -- the heavyweight champ for the past decade -- is beating the chips out of its many challengers.


THE BEAT GOES ON
My wife and I are dwarfs.
We have a 2-year-old daughter.
On our way to the toddler playground, in Berkeley, Calif., recently, we received some teasing from a young boy of 6 or 7.
The adults with the child did not intervene, and the child continued to ridicule us as we passed by.
My wife, who is a preschool teacher, approached the child and said: "You know, your parents could tell you this as well as I can. We are not silly people. We are parents. We look different, and we are little and it's O.K." We encountered two more incidents of children teasing us, before we reached the toddler area.
As my wife pushed our daughter on the swing, tears came to her eyes and we hugged.


A Successful Screenwriter Polishes the Art of Seduction
The high point for Ian Abrams was the delirious moment last summer when he drove along Sunset Boulevard and saw the first billboard for "Undercover Blues." As the screenwriter gazed at the billboard, the word "Ian" was clearly visible, but "Abrams" was lost in Kathleen Turner's hair.
Mr.
Abrams circled the billboard twice.
Then he deflated his own joy.
"If the movie dies immediately," he thought, "we'll have a month and a half of going past the billboard and wincing."


Nov. 7-13: Tagamet for Sale; Ulcers Are Becoming More Affordable
Pharmaceutical executives, already stressed out by a drumfire of Clintonian criticism of their prices, had a new reason to pop heartburn pills last week.
But consumers of prescription drugs had a reason to smile.
SmithKline Beecham, the British company that makes Tagamet, a widely prescribed treatment for ulcers and heartburn, set the drug makers' gastric juices flowing by breaking a longstanding taboo.
In a direct appeal to the consumer, SmithKline offered a $10 rebate for a month's supply.
And the company sent counter displays to 50,000 pharmacies contending that the average cost, after the rebate, would be $20 a month lower than its main competitor, Zantac, an anti-ulcer treatment that is the world's largest selling prescription drug.


Jocelyn A. Cooper, John J. Gilstrap
JOCELYN A. COOPER, the president of Midnight Music, represents fledgling songwriters who are trying to place their songs on movie sound tracks, television commercials or an upcoming Vanessa Williams album.
Songwriters regularly visit her serene, minimally decorated office in midtown Manhattan, playing their music for her, some on old tape recorders of their own, and she decides which songs could be hits and which writers stars.
Ms.
Cooper, 29, who jointly owns her company with the Polygram Music Publishing Group and Mercury Records, is the first African-American woman to run a major music publishing company.
She named the venture after "midnight schools," the clandestine late-night reading classes run by slaves on some plantations.


All Pumped Up and Ready to Go


When the Big Break Came for Bernstein, He Was Not a Bit Shy
On Sunday, Nov. 14, 1943, Leonard Bernstein made his New York Philharmonic conducting debut, filling in at the last minute for an ailing Bruno Walter at Carnegie Hall.
The rest, as they say, is . . . well, you know the rest.
The 25-year-old Bernstein, too, seemed already to sense that big things lay ahead.
Two months earlier, when he was named assistant to the Philharmonic's conductor, Artur Rodzinski, he sent the New York Times report of the appointment to his friend and onetime piano teacher Helen Coates with a note scribbled on top: "Here we go!! Love, Lenny." That scrawl furnishes the title for an exhibit at the Rose Museum in Carnegie Hall commemorating the historic debut.


ROBERT DE NIRO
Robert De Niro is speaking.
This is not as rare an event as some might lead you to suspect.
On the other hand, this is a man whose resolute faith in action and the telling nature of behavior makes him wary of mere words and their potentially deadening effects.
"Don't talk it away," he and Martin Scorsese would caution one another when considering a new project.
Still, De Niro's silences are rarely passive.
"He doesn't miss anything and he's always looking," says his mother, Virginia Admiral.
"That's one reason he doesn't talk much."


Nets Fall to Bradley and Late Rally
For the second straight game, the Nets built a double-digit lead and then let the game slip away in the fourth quarter.
This time it was Philadelphia who did them in, 98-97, as the 76ers' 7-foot-6-inch rookie center, Shawn Bradley, who struggled at the outset of the season, scored 23 points.
He also hit the game-winner on a 7-foot jumper with 23.9 seconds left to play.
In helping the 76ers overcome a 16-point deficit in the final period, Bradley also had 8 rebounds over all and blocked 3 shots.


Vic Himself Would Feel At Home
When the space that used to be Trader Vic's restaurant at the Plaza Hotel reopens next spring, it will not have lost its Polynesian theme.
Mark and Alan Fleischman, who are brothers and two of the owners of the Tatou nightclubs in New York and Los Angeles, have just completed a deal to open a supper club called Gauguin.
"We are going to create a South Seas-type atmosphere," said Mark Fleischman (below), who is also an investor in Prive, a club that is scheduled to open next month at 24 East 80th Street.
"I was very taken with Gauguin's 'Tahitian Landscape.' The colors just knocked me out. So we decided to call it Gauguin."


Topics of The Times; Elevating the City's Mood
Mayor-elect Rudolph Giuliani has finally left on vacation, punctuating the second of two campaigns he has run this year.
The first occurred before Nov. 2, when he tried to reach every citizen who might vote for him.
The second has taken place since Nov. 2, and the newly elected Republican has seemed determined to reach every New Yorker who did not.
It has been an impressive and heartening performance.
If he keeps up these efforts at outreach and reconciliation, Mr.
Giuliani can start his term on Dec. 31 with greater initial support than the 50.7 percent counted on Election Day, and he will deserve it.
Keeping such support, of course, will require that he demonstrate as Mayor the kind of flexibility and cordiality that has made this post-campaign period seem especially sunny.


Free Trade Primer
In its vote this week, Congress will weigh the North American Free Trade Agreement, a complex five-volume plan to bind the economies of the United States, Canada and Mexico.
From immigration to investment and from factories to farms, the agreement draws a detailed map for a new economic era.
Article and chart, page 14.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen105.68
108.25
124.08
per Dollar
German Mark1.6944
1.6850
1.5505
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar1.3130
1.2916
1.2645
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound1.4925
1.4834
1.5505
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold$373.00
$376.75
$335.30
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


DEATH BENEFITS
Death benign?
Perhaps, in some cases.
But do we have to pat it on the back and encourage it whenever a photo opportunity presents itself?
I am certain that death would not appear so benign if Browne were to find terrorist guns pointed at his face, with only fellow photojournalists shooting on his behalf, attempting to avoid the possibility that they might "redirect" a political event.
WILLIAM COYLE Elmont, L.I.


Prehistoric Stereotyping?
To the Editor:
Another reason to hate Barney: The article "New Season, Old Cast, Room for One More"  [ Oct. 31 ]  reports that the television series "Barney and Friends" has a new character, a brother dinosaur named B J. And what is his first adventure, in this show that's supposedly designed for kids aged 2 to 6?
"A beautiful princess awaits a hero to show her out of a make-believe jungle." B J leads her out.
And this is a show conceived and written by women.


Profile: Lucie Salhany; In a Career of Hits, a Rare Swing and a Miss
EIGHT years ago, Lucie Salhany, working for Taft Broadcasting, signed up a Chicago talk-show host for a program to be syndicated on Taft's television stations.
Taft station managers questioned whether the host, an overweight black woman, would appeal to their audiences.
But Ms.
Salhany convinced them that Oprah Winfrey was just the sort of "real life" host to whom women sitting at home in sweats and curlers would relate.


Topics of The Times; The Name Is Dumas
Something is missing from posters in subway stations heralding a new film from Walt Disney Pictures titled "The Three Musketeers, All for One and One for All." The stellar cast is listed; so are the producer, director, composer, cinematographer and film editor.
Last in the catalogue of credits is David Loughery, author of the screenplay.
But there's no mention of the begetter of the immortal tale: Alexandre Dumas (1802-70).
What makes this especially odd is that Dumas was the natural son of a Napoleonic general and Marie Cessete Dumas, a black woman from Santo Domingo.
Perhaps this topical multicultural fact escaped Disney researchers, who may have assumed that "The Three Musketeers," first published in 1844, was written by Anonymous.
But the omission is consistent with Hollywood's condescending indifference to writers in general.


Tennis, Music and Perfume on Her Mind
NAME: Gabriela Sabatini.
IDENTITY: Professional tennis player, 23.
Ranked No. 7 in the world in women's tennis.
NEXT ACTIVITY: Competing in the Virginia Slim's tournament at Madison Square Garden, which begins tomorrow.
HOMES: Buenos Aires and Key Biscayne, Fla.
Q.
How is your game going?
A.
I'm playing very well.
This year wasn't probably the best one.
I didn't win any tournaments, and it was a little bit weird because I was sick at the beginning of the year.
Q.
What places are your favorites to play in?
A.
I love New York.
But in Italy, the people go crazy.
It seems like a soccer match, because they scream.
They have signs with my name.
They sing a song.
Q.
What kind of song?
A.
I don't know.
Something where they mention my name.
My family comes from Italy.
My name is Italian.
Q.
Are the players on the tour still shaken up by the stabbing of Monica Seles?
A.
You know, when we go to play, we don't think about it.
But you can find these people everywhere.
It could happen any moment.
We have to be very careful.
Especially when we walk around in a tournament, there is always someone with me.
Q.
A personal bodyguard?
A.
No.
The tournament provides someone.
Q.
How accepting are people of Martina Navratilova and other lesbian players on the circuit?
A.
I don't know how it was before, but right now each person does their own life.
I go on and play and try to do my own life and be with my people.
I like to go there and play and then leave.
Q.
What are you listening to these days?
A.
I like to listen to the radio, but I haven't found any good songs.
Nothing new.
I listen to soft rock like Phil Collins, Chicago, Air Supply, Jon Secada.
I love music, and sometimes I like to write it down and then sing it, too.
Q.
Are you saying you'd like a second career as a pop singer?
A.
I would like to do something in the future, something with music.
I don't know what's going to happen.
My personal dream is to have a family, get married and have kids.
Q.
Do you really have two perfumes with your name?
A.
Yeah, we started with Gabriela Sabattini in 1989.
For the first fragrance I chose the scent and the package and the colors.
It was a lot of fun for me.
Q.
And for the second one?
A.
The second one is called Magnetic.
For that I had to choose between two different scents.
Q.
Why did you choose the one you did?
A.
I don't know.
It has different flowers, but it's not because of that.
I just tried it on and I felt like it was going more with my personality.
Q.
How would you describe your personality?
A.
Publicly calm, very sensitive and honest.
Q.
And serious?
A.
No, not really, when I'm around people that I know.


That Thud Was the Islanders in the Cellar
Tonight's Islander game had a familiar plot line: more benchings of regulars, more juggling of lines, another mid-game goalie switch, another injury, another defeat.
This time, the Islanders fell to the Boston Bruins by 5-2 at Nassau Coliseum, their third consecutive defeat and their fifth in the last six games as their record plunged to 4-12-1.


Dick and Jane Had It Easy
THE HAPPY HOCKY FAMILY!
Written and illustrated by Lane Smith. 61 pp.
New York:  Viking. $13.99. (Ages 3 to 8)


Late Buses, Missing Buses And Buses That Drip in Rain
To the Editor:
The essay about buses' being the stepchild of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority was right on the mark ("Heading Down the Road to Extinction," Nov. 7).
I ride an M.T.A. express bus, the X51, to and from work, and this line is replete with late buses, missing buses and buses in which rain drips on your head.


Danusia Herko, Edward Frank
Danusia Herko, a staff writer in New York for the ABC-TV show "Loving," was married yesterday to Edward Charles Frank, the vice president of current series programs at NBC-TV in Burbank, Calif.
The Rev.
Joseph O'Brien officiated at St.
Cecilia's Roman Catholic Church in Englewood, N.J.
The bride graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree in international studies from the University of Denver.
She is the daughter of Wladzia Swiatek Herko of Englewood, and the late Nicholas Herko.


Mementos Of Military Mail
THERE is something in the psyche that makes letters with stamps on them seem more important than letters with metered or printed notations that say little more than "postage paid."
Currently, for example, companies that send out large volumes of mail increasingly use brightly colored coil stamps that have no price on them; instead, the legend at the bottom reads, "Bulk Rate USA." The Postal Service weighs the shipment, and the mailer pays a single fee for the entire mailing.
The Postal Service designed and produced these stamps to encourage large companies to use the mail rather than other delivery services.


A Belated Farewell To a Free-Thinking Choreographer
Lester Horton, the innovative modern-dance choreographer and teacher, lived and died in Los Angeles.
He struggled fitfully toward the end of his career to get to New York and present his work.
But he was never able to establish much of a reputation nationally, either as a historical figure or for his distinctive dance technique.
And so ". . . Genius on the Wrong Coast," a new documentary that will be shown on Thursday and next Sunday at Anthology Film Archives on the Lower East Side, is a welcome addition to the growing library of archival films on dance.
The 90-minute film, which takes its name from a review by the dance writer Clive Barnes, is also an unusually vivid re-creation of a life and career.
What makes a dance documentary work?
One common element in successful films is the sense that the film makers have amassed, digested and then put aside the facts, leaving those facts to wander into the narration seemingly on their own.


On Sugar Hill, Neighbors Fear Building's Fall
For months, as James Williams looked out from his century-old town house at 722 St.
Nicholas Avenue, he feared that the gradual collapse of the city-owned building two doors down would damage his own home.
Mr.
Williams's building and five others share the facade with 718 St.
Nicholas.
Its fall could bring down a row of distinguished town houses along a historic stretch of Harlem known as Sugar Hill.


The Pulp Crisis
Every trend leaves behind a trail of detritus and heartbreak.
During the heady, intoxicating days of the recent fruit-and-vegetable-liquefying craze, my companion bought a Juiceman juicer.
My dismay at this addition to our home stemmed not from a dislike of things frothy, but rather from a reluctance to contribute to what is slowly becoming a global crisis: the wanton disposal of fruit and vegetable pulp.


Jets Facing Cold Old History and a Hot Young Quarterback
As brilliant as the Jets' history is against Miami, it is lousy against the Colts.
Consider a game last year in which the Jets lost to the Colts, 6-3, in overtime.
It was the Jets' worst performance in any of the losses in a 4-12 season.
The Jets (4-4) have beaten Miami in five of the last six games, but they have lost 10 of the last 12 to the Colts.
And a week after hanging a 27-10 loss on the Dolphins, the Jets walk into the Indianapolis Hoosier Dome this afternoon to face the Colts (3-5).


Metaphor for Artists' Overflowing Lives
SEVERAL artists in "My Cup Runneth Over," a handsome exhibition at Georgian Court College here, interpreted this phrase from the 23d Psalm as a metaphor for their own overflowing lives.
Nina Gelardi says it with a laugh.
Instead of her usual elegant leatherwork, this Belle Mead artist created a sturdy backpack and stuffed it with a handmade belt, an artist's paintbrush, photos, copies of American Craft and Parents Magazines, and -- most significantly -- a baby bottle.
The title, "My Bag," tells all.


Nov. 7-13: Supreme Court; Justices Make It Easier to Win Sex Harassment Suits
The Supreme Court, which can so often manage to make the simple appear complex, did the opposite in its ruling last week on sexual harassment in the workplace.
The Justices took a complicated social and legal question and made the answer look easy.
A workplace environment that "would reasonably be perceived, and is perceived, as hostile or abusive" because of sexual harassment is a form of sex discrimination prohibited by Federal law, Justice Sandra Day O'Connor wrote for a unanimous court.
The decision overturned a Federal appeals court ruling that had made proof of "severe psychological injury" an essential element.
Psychological distress can be a factor, Justice O'Connor said, but the courts should look at the circumstances of each case, including the severity of the harassment, its duration, and its impact on the plaintiff's career.
The plaintiff's job performance need not have actually suffered.


At 10-0, Nebraska Orange Bowl Bound
Nebraska 49, Iowa State 17
Nebraska clinched its third consecutive trip to the Orange Bowl and went to 10-0 for the first time in a decade by beating Iowa State, 49-17, yesterday in Lincoln, Neb.


Blunder Limits Supply of Crucial Drug
Because of a bureaucratic lapse at the Justice Department, thousands of parents around the country are going from pharmacy to pharmacy trying to find supplies of Ritalin, the principal drug used to treat hyperactive children.
Supplies of Ritalin, an amphetamine-related drug that is tightly regulated by the Drug Enforcement Administration because of its potential for abuse as a stimulant, were disrupted early this fall because the Justice Department inadvertently delayed approving a manufacturer's request to increase its production.


When Equality Rears Its Ugly Head
WHEN traveling by plane or train, or ferry or bus, most of us have been seated at some time next to the Wailing Baby -- indeed, some of us may have actually once been the Wailing Baby, or, later, clucked and cooed at one in the vain effort to avert the angry glares an unhappy infant seems to elicit from people in dark suits.
Most of us, in our journeyings, have had to sit through someone else's soccer game or rock show on a roaring TV.
And most of us have had to stand because someone stole our seats when we weren't looking.


Library Fund-Raising Is Not the Answer
I commend County Executive O'Rourke  [ "Libraries Urged to Lobby for Funds," Oct. 24 ]  for convening a task force to address the financial problems facing libraries and the task force members themselves for their hard work and commitment to find solutions to these problems.
The report offers many useful ideas that the Westchester Library System will take under serious consideration.
I am concerned, however, that if, as the Task Force Report recommends, the 38 public libraries and the Westchester Library System embark on ambitious fund-raising efforts to offset deteriorating public support for basic library services, and if these efforts are successful, what will then happen to the bedrock of library support -- local and state government?
Will the governments look at the libraries' successful efforts and use them as an excuse to further reduce support?
And if successful, will private dollars compromise the mission of the public library -- to provide materials and services on all subjects and viewpoints to all who enter their doors regardless of their ability to pay?


Barbara Janoff, Alvin Silverstein
Dr.
Barbara Letofsky Janoff, the dean of continuing education at the Fashion Institute of Technology in New York, was married last evening to Alvin Bernard Silverstein, the director of United States advertising sales, in New York, for 20/20 Europe, a London-based trade magazine.
Rabbi Paul Altman officiated at the home of the bridegroom's brother and sister-in-law, on Maui, Hawaii.
The bride, 44, graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania.
She received master's and Ph.D. degrees in comparative literature from Columbia University.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.
She is a daughter of Benjamin and Frances Letofsky of Pembroke Pines, Fla., who are both retired.
Her father was the owner of the Village Inn, a restaurant and nightclub in Cherry Hill, N.J.
Her mother was a bookkeeper in Philadelphia.


Squatters Testing Limits as Apartheid Crumbles
Albert and Nellie Brown need no newspaper to tell them South Africa's old order is collapsing.
They can step out on their porch in a white university neighborhood and look across the street.
There, on an overgrown slope where they once expected to see a new hospital or terraces of comfortable homes like their own, is a burgeoning squatter village of mud huts, recycled plywood, plastic tents and sheet metal.


Kiwi and Eagle Airlines Expanding Routes
Two fledgling carriers, Kiwi International Air Lines and Eagle Airlines, have expanded their routes this fall.
On Nov. 1, Kiwi International Air Lines, (800) 538-5494, started offering two daily round trips from its base in Newark to West Palm Beach.
Round-trip fares range from $180 to $298 depending on the time of the flights.


Wall Street's Innovation and Remuneration
To the Editor:
Susan Webber was nice enough to note Citibank's pioneering role in swaps, but she is misinformed in suggesting that top management pay is a ceiling on earnings of Citibank's swap dealers.
Not so.
Citibank appreciates the value of good traders and recognizes the market for them.
Citibank's performance-based compensation can -- and does -- earn some traders and product specialists more than John Reed, our chairman, and other senior managers get in their paychecks.
And when you look at the consistently high levels of our revenue from foreign exchange, derivatives and securities trading, you can understand why.
H.
ONNO RUDING  New York, Oct. 29  The writer is a vice chairman of Citibank.


THE OUTLOOK: The Future; Plan Is No Panacea But a Remedy for Costs And Major Inequities
Suppose President Clinton's health plan is adopted.
Suppose every American gets a health insurance card and no one need worry again about being uninsured.
Will the nation be healthier?
The answer might seem obvious.
After all, 37 million Americans are uninsured.
How could the plan do anything but improve the overall health of the country?


Warming Up, Cilling Out
REVEL IN IT OR FLEE, WINTER IS HERE TO stay, at least for a while.
For revelers, there's snow and ice galore, skiing in the shadow of the Matterhorn, gliding along Ottawa's Rideau Canal and even, in Lappland, checking into the world's largest igloo for a cozy holiday a hundred miles above the Arctic circle.
The contrarily inclined can explore the splendors of Australia's Great Barrier Reef, see myriad Mexicos, catch a few rays (and possibly a concert) on a South China beach or applaud the Technicolor Sunset in Key West.
A pre-Christmas visit to Munich combines the chill of the season with the warmth of the holiday, proving that you can indeed have your cake -- or, in this case, your stollen or your birnenbrot -- and eat it, too.
Take another look at our cover.
Hot or cold, either way you turn it, you come up smiling.


Time to Inspect the Heating Systems
THE inspection and maintenance of a home heating system are important and should be done before the heating season begins in earnest.
For safety and to obtain the best results, have the job done by a qualified heating technician.
Finding a reliable technician often can be done by checking the furnace for the label of the company that installed it.
Invariably, companies that install heating systems are available to service them.


Meric Bloch Lauren Brenner, Richard Maybaum
Lauren Kimberly Brenner, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen M. Brenner of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married there last evening to Richard E. Maybaum, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Maybaum of Short Hills, N.J.
Rabbi Richard Jacobs officiated at the Westchester Reform Temple.
Mrs.
Maybaum, 29, a clinical nurse at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, graduated from the University of Rhode Island.
She is studying for a master's degree in nursing administration at Pace University.
Her father is a gastroenterologist at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.


Being Useful And Fashionable
To the Editor:
Your article on the Timberland phenomenon highlights a fact we have observed for years in selling sporting goods and work clothes: utilitarian footwear and apparel often make a fashion statement and for less money than commanded by the Madison Avenue designers who invariably pick up on such trends.
Who needs Ralph Lauren when you can have Carhartt, Woolrich and the like?


Agreement On Yonkers Waterfront
HIS city's plans to revitalize its Hudson River waterfront, a dream of successive administrations here as far back as most people can remember, were reincarnated yet again last month in a proposal drawn up by Mayor Terence M. Zaleski and County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke.
Under the joint plan, the county would invest $15.5 million to restore the riverfront to what Mr.
O'Rourke described as the "vibrancy and grandeur that befits this gateway to the Hudson Valley."


Nirvana, the Band That Hates to Be Loved
Nirvana rolls into new York City tonight as the great alternative-rock success story.
Its first album for a major label, "Nevermind," has sold nearly nine million copies since late 1991; its new one, "In Utero," zoomed directly to No. 1 when it was released in September.
Nirvana's concert tonight at the 7,000-seat New York Coliseum sold out immediately.
But if ever a band was ambivalent about reaching a mass audience, it is Nirvana.
In a song from the new album, "Radio Friendly Unit Shifter" -- music-business jargon for a recording that gets played on radio stations and sells well -- Kurt Cobain snarls, "I do not want what I have got" and agonizes, "What is wrong with me?"


Storybook Ending Belongs to Quakers
If the game had been played in Hollywood, then Harvard would have won.
If only it had ended at halftime in Harvard Stadium today, the Crimson would have been the victors and this script fulfilled.
Underdog team wins last home game for beloved and retiring old coach -- Harvard's Joe Restic -- against huge odds and everyone cries a little.


New Limits on Street Fairs Proposed
Street fairs took over major Upper West Side thoroughfares almost every weekend last spring and this fall, angering some residents and merchants who complained of garbage, odors, snarled traffic and noise.
Now the local community board has begun to consider setting limits.
Regulations under consideration would prohibit fairs that last more than a day or that stretch over multiple blocks on Columbus Avenue, Amsterdam Avenue or Broadway on Saturdays.
They would limit sponsorship to nonprofit groups situated in or serving the Upper West Side and, beginning next year, would require 200 signatures supporting a proposed fair from residents or businesses in the immediate area.


Kieran Foley, Brian Leonard
Kieran Anne Foley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence C. Foley of Rye, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Brian Michael Leonard, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Brian J. Leonard of East Orleans, Mass.
Msgr.
Thomas McMahon performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Resurrection.
Mrs.
Leonard and her husband, both 25, graduated from Providence College.
She is the manager of trading operations and research at Foley Capital Management, a private investment concern in Greenwich, Conn.
Her father is the executive vice president of sales at Computer Leasing Inc. in Hackensack, N.J.


Nafta's True Importance
There's more at stake than a simple trade pact when the House votes on the North American Free Trade Agreement this Wednesday.
For President Clinton, the vote will test his, and the Democratic Party's, ability to shape major legislation.
For the U.S., the vote will test its longstanding commitment to open trade -- the primary locomotive of world growth for a half-century.
Republican and Democratic Administrations alike have urged Latin and South Americans to adopt market reforms and open their borders to U.S. exports.
If the U.S. now rejects Nafta because it fears competition from an economy one-twentieth its size, it will look like the hemisphere's biggest hypocrite.


Books Are Chosen Over Dancing
To the Editor:
I was compelled to write, after reading the letter written by Helen Geng ("Keeping Romance Out of Bookstores," Oct. 31).


Erika Nickrenz, Karl A. Herman
Erika Nickrenz, the chairwoman of the music department at St.
Ann's School in Brooklyn Heights and a professional pianist, was married Wednesday to Karl Alan Herman, the principal clarinetist for the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra.
Judge John Edward Parker, the Town Justice of Hurley, N.Y., officiated at Mohonk Mountain House in New Paltz, N.Y.
The bride, 30, also performs with the Eroica Trio.
She graduated from the Juilliard School of Music, from which she also received a master's degree in music.
She is the daughter of Scott Nickrenz of Brookline, Mass., and Joanna Nickrenz of New York.


The Art Market Bounces Back
The art market took a step forward during the two-week fine art auction marathon that ended Wednesday.
After a severe three-year slump, consumer confidence is back.
Buyers came out in droves to bid for every level of Impressionist, modern and contemporary art, although at prices below those of the great boom five years ago.
"But we're beginning to see a breakthrough," said Christopher Burge, president of Christie's in New York.
For the last 18 months, Impressionist and modern art sales have shown a steady growth.
Artists like Matisse, Degas and Pissarro sold particularly well this fall.
At Christie's the 1885 Degas pastel, "Dancers Taking a Bow (The Ballerinas)," sold for $7 million.


As a Buff, Color Me Cadillac
ALL right, I know I'm supposed to be impartial.
But I can't help it; I really like green.
And, when I think about it, the cars that have put lust into my heart -- at least the cars that were semi-affordable and therefore almost possible -- have been Cadillacs.
Green ones.


Making The Grade
WHAT: Rival icons of greenness for American packaging.
Green Seal is small and high-concept: a sprightly green check slashed across a blue globe, legible even when thumb-print size.
Environmental Report Card is erudite and bulky: a bar graph specifying a product's intake of natural resources and output of pollution; it can sprawl across packages because it is almost impossible to read when less than two inches square.
WHO'S GOT ONE: About eight manufacturers an icon.
Green Seal appears on fringe and mainstream green merchandise: G.E. light bulbs, Clivus Multrum's waterless composting toilets, Cato Oil and Grease's recycled-oil lubricants.
Environmental Report Card itemizes "environmental burdens" of green and not-so-green items: Plasti-Kote's spray paints, Eeko's faux leather purses, Tree-Free's recycled-paper toilet paper.


Bishop Criticizes Condom Policy
Bishop Thomas V. Daily, head of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn, has criticized Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani for supporting the distribution of condoms in the public schools.
In a statement issued Friday afternoon, Bishop Daily, the spiritual leader of 1.6 million Catholics in Brooklyn and Queens, said he was "disappointed and dismayed that our Mayor-elect, Rudy Giuliani, has indicated that he supports this dangerously irresponsible policy."


RECORD BRIEF
Smashing Pumpkins: 'Siamese Dream' Virgin 88267; CD and cassette.


If Everybody Knows So Much About Education, Why Doesn't Education Work?
I RECENTLY heard of a foreign con artist whose lure was that he could help students enter a very competitive national university.
The man bragged that he knew the arcane details of the admission process, had contacts with the appropriate officials and so on.
After gathering detailed information, he collected an exorbitant fee, promising to return it if the student was not admitted.
Every year he threw the information out; every year some of the students got in.
Their fees he kept.
In my more cynical moments, I think that our preschool through high school system is no more effective than that charlatan in preparing students for college, a job or both.
The drumbeat of dismal test scores (not the baseball caps worn backward) may be cited as warrant for my cynicism. (The latest literacy statistics are just as depressing: nearly one-quarter of American adults are either illiterate or functionally so, according to the Department of Education.) Whether the recent books proposing solutions to this plight offer reason for hope, the reader can decide.


Corrections
A picture in the Neighborhood Report last week showing two limestone slabs in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park was published in error.
The intended photograph, of Nick Micros's sculpture, "Monument With Niches and Burl," appears today on page 9.


Those Mind-Boggling Promotions
AMERICANS' love of a bargain notwithstanding, consumers are getting fed up with the increasingly complex promotions being served up by corporate marketing departments.
The often dizzying lists of conditions, choices and partners in today's promotions -- a loose term for incentives that typically give shoppers something in addition to the basic product -- leave many people feeling they need an accountant's eyeshade to scour ads for savings.


The Love Affair With Large Lawns
The article "The Perfect Lawn Isn't Always Green" (Oct. 17) was very interesting in more ways than one.
It is gratifying to see an idea that has been around for years finally catch on.
Movements such as this take years to come to fruition.
Although we admire the current exponents, it is always good to give credit to the pioneers.


Pals


Hearty Chicken Stew Cheers a Wintry Day
CHICKEN and dumpling stew is truly old-fashioned fare, but it easily satisfies the appetite in chilly weather.
The only problem, when it comes to stewing a chicken, is the unevenness with which it cooks.
The white meat is done and starting to dry out before the dark meat is finished.
One way to solve the problem is to use the wings.
Although they are white meat, they tend to remain more succulent than the breast.


Unions Plan Action After United Buyout Fails
After talks fell apart Friday night between United Airlines and its pilots and machinists unions on a proposed buyout by the labor groups, the unions said yesterday that they would announce their plans in the next few days to demonstrate against the carrier and its efforts to reduce costs through asset sales and other means.
"Fasten your seatbelts, it's going to be a rough flight," said one recording yesterday on a telephone information line for members of the machinists' union in Chicago.


Too Few General Doctors
A growing shortage of doctors willing to practice general medicine has left some hospitals and health-maintenance organizations desperate for qualified candidates and, in the long term, stands as a major obstacle to overhauling the nation's health-care system.
Almost all changes under consideration include a central role for what used to be known as the family doctor -- today generally an internist or family practitioner -- who can save the system money by taking care of a wide variety of ailments on his own and referring patients for more costly specialty care or tests only when absolutely necessary.


THE NATION: It's Moving; Home Stretch For Brady Bill
FEAR of vengeful voters has created a temporary confederacy of liberal and conservative lawmakers dedicated to passing the most significant pieces of anti-crime legislation in more than a generation.
After a decade in which Congress endlessly debated what to do about crime but enacted virtually nothing, the Senate is preparing to pass a $22.3 billion anti-crime package early this week, and will likely pass the Brady bill as well.
Named after James Brady, the former White House press secretary who was wounded in the 1981 assassination attempt on President Reagan, the bill establishes a mandatory waiting period of five working days for the purchases of handguns.
Republican and rural Democratic members tacked on an amendment that would end the waiting period regulation in five years, but supporters promised to extend it once it proves effective.
Local law enforcement officials would use the waiting period to check if would-be buyers had criminal records.
The measure is not foolproof since criminals can buy their guns illicitly.


Yucatan's Pools Of Mystery
AMONG the many marvels of the Yucatan Peninsula -- ancient ruins, one of the world's longest barrier reefs, endless beaches -- are some not explored by very many tourists, though they offer an unusual way to delve into Maya culture and mythology.
These are cenotes, the collapsed limestone sinkholes that dot the Yucatan and, until recently, provided its people with their only source of drinking water.
These crystal-clear pools, the color of turquoise or emeralds, vary widely in size, nature and depth.
Some are so close to the sea that their waters are brackish rather than fresh.
Many connect into underground rivers.
Others are ringed by caves and decorated with stalactites and stalagmites or populated by manatees and sea turtles.
All were formed, and are still being formed, by the same geological processes.


Services for the Elderly
VARIOUS services for the elderly are available through the Department for the Aging, other city agencies and volunteer groups.
A complete list can be had at the City Bookstore, 61 Chambers Street, New York, N.Y. 10007; (212) 669-8245.
Here is a sampling:
HOME SHARING
New York Foundation for Senior Citizens, (212) 962-7559.
Arranges house partners, provides screening and financial advice.
MEAL DELIVERY
Aging in America, 1500 Pelham Parkway South, the Bronx, N.Y. 10461; (718) 824-4004.
BHRAGS Tompkins Park Senior Center, 550 Greene Avenue, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11216; (718) 638-3000.
Brookdale Village Senior Services, 131 Beach 19th Street, Far Rockaway, N.Y. 10023; (718) 471-2300.
Central Harlem Meals-on-Wheels, 163 West 125th Street, Room 1320, New York, N.Y. 10027; (212) 222-2552.
Housekeeping and personal care available.
Jewish Community Center of Staten Island, 475 Victory Boulevard, S.I. 10301; (718) 981-1500.
Prospect Hill Senior Services, 283 Prospect Avenue, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11215; (718) 499-9574.
Some housekeeping services available.
Southwest Queens Senior Services, 103-12 101st Avenue, Ozone Park, N.Y. 11416; (718) 847-2100.
Stanley Isaacs Senior Center, 415 East 93d Street, New York, N.Y. 10218; (212) 360-4344 or (212) 360-8348.
OUTINGS
Astoria Community Senior Citizen Center, 23-56 Broadway, Astoria, N.Y. 11106; (718) 626-1500.
Offers assistance to crime victims, health screening, shopping and chore services.
Project FIND: Hamilton Senior Center, 141 West 73d Street, New York, N.Y. 10023; (212) 787-7710.
Organizes trips.
REPAIRS
Allen A. M. E. Housing/Senior Transportation, 114-02 Guy Brewer Boulevard, Jamaica, N.Y. 11433; (718) 658-6660.
Department of Housing Preservation and Development, Emergency Repair Program, (212) 960-4800.
Emergency heat and water repairs, 24 hours a day.
New York Foundation for Senior Citizens, 150 Nassau Street, New York, N.Y. 10038; (212) 962-7653.
Home safety inspections and minor repairs, throughout the city.
TRANSPORTATION
Aging in America, (718) 824-4004. Transportation throughout the Bronx.
Hamilton Grange Senior Citizens Center, 420 West 145th Street, New York, N.Y. 10031; (212) 862-4181.
Transportation throughout Manhattan for elderly residents of Community Board districts 9 and 10 (110th to 155th Street, river to river).
VISITING
Senior Action in a Gay Environment, 208 West 13th Street, New York, N.Y. 10011; (212) 741-2247.
Visiting Neighbors, 401 Lafayette Street, New York, N.Y. 10003; (212) 260-6200.
JESSE MCKINLEY


High Noon on the Lower Level


LITTLE BIG PEOPLE
It is unfortunate that three of the pictures in your otherwise excellent article depict Chinese food in a negative way.
This singling out of one ethnic food is unfair to Chinese Americans -- especially to my friend who just opened a Chinese takeout restaurant in September.
NOEL YUE Floral Park, Queens


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League  SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Agreed to terms with Robby Thompson, second baseman, on a three-year contract.
Basketball  National Basketball Association


What Californians Brought To Arts and Crafts
There was more to the arts-and-Crafts movement in California at the turn of the century than the robust, unembellished, medieval-style furnishings popularized by Gustav Stickley of New York.
Out West, handcrafted objects boasted brighter colors, warmer woods and more elaborately decorated surfaces than anything produced back East.
The 200 items exhibited in "The Arts-and-Crafts Movement in California: Living the Good Life," at the Renwick Gallery of the National Museum of American Art through Jan. 9, comprise all the variations that evolved between 1890 and 1930.


Seen in Sorrento
To the Travel Editor: On Sept. 12, the Travel section featured Italy.
One article, "Blending In With the Home Crowd," by Molly O'Neill, described how much fun it was to "mingle" with the local residents.
There was a picture of Italian men playing cards in Sorrento in a beautiful open-air building decorated with frescoes.
Having read this article on the plane to Italy, I stuffed it into my carry-on, forgetting it was there until my husband and I arrived in Sorrento on Monday and saw the picture come to life before our eyes.


London Tickets
To the Editor: We returned Aug. 29 from a week's visit to London.
Since time was limited, we chose to follow the advice given in some of the British Tourist Authority pamphlets.
We purchased theater tickets in advance from an agency they suggest, Edwards &amp; Edwards in New York.
In addition, having read the article "Getting Into Buckingham" (Travel Advisory, June 27) that a palace visit and a London guided tour were being sold by the agency, we also purchased two of these tickets.


If Everybody Knows So Much About Education, Why Doesn't Education Work?
I RECENTLY heard of a foreign con artist whose lure was that he could help students enter a very competitive national university.
The man bragged that he knew the arcane details of the admission process, had contacts with the appropriate officials and so on.
After gathering detailed information, he collected an exorbitant fee, promising to return it if the student was not admitted.
Every year he threw the information out; every year some of the students got in.
Their fees he kept.
In my more cynical moments, I think that our preschool through high school system is no more effective than that charlatan in preparing students for college, a job or both.
The drumbeat of dismal test scores (not the baseball caps worn backward) may be cited as warrant for my cynicism. (The latest literacy statistics are just as depressing: nearly one-quarter of American adults are either illiterate or functionally so, according to the Department of Education.) Whether the recent books proposing solutions to this plight offer reason for hope, the reader can decide.


Nagged by 'What Ifs,' Tigers Stay in Running
He won't budge.
If Penn goes undefeated, and wins the Ivy League championship, the competitive fires inside Princeton running back Keith Elias will not allow him to congratulate Penn.
"I just don't think they got to see us and what we're capable of doing," Elias said today after Princeton beat Yale, 28-7.
"Situations took us out of that game."


Why Russians Can't Get Excited About a Constitution
IZVESTIA recently sent a reporter to test the political waters in Churilino (population 670), 530 miles due east of Moscow, and found that the prevailing desire was to avoid any change.
"That is understandable," wrote the reporter, Boris Bronshtein.
"There is no guarantee that change will be for the better. Here they believe they've been lucky so far -- Moscow's political tremors have not touched them at all."
To be sure, that issue of Izvestia, which used to be the government newspaper, carried the full text of the draft constitution that President Boris N. Yeltsin approved last week, as well as several reports on the political campaign under way.
And readers did scan the draft for questions closest to their hearts, like the right to own private property.
They, after all, are the voters who will be passing judgment on the draft Dec. 12, when they also elect a new parliament.


Dispute Springs Eternal Over 'Spuyten Duyvil'
To the Editor:
Washington Irving, the great humorist, passed along the old saw that interprets Spuyten Duyvil as "in spite of the Devil," and it is repeated in the F.Y.I. column of Oct. 10.
Reginald Pelham Bolton, in his authoritative history, "Washington Heights" (1924), argues persuasively that the Dutch name actually means "sprouting meadow," referring to the beautiful spring that to this day rises at the foot of Inwood Hill, near what remains of the original course of the Spuyten Duyvil Creek.
FRANK J. SYPHER Washington Heights


Nov. 7-13: Scientific Misconduct; Study Says Cheating Is Not So Rare
Scientists have long said they adhere to special standards of honesty and integrity -- a claim that has been undermined in recent years by one celebrated misconduct case after another.
Last week, charges against Dr.
Robert C. Gallo, co-discoverer of the H.I.V. virus, were dropped.
At the same time, the first large-scale study of misconduct suggested that it was far from a rare phenomena.
Researchers from the Acadia Institute in Maine and the University of Minnesota had 2,600 scientists and students at 99 universities fill out detailed questionnaires.


Young Performers on Stage Today in Fairfield
NEARLY 200 elementary, middle and high school musicians, representing 20 towns, will perform this afternoon at 3 when the Greater Bridgeport Symphony Youth Orchestras begin their 33d season in the Fairfield High School Auditorium.
Under the direction of Alfred Anderson, John Hanulik and Robert Genualdi, the youngsters in the string, concert and principal orchestras are tackling works from Corelli, Brahms and Beethoven through Gilbert and Sullivan.
Tickets will be available at the door.


Karen L. Beyer Brad Radulovacki
Karen Leesa Beyer, the daughter of Col. and Mrs.
Lawrence M. Beyer of Roanoke, Va., was married yesterday to Brad Radulovacki, a son of Dr.
Miodrag Radulovacki of Chicago and Dr.
Liliana Radulovacki of Evanston, Ill.
The Rev.
William Pindar officiated at the Central Presbyterian Church in New York.
The bride, 31, is a vice president at the Bankers Trust Company in New York.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Virginia, from which she also received an M.B.A.
Her father, who retired from the United States Army, is a regional administrator for the Virginia Department of Taxation in Roanoke.
Her mother, Penny Beyer, is the director of the Roanoke Senior Citizens Association.


Saving Gouverneur's W.P.A. Murals
To the Editor:
Your article on Gouverneur Hospital  [ "In Murals for Children, Alice's City Wonderland," Aug. 8 ]  did not do justice to the dramatic 11th-hour rescue of the marvelous W.P.A. murals that once graced that hospital's children's ward.


Corrections
A review on Oct. 17 about "Anna's Book," by Ruth Rendell writing as Barbara Vine, misstated the year of the final entry in the diary of Anna Westerby, the title character; it was 1967, not 1944.
Because of an editing error, the review also misstated the relationship of Ann Eastbrook, the novel's narrator, to Anna Westerby's daughter Swanny.
Ann Eastbrook is Swanny's niece, not her daughter.


A Priest, a Big Robbery and Even Bigger Questions
For nearly 40 years, the Rev.
Patrick Moloney has cultivated the reputation of a humble defender of the poor and helpless in the East Village of Manhattan.
But yesterday, as he stood accused of complicity in helping to steal $7.4 million from a Brink's armored car service in Rochester, a more complex question of identity arose: is he a saint, a robber, or even both?
The question goes to the heart of a set of contradictions that emerged yesterday as prosecutors outlined their case against the 61-year-old Father Moloney and two other suspects and as neighbors talked about the quiet priest they knew as Father Pat.


A Cutthroat Game Of Unmusical Chairs
A QUICK glance at the diagram of the hand and bidding may cause some readers to recommend indignantly that the columnist, or the editor, or the computer, or all three, should be replaced.
But read on.
All will be revealed.
About half a century ago, a player named S. B. Fishburne devised a form of bridge he called Cutthroat.
Alternative names were Reject and Let's Pick Partners.
After any opening bid, which may not be a psychic, the bidding continues.
When it ends, the player who has made the highest bid can select any of the other three as his partner.
The selected player becomes the dummy and trades seats, if necessary, with declarer's original partner.


C.I.A. Formed Haitian Unit Later Tied to Narcotics Trade
The Central Intelligence Agency created an intelligence service in Haiti in the mid-1980's to fight the cocaine trade, but the unit evolved into an instrument of political terror whose officers at times engaged in drug trafficking, American and Haitian officials say.
American officials say the C.I.A. cut its ties to the Haitian organization shortly after the 1991 military coup against Haiti's first democratically elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


Moving Harlem Street Vendors, but Delicately
Anyone who has walked along 125th Street on a sunny afternoon has noticed that the vendors are still there, reggae and rap music blaring over their calls hawking everything from traditional African outfits to incense to videotapes.
The city was supposed to begin moving the vendors -- whose numbers, typically in the hundreds, swell on weekends and holidays -- to 126th Street sometime last month.


Riding the Rails With Europass
THE system of selling passes to Americans for travel on European railroads began in 1959, and for a long time it was pretty simple: Buy unlimited travel in all the participating countries -- 17 now -- for a certain number of days for a certain price.
But since 1988, the offerings have grown complex, with about half a dozen international versions now available for a certain number of days over a particular period, with options for auto rentals and air travel, plus national passes.
Figuring out if buying a pass for rail travel will be cheaper than buying individual tickets is a process that seems like fun only to people who like to do their own income taxes.
And the choice should be made ahead of time, because the prices are higher in Europe.
For 1994, Rail Europe, the North American sales agent for most European railroads, has created yet another pass.
That one, however, could simplify the shopping, because its sponsors say the five countries it covers -- France, Germany, Italy, Spain and Switzerland -- are the ones that 80 percent of United States rail-pass buyers visit.


A Softer Approach to Growth Problems
WHEN a particular plant fails to perform as expected, the solution sometimes is a cursory examination followed by an application from a spray can.
Much better is taking a sampling of the plant's problem to a professional consultant for a proper diagnosis and suggestion of treatment.
Many gardeners now have a handy reference library so they can do their own homework.
Greater use of town, garden and nature-center libraries has encouraged this.


A New Framework for Health Care
To control medical costs and provide secure coverage to all, President Clinton has proposed a vast restructuring of the health care system, to be phased in over several years.
The proposal would use financial incentives to encourage consumers to join low-cost health maintenance organizations, and would push doctors, hospitals and insurers to join toether in networks.
The strategy is to make consumers conscious of the ture cost of their care and, by fostering competition among plans, to force the plans to cut costs and offer better service.
If competition does not drive down costs, mandatory ceilings on the growth of insurance premiums would aim to keep total spending in line with the growth of the economy.
THE OVERSEER A seven-member National Health Board, appointed by the President, would monitor state compliance and the functioning of health alliances, interpret the standard benefit package and make recommendations about new benefits to reflect changing technology and needs, and set regional medical spending ceilings.
It would develop indicators ofthe quality of service and care offered by health plans and publicize the results to promote informed consumer choices.
A committee would monitor drug prices, raising questions to the pharmaceutical companies about those drugs it deems unreasonably expensive.
THE PAYERS Employers: Would pay the bulk of the cost.
The plan requires them to pay at least 80 percent of the average cost of premiums in thier region, and to support family coverage for married workers.
Employee: Would contribute an average of 20 percent toward their own insurance premiums, plus any required deductibles or co-payments.
Self-Employed and Nonworkers: Would be required to buy insurance, paying the full cost of premiums, unless they qualify for government subsidies.
The cost would be fully tax deductible.
Currently only 25 percent of the cost is tax deductible.
Government: Would subsidize costs for many small and low-wage businesses and for individuals (like part-time workers and the unemployed) who have incomes below 150 percent of the poverty line.
Medicare payments would continue for the elderly and disabled.
Medicaid would continue to pay for the poor, but through health alliances.
Large Corporations: Would have the option to negotiate directly with insurers for their employees' coverage, but would still be required to pay at least 80 percent of employees' premiums.
THE BROKERS Health Alliances: The core of the plan.
Run by the states under Federal scrutiny, these regional purchasing groups would collect and distribute premiums, certify health plans and offer them to consumers, insure that average premiums grow no faster than Federally set limits, collect and publish data on performance of health plans and negotiate with local doctors and hospitals to set fees for services provided outside H.M.O.'s Access: All citizens and legal resident would be covered.
Cost: Alliances would determine a target range for average premiums charged by plans in its area.
Plans would not be eligible if their charges were higher than the range.
Eligible Plans: Alliances would write a contract with any plan that met state requirements.
Options: Alliances would offer a range of medical plans of three types: an H.M.O., a fee-for-service plan, or a combination of the two.
Patients could not be turned away unless a plan is overshubscribed.
Quality: Allance would publich information to help consumers compare the service and the medical perfomance of various plans.
Size: Alliance size would be based on population, so the number of alliances in each state would vary.
Structure: Alliance structure would be determined by states.
Could function as nonprofit corporations or state agencies, but consumers and employers would have to be equally represented in the management of the alliance Corporate Alliances: If these employers decided to negotiate directly with insurers and form their won alliances, they would still have to offer the guaranteed benefits package and a choice of plans, though their employees might have fewer providers to choose from.
THE OPTIONS Most alliances would offer a large selection of plans, but all must include at least one fee-for-service options offering free choice of doctors.
The administration estimates that the average plan cost would be $1,932 a year for an individual and $4,360 for a family, but costs would vary by region.
Plans of any type would vary in price; people choosing costlier ones would pay a higher share of premiums.
Plans could offer supplemental policies, covering items like extra dental or mental health benefits; employers could choose to pay for these or consumers could buy them with after-tax dollars.
H.M.O.: The least-expensive option.
Patients sign up with a health maintenance organization and only consult doctors affiliated with that organization.
Subsribers typically pay only $10 for an office visit.
If they visit a doctor outside the plan, they pay a share of the bill.
Combination Plan: The middle option.
Patients sign up with a group for most of their care, but reserve the right to consult outside doctors by paying 20 percent of the fee for those visits.
Fee For Service: The most expensive option, offering the widest choice of doctors.
Patients can see any doctor they choose, but must pay deductibles ($200 for an individual and $400 for a family) and 20 percent of the cost of office visits and hospitalization, up to a limit of $1,500 for an individual and $3,000 for a family.
THE BENEFITS All Americans would be issued a "health security card" that would enable them to receive the guaranteed benefits listed below.
Dental: Most care for children.
Adult preventive benefits phased in by 2000.
Drugs: Prescriptions Eye &amp; Ear: Routing vision and hearing examinations; eyeglasses for children only.
Extended Care: Nursing homes or rehabilitation centers (as an alternative to hospital stays).
Maximum of 100 days each year.
Home Care: As an alternative to hospitalization; re-evaluated every 60 days.
Hospice Care: For terminally-ill people.
Hospital Stays: Semi-private room; private rooms only when medically necessary.
Mental Health: Limited psychotherapy; limited inpatient services and psychiatric hospital stays.
Office Visits: Professional services, emergency care and other outpatient hospital services; laboratory tests and ambulance.
Medical Equipment: Braces, artificial limbs or prosthetic devices, when equipment improves functional abilities or prevents futher deterioration.
Outpatient Therapy: Physical, occupational or speech therapy to restore skills lost from illness or injury.
Re-evaluated every 60 days.
Preventive care: Immunizations, mammograms, Pap smears, prenatal care and cholesterol screening.
Substance Abuse: Limited outpatient and inpatient services.
The plan excludes services that are not "medically necessary or appropraite," citing cosmetic orthodontia, hearing aids, contact lenses, sex-change surgery and in-vitro fertilization as examples of such services.
A Consumer's Guide: How Different Groups Would Be Affected
IF YOUR SITUATION IS...
Working, with Good Insurance: Many employees would see little difference, especially if they have already joined an H.M.O., and some would have more plans to choose from.
Workers opting for free choice of doctors would often pay more up front toward premiums and have higher costs as theyreceived care.
Companies would be required to pay 80 percent of average premium costs, but could pay more if they wished.
If currently offered, company-sponsored benefits behond those in the standard package remian tax-free to employee for 10 years.
Working, Uninsured: Employers would be required to contribute and employees would be required to purchase coverage, paying 20 percent of the cost if they chose an average-priced premium, less if they chose a cheaper one.
Workers would receive a subsidy toward their share, on a sliding scale, it family income is below 150 percent of the poverty line.


If Everybody Knows So Much About Education, Why Doesn't Education Work?
I RECENTLY heard of a foreign con artist whose lure was that he could help students enter a very competitive national university.
The man bragged that he knew the arcane details of the admission process, had contacts with the appropriate officials and so on.
After gathering detailed information, he collected an exorbitant fee, promising to return it if the student was not admitted.
Every year he threw the information out; every year some of the students got in.
Their fees he kept.
In my more cynical moments, I think that our preschool through high school system is no more effective than that charlatan in preparing students for college, a job or both.
The drumbeat of dismal test scores (not the baseball caps worn backward) may be cited as warrant for my cynicism. (The latest literacy statistics are just as depressing: nearly one-quarter of American adults are either illiterate or functionally so, according to the Department of Education.) Whether the recent books proposing solutions to this plight offer reason for hope, the reader can decide.


Soaring Costs for Health Care Touch Off Service Cuts and Fees
Canada's 27-year-old universal health insurance system, in which most medical bills are paid by Government tax money and hospital budgets and doctor's fees are regulated, faces exploding costs.
One response has been to get individuals and employers to pick up more of the bill.
Canadians are proud of a system that generally provides good medical care to all its citizens at a lower cost than in the United States -- averaging 1,915 American dollars per person in 1991, the latest year for which figures are available, compared with $2,868 in the United States.
But spending in recent years has grown nearly as fast as in the United States, and is outstripping the ability of the public sector to pay.


Bonuses for Adding Games and Losing Weight
Deion Sanders received the biggest bonus of the 1993 season, $1.75 million, but Julio Valera benefited from the most unusual.
Valera, a California Angels pitcher who tends to the chunky side, had a body-fat bonus in his contract and earned $7,500 from the provision.
Valera's contract called for him to have his body fat measured on the first day of each of six months during the season, and each time he met the stipulated percentage, he would receive $2,500.


Waiting for The Post to Call
They are still waiting.
They are reporters, photographers, advertising and circulation workers, formerly of The New York Post.
Usually their days were full of ringing telephones and deadlines.


Corrections
A map on page 29 of the Travel section today, with an article about the Austrian Museum of Applied Arts, mislabels two Vienna museums in some copies.
The Museum of Applied Arts is north of the Stadtpark; the Academy of Fine Arts is on the Schillerplatz, a few blocks south of the Imperial Palace.


Some Doctors See Peril; Others Are Unworried
When Dr.
Bruce H. Berlin and Dr.
Christopher Puca finished their internal-medicine training at the Nassau County Medical Center in 1983, they set off on divergent paths.
Dr.
Berlin took $15,000 from the cash received in wedding gifts, leased a room in another doctor's office and worked nights and weekends over the next decade to build a thriving private practice all his own.
Dr.
Puca went to work for the Public Health Service in a medically underserved area in Queens and, in 1990, joined a group practice, where -- for a salary -- he takes care of patients from health maintenance organizations.


Wendy Weisner, Todd Cooperman
Wendy Joy Weisner, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alvin A. Weisner of Willowbrook, S.I., married Dr.
Todd Jonathan Cooperman, the son of Mildred Cooperman and the late Dr.
Irwin Cooperman of Oceanside, L.I., last evening.
Rabbi Elihu Kasten performed the ceremony at Congregation B'nai Jeshurun in Westerleigh, S.I.
Mrs.
Cooperman, 26, a computer technology coordinator at the Dalton School in New York, graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y.
She received a master's degree in computers and education from Columbia University.
The bride's father is a court reporter for the Civil Court in Manhattan.
The bride's mother is a special-education teacher at Public School 37 in South Beach, S.I.


Poland Exercises the Right to Channel Surf
CONSIDER a Polish family settling into the Friday night TV lineup with remote control in hand, a cable box atop the color set and a satellite dish outside the window.
They can flick between lowbrow and high, new American or classic, MTV or the Simpsons.
They can tune in CNN or European or Polish stations for news or political discussion.
There is the wildly popular satire, "Polish Zoo." At midnight the N.H.L. championships come in via the Eurosport channel, while the teen-agers hang in for the 1 A.M. live performance of the pop star Sting in Oslo via Polish state television.


Alice Aragones, Ignacio Vergara
Mr. and Mrs.
Jose R. Aragones of New York have announced January wedding plans for their daughter Alice Eugenia Marta Aragones, and Ignacio Javier Vergara, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Enrique M. Vergara of Mexico City.
Miss Aragones is an associate in the Washington office of Coudert Brothers, the New York law firm.
She graduated from Georgetown University, from which she also received a law degree.
Her father, now retired, had been a general manager for Iberia Airlines' operations in Italy, the United States, France and the Netherlands.


13 Decorators Combine to Revamp Mansion at Bailey Arboretum
ANOTHER Gold Coast mansion is coming up with a new look.
The interior of the century-old mansion at the Bailey Arboretum in Locust Valley is being revamped by 13 decorators.
The reason for the undertaking, sponsored by the new Locust Valley Chamber of Commerce, is to attract shoppers and commerce to the town.


Tender Is the Crocodile
VICTOR AND CHRISTABEL Written and illustrated by Petra Mathers.
Unpaged.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $15. (Ages 4 to 8)


New York
NEW YORK subjects visitors to inconveniences like traffic jams and panhandlers, but it offers compensations.
A big one is the city's cultural life, which is flourishing this fall.
From Broadway openings to ballet at Lincoln Center, from uptown museum shows to downtown galleries, New York is humming with things to see.
It would take a volume the size of the Manhattan yellow pages to detail all the season's cultural delights, but the following offers a taste.
Events
The 67th annual Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade starts at 9 A.M. on Thursday, Nov. 25.
This year's line-up includes a sprinkling of celebrities -- model Fabio, members of the 1969 "Miracle" Mets -- and four gigantic new balloons, including Beethoven, the St.
Bernard.
Two million spectators are expected to line the route, from Central Park West and 77th Street to Broadway and 34th Street.


Science Fiction
As Webster's Third New International Dictionary confirms, the word "fantasy" has a long and honorable lineage.
Its ancestry can be traced back to the Greek phantazein, "to make visible, present to the mind," which is derived from phaos, the Greek word for light, and akin to the Sanskrit bhati, "it shines." Sadly, most books marketed today under the label of fantasy do a disservice to this proud etymology.
Instead of fresh wonders made visible, fantasy as a commercial genre has come to mean endlessly recycled adventures of sword-wielding heroes and spell-casting wizards, recounted in a pseudopoetic prose as dreary and predictable as the characters and settings.
This makes the achievement of Peter S. Beagle in THE INNKEEPER'S SONG (Roc/Penguin, $20) all the more remarkable.
In his capable hands even the most timeworn material shines again.
Mr.
Beagle, whose 1968 novel, "The Last Unicorn," is something of a classic in the field, sets his story of love and loss in familiar territory -- a preindustrial world in which the levers of power are manipulated, for good or ill, by people known as wizards or magicians.
Three women -- one black, one brown and one paler than a corpse -- take a room in a village inn.
Their coming is no accident.
Two of the women are former pupils of a magician who is locked in a deadly duel with his greatest protege; the pale woman has been called back from the dead by an act of gratuitous kindness that will have profound consequences.


Main Street's Struggle for Survival
DESPITE changes taking place on the street outside his appliance store, Martin H. Painkin still cleaves to a dream that has sustained him for more than four decades: when he retires soon, he wants his two grown sons to carry on the family business.
But on a recent afternoon, as he tallied his ledger at a desk in the rear of Leibert Brothers Appliance Discount Center, the 68-year-old Mr.
Painkin momentarily lost heart, worried that his dream might be just that.


Guess Again
Who's in the front of you?
Great coat.
Great boots.
In fact, you'd wear the whole outfit. then you catch up at the corner and realize that the two of you don't use the same restrooms.
Feel foolish?
Don't.
This is not about the resurrection of unisex, which ha androgyny as its goal.
No, today's aim is comfort.
And when it comes to that, fabric and shape are not gender-specific.
Baggy pullovers, cropped T's, leather anything - they fit everyone.
What makes a look masculine or feminine is not clothing, it's attitude.
What kind of attitide?
The kind that keeps you guessing.


M.B.A. Programs Fight for Shrinking Pool of Students Interested in Business
For years, business schools have taught students the importance of knowing their markets and their products.
But now business schools across the country are finding that they must heed their own message.
In the last few years, interest in business careers and business education has slid.
"We're all like the airlines after deregulation, suddenly faced with really having to compete," said Stephen Christakos, director of admissions at the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University.


For the Dance


SURFACING


It's Easy Being Green
KOMODO!
Written and illustrated by Peter Sis.
Unpaged.
New York:  Greenwillow Books. $15. (Ages 4 and up) THE DRAGONS ARE SINGING TONIGHT By Jack Prelutsky.
Illustrated by Peter Sis. 39 pp.
New York: Greenwillow Books. $15. (Ages 5 and up) DRAGONS Truth, Myth, and Legend.
By David Passes.
Illustrated by Wayne Anderson. 45 pp.
New York:  Artists and Writers Guild Books/ Western Publishing Company. $14.95. (Ages 8 to 12) DEMI'S DRAGONS AND FANTASTIC CREATURES Written and illustrated by Demi.
Unpaged.
New York:  Henry Holt &amp; Company. $19.95. (Ages 4 to 8)


Stem to Stern in 10 Big Pictures
STEPHEN BIESTY'S CROSS-SECTIONS: MAN-OF-WAR By Richard Platt.
Illustrated by Stephen Biesty. 32 pp.
New York: Dorling Kindersley. $16.95. (Ages 5 and up)


Playing With the Big Boys in Consulting
WHEN the General Dynamics Corporation decided to cut costs by having an outsider run its sprawling information technology operations, the betting was that an industry giant like Electronic Data Systems or I.B.M. would win the contract, a 10-year mega-deal worth more than $3 billion.
So when the decidedly low-profile Computer Sciences Corporation grabbed the biggest prize ever in the burgeoning "outsourcing" market for computer services in late 1991, more than a few eyebrows were raised.
Just who was C.S.C., and what was it doing playing with the big boys?
Now, two years later, fewer eyebrows are being raised about the audacity -- if not the identity -- of the company.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
P.S.A.L.
THE BIG GUYS CLEAR THE WAY: Phil Thomas rushed for 152 yards on 14 carries and 2 touchdowns as SHEEPSHEAD BAY (6-3) dominated MIDWOOD (6-4), 42-13, in the Public Schools Athletic League opening-round playoff game.
Deyate Hagood, a 6-foot-2-inch, 220-pound tackle, and guards Shawn Alexander, 6-0, 235, and Chris Green, 6-2, 220, provided Thomas with gaping holes all afternoon, helping Sheepshead Bay run up 425 total yards.
Thomas also had two interceptions as a safety.


No Peeking Zone
The woman sitting on the midtown curb looks like just another crazy.
She's taken off her sensible pumps and is tugging on a pair of shiny Lycra tights -- over her calves, up her thighs, all the way under her trim little Liz Claiborne skirt.
She's taking off her jacket now.
There goes the skirt.
She's putting pads on her knees, pulling on thick socks and changing footwear.
But this isn't a homeless woman's toilette.
It's a Manhattan office worker turning Rollerblade queen.
Lacking the phone booth that Clark Kent found so useful, the woman, a 24-year-old legal secretary, is counting on eye-aversion to shelter her transformation.
It works.
The sidewalk is crowded, but no one seems to notice.
People have learned not to look.
Oddly, in an age that shuns decorum, common courtesy has replaced structural walls.


Rights Group Urges Delay For Whitman
Staking a markedly different position than have a number of black ministers and some noted civil rights leaders, the New Jersey Chapter of the N.A.A.C.P. urged Gov.-elect Christine Todd Whitman today not to take office until investigations clear her of allegations that Republicans spent $500,000 to suppress the urban black vote.
"There is no peace between the clergy of this state and Mrs. Whitman," the Rev.
Calvin McKinney, the first vice-president of the General Baptist State Convention of New Jersey, said at a news conference called by the N.A.A.C.P.
"We expect her to respond to and follow the recommendations of the N.A.A.C.P."


End for Taylor? Butkus Wonders
If there is anyone who can identify with the struggles Lawrence Taylor is enduring, it is Dick Butkus.
He is in the Hall of Fame and, like the Giants linebacker, has been called the greatest of all time at his position.
In the early 1970's, Butkus's body began to wear down.
The ligaments in his right knee were so worn that eventually bone was grating against bone.
To make a simple tackle meant the greatest of efforts -- and pain was a constant companion.
As Taylor is doing now, Butkus would often skip practices and just suit up for the games.
For a while, he refused to accept the fact that his skills were slipping.
There were times Butkus would look at game film and see that he was always a step behind, that instead of making a tackle he was just piling on.
Then came a Monday night in 1973 and a nationally televised audience saw Butkus, perhaps football's greatest warrior, limping around the field.
It was around then that players began to compare Butkus to a wounded grizzly.


A New Home for the 107th
The 107th Precinct station house in Fresh Meadows has never really been much of a station house at all.
In fact, it was a one-story parking garage until about three decades ago, when it was converted to house the precinct staff.
Now, though, the precinct's 230 officers, administrators and clerical workers are getting ready to move into a new three-story building in Electchester -- the first station house to be built in Queens since 1983, when the staff of the 115th Precinct settled in a building on Northern Boulevard in Jackson Heights.


POSTINGS: Should It Be Moved?; Discussing the Future Of Hamilton Grange
Earlier this year, the National Park Service decided to lift up Hamilton Grange, the rural home of Alexander Hamilton from 1802 to 1804, and carry it from 287 Convent Avenue in Hamilton Heights across West 141st Street to St.
Nicholas Park, which is a block away.
The plan, however, has met with opposition from some Harlem community members, who say that the Grange should remain where it is, next to St.
Luke's Episcopal Church and among the brownstones of Hamilton Heights, and that to move it would put a rift in the fabric of the community.


From Soup to Sushi, It's Strictly Japanese
WHEN Shiki, a tiny Japanese restaurant in Babylon, opened two years ago, it would have been overwhelmed by the crowds generated by a favorable review.
Last month, things changed.
This popular Japanese outpost on Main Street doubled its size.
Now here is that favorable review.
Shiki is simple, sleek and serene with its pale beige walls, light wood, artistic flower arrangements and Asian prints.
Each of the twin dining rooms has its own sushi bar.
Additionally, the newer one features a partly screened tatami section where agile patrons remove their shoes, sit on pillows and enjoy Japanese-style dining.


New Abortion Fight Looms on Parental Notice
PROPONENTS of a bill that would require parental notification before a minor could receive an abortion are planning to intensify their efforts in support of the bill when the new Legislature convenes in January.
The bill, which has been stalled in committee in both houses of the Legislature, is being filed for the next legislative session and could be modified by its sponsors to make it more acceptable to opponents.
They say they may be willing to amend the bill to allow for notification of an adult sister or brother to substitute for parental notification.


Trade Debate Rubs Salt in Canada's Wounds; The European Example
To the Editor:
When Vice President Gore asked Ross Perot what Mr.
Perot specifically would change in the North American Free Trade Agreement, Mr.
Perot responded that he would study other free trade agreements.
He indicated that he thinks the United States could learn from the experience of the European Community in integrating Spain and Portugal.


Giuliani Takes Break By Puerto Rican Surf
The next Mayor of New York City, Rudolph W. Giuliani, found himself stuck in an awkward position today, fielding tough questions under the glare of public scrutiny, as he stood amid a grove of palm trees swaying in a gentle Caribbean breeze.
"One out of three times," he said, "you go from one sand trap to another."


Facts by Fax
Anyone going to Chicago on short notice can get a map, sightseeing details and other information from Faxback, a service introduced by the Chicago Convention and Tourism Bureau.
Callers dial (312) 567-8528, follow the instructions and enter a fax number.
The information is sent immediately.
The service is free, except for the cost of the call.


Laura P. Freundlich, Jonathan E. Fiur
Laura Pepi Freundlich, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Freundlich of Philadelphia, was married there last evening to Jonathan Edward Fiur, a son of Lola Troy Fiur of New York and the late Merton S. Fiur.
Rabbi David Wice officiated at the Hotel Atop the Bellevue.
Mrs.
Fiur, 28, is the director of corporate communications at Oxxford Clothes Inc. in New York, a Chicago-based manufacturer of men's apparel.
She graduated from Tulane University.
Her father is a managing director at Furman Selz, a New York investment bank.
Her mother, Bonnie Freundlich, is the president of Freundlich Associates, a marketing concern in Philadelphia.


Linda Wells, C. K. Thompson
Linda Wells, the editor in chief of Allure magazine, was married yesterday to Charles King Thompson, a vice president with Banque Paribas, the French bank.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York.
The bride, a graduate of Trinity College in Hartford, started Allure, a Conde Nast publication, in 1991.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Wayne Wells of St.
Louis.
The bride's father, who retired as the treasurer of the General Dynamics Corporation, the defense contractor in St.
Louis, is the president of Alltype Quality Midwest, a fire-safety company there.


Elizabeth Stout, David C. Fuchs
Elizabeth Pierce Stout, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Curtis Pierce of New York, and David Clement Fuchs, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Peter F. Fuchs, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
T.
Carleton Lee performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.
Mrs.
Fuchs, who graduated from Tufts University, operates a nursery and horticulture consulting business, Ask Elizabeth, in Lloyd Harbor, L.I.
She was a widow.


Hearty Chicken Stew Cheers a Wintry Day
CHICKEN and dumpling stew is truly old-fashioned fare, but it easily satisfies the appetite in chilly weather.
The only problem, when it comes to stewing a chicken, is the unevenness with which it cooks.
The white meat is done and starting to dry out before the dark meat is finished.
One way to solve the problem is to use the wings.
Although they are white meat, they tend to remain more succulent than the breast.


ARAFAT CONDEMNS SETTLER'S SLAYING
Responding quickly to American and Israeli demands at the highest level that he speak out, Yasir Arafat today condemned the recent killing of an Israeli settler by allies in his Palestine Liberation Organization and called for an end to violence "to safeguard the peace process."
Mr.
Arafat's statement, representing what is believed to be his first public denunciation of a lethal attack on an Israeli by Palestinian nationalists, was welcomed as "a very positive sign" by President Clinton.


Clinton's Goals for Pacific Trade Are Seen as a Hard Sell at Summit
When President Clinton earlier this year invited the leaders of Asia to Seattle for an economic summit meeting, he was already talking about a "new Pacific community." Now he is hoping to show that the meeting, the first ever, can create jobs and wealth for America by linking it to economies that together control nearly half the world's output.
But if fusing the economic superstars of the Pacific Rim in a tight economic power bloc were that simple, it would have happened long ago, many officials from Tokyo to Jakarta argue.


If The French Can Do It, Why Can't We?
Pascal Favre-Rochex is in the midst of that morning tightrope walk parents know so well -- settling his son in preschool.
His knees are scrunched up against the pint-size table as he hams it up, reading "Monsieur Rigolo" to 3-year-old Clement.
A moment later he gives his son a hug and is out the door.
The teacher, Maryse Corne, invites Clement, Antoine, Ines, Mehdi, Stanislas and 16 other toddlers to sit on the gray rug at her feet.
First they recite rhymes about escargots and bumblebees, and then they sing "Frere Jacques," pumping their right arms up and down to ring imaginary church bells.
By French standards it's just another day in preschool.
But through American eyes what's going on in this Parisian preschool is extraordinary.
This class is part of a free, full-day, public preschool, or ecole maternelle.
Many New Yorkers, Washingtonians and Californians pay $8,000 to $14,000 a year to send a child to preschool or a day-care center, if they are lucky enough to find a place.
In France, 99 percent of 3- 4- and 5-year-olds attend preschool at no or minimal charge.


Lisa Guttroff, Richard Gladstone
Lisa Mary Guttroff, a daughter of Frederick and Catherine Guttroff of Wayne, N.J., was married last evening to Richard Henry Gladstone, the son of Ted S. and Alexandra Gladstone of Greenwich, Conn.
Rabbi Paul Steinberg officiated at the Harvard Club in New York.
Mrs.
Gladstone, 27, who was until recently an analyst at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, graduated from Johns Hopkins University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in public policy from Harvard University.
Her father is a former president of the United States division of N.P.C.
Inc., a a telecommunications company in Commack, L.I.


Morelia's Colonial Grace
MORELIA is not for those whose idea of a good time involves discos, Jet Skis or golf.
The capital of the Mexican state of Michoacan is not a high-profile resort destination like Ixtapa or Cabo San Lucas.
But the graceful colonial city, built of shimmering pink stone, is a tranquil haven for travelers who are delighted by architecture, folk art and majestic scenery -- or those who just want to kick back and get a feel for the Bajio, the Mexican heartland.
The city was founded in 1541 as Valladolid, after the Spanish town, but was renamed in 1828 in honor of its native son Jose Maria Morelos de Pavon, the revolutionary priest turned soldier who led the War for Independence.
Like the city of Oaxaca, to the south, Morelia is noted for its lively mercados and artesanias, but it has yet to become a popular tourist spot.
Morelia is an easy (for Mexico) four and a half hour ride from Mexico City on a toll road, or a short flight, but on a recent three-day trip, my husband and I encountered no other Americans.


What an Earlier Trade Pact Did Up North
Almost five years after the United States-Canadian Free Trade Agreement took effect Jan. 1 1989, economists are uncertain of its impact on employment because Canada has just gone through a long recession.
Some industries were unable to keep up in the more competitive trade environment, but job losses also came from a spillover of the American recession, an overvalued Canadian dollar and high interst rates.
Daniel Schwanen, senior policy analyst at the C.D.
Howe Institute, a Toronto research group that studies employment, estimates that of the nearly 350,000 manufacturing jobs lost in the last five years, as many as 100,000 were lost in labor-intensive industries as a result of the Free Trade Agreement.
But he also estimates as many as 50,000 jobs have returned with export gains, chiefly in high technology services.


Wall Street's Innovation and Remuneration
To the Editor:
Susan Webber needs to spend more time outside Manhattan.
"On Wall Street, Masters of Innovation" (Viewpoints, Oct. 24), her paean to Wall Street as a model of how to innovate, appeared the same day as two letters and a short article on how Prudential will try to recover from one more financial innovation gone astray.
The small investor reads her boast that on Wall Street "making money takes precedence over all else" and asks, "For whom?"


Frederick D. Murphy; Publicist, 53
Frederick D. Murphy, a New York publicist who represented entertainers and philanthropies, died on Nov. 7 at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
He was 53.
He died of complications from AIDS, said Ida Lewis, a friend.


In Lappland, the Sound of Snow on Snow
A DAYDREAM FROM CHILDHOOD AS YOU lay back on summer grass and gazed at the distant sky: What would it be like to walk there, bolstered by clouds?
You could imagine it.
You could yearn for it.
Lappland in winter satisfies the daydream.
One hundred miles north of the Arctic Circle, cloudlike snow forms a firmament afloat in blue air.
At dusk, when the wind roars in and the stars take their places, you think you might begin to get your bearings, to decipher the difference between sky and earthly air.
But then the stars start falling like snow, and your bearings leave you again.


Leslie Feiner, Jeremy Levin
Leslie Alene Feiner, an assistant district attorney in the sex crimes bureau of the Brooklyn District Attorney's office, and Jeremy Ian Levin, a research chemist specializing in development of hypertensive drugs at the American Cyanamid Company in Nanuet, N.Y., are planning a January wedding.
Ms.
Feiner, 35, a daughter of Seymour Feiner and Gail D. Feiner of Jamesburg, N.Y., graduated from the University of Virginia, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received her law degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
The prospective bride's father, now retired, was an accountant with the New York law firm of Davis, Polk &amp; Wardwell.
Her mother, also retired, was an account analyst for Holman Moving Systems, a division of United Van Lines Corporation, in Hackensack, N.J.


Dickey: Calm but Combative
Bill Dickey, the Hall of Fame catcher for the New York Yankees who died at 86 on Friday in his hometown of Little Rock, Ark., was known for playing baseball in much the same way as his close friend and roommate, Lou Gehrig.
Like the ill-fated Lou, Dickey was celebrated for his modesty, dignity and composure.
Yet two incidents in Dickey's 17-year career as a player for the Yankees suggests that even as he handled such outstanding Yankee hurlers as Herb Pennock, Red Ruffing, Lefty Gomez and Waite Hoyt with consummate poise, there was another side to Dickey's placid facade.


Wall Street; Forstmann Turns Toward the Future
IN a four-page letter that reached most of his limited partners last week, Theodore J. Forstmann, general partner of Forstmann Little &amp; Company, mapped out some key changes in direction for his buyout firm, and announced the departure of founding partner Brian Little as a full-time general partner.
Not mentioned in the letter, but to be announced within days, is the additional news that Mr.
Forstmann will be taking over as chairman of Gulfstream, a Forstmann Little property whose current chairman, William Lowe, will officially resign.
Mr.
Forstmann spoke last week about the changes that he terms evolutionary, including his new role at Gulfstream.


Field Trip
A SHORT WALK AROUND THE PYRAMIDS &amp; THROUGH THE WORLD OF ART By Philip M. Isaacson.
Illustrated. 120 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $20.


Karen L. Hirsh, David A. Shuster
Karen Lisa Hirsh, a law clerk to Judge Mary Ann Cohen of the United States Tax Court, and David Alan Shuster, a lawyer in the tax division of the Justice Department, both in Washington, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Melvin Sirner officiated at the Rye Town Hilton in Rye Brook, N.Y.
Mrs.
Shuster, a cum laude graduate of Cornell University, and her husband, a magna cum laude graduate of the University of Michigan, received law degrees from New York University.
She is a daughter of Dr.
David and Ruth Hirsh of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Her father is an attending surgeon at Weiler Hospital at the Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.


Sports of The Times; Please, Sam, Don't Play It Again
IN the moments immediately following Notre Dame's convincing victory over Florida State this afternoon, the watchword was "rematch." Everybody wanted to see a rematch.
Kez McCorvey, a Seminoles wide receiver, reflected on Florida Sate-N.D.
II and predicted, "It'd kind of be like the Thrilla in Manila."


SUNDAY, November 14, 1993; Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Television
Attorney General Janet Reno is against television violence.
She also runs the F.B.I., which, in bailing out the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms down in Waco last March, itself provided a fair amount of televised violence.
Now Reno and the friendly folks at Whisky, Cigarettes and Pistols both seem to be facing some tough questions.
How can the the Bureau of Alcohol, etc. be saved?
How can the country stop television violence?
How can it stop real violence?
And most puzzling, how did alcohol, tobacco and firearms ever get put together in a Federal agency in the first place?
The answer to the last question holds the key to the first three.


The Crowd in the Suitcase
"Language, Thought and Reality" By Benjamin Lee Whorf Where words travel, can the heart be far behind?
I like to pack friendly minds in my luggage when I take long journeys.
They're books I've read before, and I don't always read them on each trip; I just like their companionship.
Isak Dinesen is a favorite, especially her "Out of Africa," because her delicate insights about people and her precise descriptions of nature make Africa shiver in my imagination.
I also like Albert Camus's "Lyrical and Critical Essays," in which he poignantly observes North Africa and the young men of Algiers, who gamble everything on the flesh, knowing in the end that they must lose.
Antoine de Saint-Exupery's "Wind, Sand and Stars" charms me with its youthful, ebullient mysticism of desert and sky, and its impromptu survival tips.
Who knows when I may crash-land far from water -- best to learn how to collect dew on a tautly tied parachute.
I never tire of Emerson's "Essays," which really are rambling walks through the New England countryside.
They strike a perfect balance between the sacred and the profane, and they include so many sprightly images and epigrams to pause and think about.


2 Female Composers Honored
TWO distinguished Westchester composers -- Ruth Schonthal and Jane Hart -- are being honored today at 3 P.M. at the New Rochelle Public Library.
They will receive the New Rochelle Council on the Arts' Lifetime Achievement in the Arts Award during a concert that will include the world premiere of Ms.
Schonthal's "Bells of Sarajevo" for Clarinet and Prepared Piano.
Among the performers will be the clarinetist Esther Lamneck, the cellist Maya Baiser, the sopranos Mareda Gaither-Graves and Margaret Astrup and the pianists Adam Kent, Elena Belli, Doris Rollings, Mary Ann Brown and Elise Yun.
The number to call for more information is 632-7878.


Patience Pays Off or Lucky Stargazers
On behalf of the Astronomical Society of New Haven, I would like to commend your article about the Connecticut Star Party (Oct. 3).
It certainly captured the flavor of the event.
There was, however, one error.
The article stated "the Connecticut star parties have been unlucky events. One of two nights in 1991 was clear, but both 1992 and this year were rained out."
On the contrary, luck was definitely with us this time.
After 10 P.M. on Saturday the clouds began to dissipate.
From midnight to 3:30 Sunday morning, when mighty Orion ascended the sky and triumphant star partiers retired to bed or bag, there was uninterrupted viewing under nearly ideal conditions.


Bosnian Serbs Begin to Question Price of Victory
"Thank God that's over," the young soldier said, settling into the passenger seat of a vehicle after it picked him up on a winding road lined with scores of Serbian tanks and guns.
After 15 months as an artillery gunner at one of the Serbian batteries near the "war road" above Sarajevo, the 22-year-old man was reveling in his release from the army of the self-styled Srpksa Republic, the independent state proclaimed on the 70 percent of Bosnia seized by Serbian nationalist troops.


Keeping Young Convicts Out of Jail
UNTIL recently, youthful offenders in the state, aged 16 through 21, who had served a prison term were given little else upon their release besides bus fare and their belongings.
Small wonder, then, that 53 percent of that population ended up returning to jail within three years of their release, according to figures from the State Education Department.
And criminal-justice experts estimate that the price of a former prisoner's return to jail, called recidivism, is nearly $54,000 a year for each inmate.
"At the county facility, the door opens and people walk out with no place for them to go," said Jean Fink, president of the Westchester Alliance for Juvenile and Criminal Justice, a 15-year-old nonprofit group of 50 organizations that are advocates for an improved justice system.
"Transitional services are most important," Ms.
Fink added.


Rangers Do the Job With Their Defense
The Rangers brought a six-game winning streak to tonight's game at USAir Arena in suburban Washington.
So did the Capitals, who started the season so pitifully and have been playing so well.
Still, this was not the topic of pregame conversation in the visitors' locker room.
The reason proved to be simple, once Mark Messier explained it.
A winning streak is nice, the captain said afterward, but it's just not the same as first place.
And with both the New Jersey Devils and the Philadelphia Flyers losing earlier this afternoon, first place in the division was within the Rangers' reach when they took the ice against the Capitals tonight.


Commercial Property:/Around West 34th Street; A High-Traffic, Low-Rent Lure
ANN M. ARBUTHNOT, a senior vice president of J. Baker, gives a one-word rationale for why her Canton, Mass. company opened two Parade of Shoes stores on West 34th Street this year: "People."
So why not 57th Street and Fifth Avenue, or one of New York's other busy retail areas?
Again, a one-word answer: "Rents."


A Softer Approach to Growth Problems
WHEN a particular plant fails to perform as expected, the solution sometimes is a cursory examination followed by an application from a spray can.
Much better is taking a sampling of the plant's problem to a professional consultant for a proper diagnosis and suggestion of treatment.
Many gardeners now have a handy reference library so they can do their own homework.
Greater use of town, garden and nature-center libraries has encouraged this.


At Irish Gathering Spot, I.R.A.'s Welcome Wanes
There was Guiness stout and Notre Dame on the television set.
But many people at the Tommy Makem's Irish Pavilion at 130 East 57th Street yesterday afternoon were focused on the news that three Irish-Americans, including a Catholic priest, had been arrested in connection with an armored car robbery in January that took in $7.4 million.
Much of the talk revolved around the apparent links the suspects had to the Irish Republican Army and the questions those ties raised about a possible motive.
Such stories feed into ethnic stereotyping of the Irish as knee-jerk I.R.A. supporters, they said, while most Irish-Americans are actually focused on other issues.


Painting the Tavern Red


The Way Things Work Underwater
SHIP Written and illustrated by David Macaulay. 96 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $19.95. (Ages 8 and up)


CHAIRWOMAN JANE
In "Chairwoman Jane" (Endpaper/Public Stages, Oct. 17), Frank Rich cannot control his urge to refer to Jane Alexander's statements and actions at her Senate confirmation hearing as "parts" or "roles" she is playing.
These references go far to make her seem insincere.
Is it possible that she is not playing a part?
Is it possible that she is a real person with a real vision?


Nancy Neiman, Darrell Brown
Nancy Eve Neiman, a daughter of Helen K. Neiman of Glen Rock, N.J., and the late Dr.
Arnold Neiman, was married last evening to Darrell Charles Brown, a son of Hazel and Garland Brown of Norwich, Conn.
Rabbi David Rosen officiated at Beechwood in Newport, R.I.
The bride, 33, graduated from Stockton State College.
She is a saleswoman in Boston for Sprint, the long distance telephone company.


Winds of Change: Irish Dethrone the Seminoles
Nobody ever asked them to be a team for the ages.
Throughout the stressful week leading to the challenge of Florida State, a game that may have been the most intensely anticipated in the history of Notre Dame Stadium, the Fighting Irish were constantly issued a simple reminder: all they had to do was become the best team here today.
The Irish barely accomplished their goal in a 31-24 victory with a power game that temporarily reduced the top-ranked Seminoles from a team worthy of forever status to a frustrated, overwhelmed group -- but one that eventually, somehow, remained a threat until the final, frantic second.


On Sunday; For a Mother, A Reprieve In Drug War
SOMETIMES the city can contrive a moment of peace, a turning from dismal certainty.
So we have Carmen Aponte, motherly felon firmly imprisoned in an earlier skirmish in the war on drugs, reunited at last on the Lower East Side with her 5-year-old daughter.
This is no small accomplishment as an increasing legion of women finish their years inside, mandatorily sentenced for petty drug dealing roles in the 1980's phase of street sweeps and high arrest tallies.
Recall how the politicians and dragnet teams back then publicly aimed for kingpins but statistically netted mostly addicts.
Now watch the mothers come back out to face a devilish Catch-22.


Hearty Chicken Stew Cheers a Wintry Day
CHICKEN and dumpling stew is truly old-fashioned fare, but it easily satisfies the appetite in chilly weather.
The only problem, when it comes to stewing a chicken, is the unevenness with which it cooks.
The white meat is done and starting to dry out before the dark meat is finished.
One way to solve the problem is to use the wings.
Although they are white meat, they tend to remain more succulent than the breast.


F.Y.I.
No Signals
Q.  Why are there no pedestrian crossing lights on Park Avenue at 57th Street?


LITTLE BIG PEOPLE
Children who walk all over their parents are not necessarily the products of dual-income families ("Little Big People," by Lucinda Franks, Oct. 10).
I have friends who work and friends who don't and many of each type have children without bedtimes, children with whom the parents negotiate every bite of food and article of clothing and children of whom permission is asked for everything.


Corrections
A report on Oct. 31 about the wedding of Elizabeth Burger mispelled the surname of the bridegroom.
He is Richard Mahony Jr.


Public &amp; Private; Tied to the Tracks
Lyle and Erik Menendez killed their parents.
There is no disputing that.
In the den of the family home in Beverly Hills they fired 15 blasts from two shotguns, nearly blowing off their father's head and shooting their mother as she crawled across the floor.
As they sit in a courtroom in Los Angeles fighting for their lives, facing the gas chamber, the only matter at issue is why.
At first the answer seemed apparent.
The Menendez brothers stood to inherit millions; after their parents were dead, they went on a rich kid's shopping spree, Rolex watches and sports cars.


HOW OTHERS DO IT: Germany; Coverage for All, With Choices
If the most critical problem in providing national health care is getting control over rapidly rising costs, as President Clinton has often said, he may find some intriguing ideas in the German health care system, which offers coverage to all at a much lower price than Americans pay.
Germany's much-admired system of health care, provided through nonprofit but private "sickness funds" that are mandatory for nearly 90 percent of the population, leaves patients with freedom to choose their own doctors and their own hospitals, and freedom from almost all medical bills.


Just Don't Call It 'Unfilmable'
As the repressed butler in "The Remains of the Day," Anthony Hopkins carries the weight of the film literally in his shoulders.
When he plays the aging Stevens of the 1950's, Mr.
Hopkins's shoulders are slightly hunched up and rounded, so full of tension they look painful.
In flashbacks to Stevens in his prime during the 1930's, the shoulders are less tense.
In those days of Stevens's blind and self-satisfied devotion to his master, Lord Darlington, the butler has a rigid bearing and placid face, though his worried eyes hint at the merciless denial of his emotional life.
The actor's posture is one visual equivalent of the self-deluded and defensive monologue by Stevens that makes up the English writer Kazuo Ishiguro's 1989 novel, on which the film is based.
What is "a great butler," Stevens fussily wonders in the novel.
Who "set the standards amongst our generation"?
That sense of a generation whose time and standards have passed is a major theme on the page.
Stevens's musing about it is absent from the film, but Mr.
Hopkins's punctilious diction and changing posture provide perfect cinematic equals.


Hearty Chicken Stew Cheers a Wintry Day
CHICKEN and dumpling stew is truly old-fashioned fare, but it easily satisfies the appetite in chilly weather.
The only problem, when it comes to stewing a chicken, is the unevenness with which it cooks.
The white meat is done and starting to dry out before the dark meat is finished.
One way to solve the problem is to use the wings.
Although they are white meat, they tend to remain more succulent than the breast.


Royal Tableware Displayed at Versailles
The tableware of Europe's royal courts from the 17th to the 19th centuries is on display in a recently opened exhibition running until Feb. 27 at the Chateau de Versailles.
"Versailles and the Royal Tables of Europe" brings together more than 1,000 pieces of the finest surviving table services from public and private collections across Europe, and traces the evolution of eating habits, etiquette and menus.
Among the masterpieces on display is a collection of 307 silver pieces from the service of Dom Jose I of Portugal, made by the silversmith Francois-Thomas Germain between 1756 and 1765.
The Orlov silver service, ordered by Catherine the Great, is represented by approximately 50 pieces brought together from the Portuguese, French, Russian and United States collections to which they now individually belong.
Among the Russian collections shown are Catherine's porcelain "Cameo" service and "Parnassus of Russia" centerpiece.
The porcelain collections include Louis XVI's "Grand Service," produced by Sevres and purchased by the British crown after the French revolution, and the "Egyptian" porcelain service that Napoleon offered to Czar Alexander I.


SUNDAY, November 14, 1993; Molly Bloom at Antioch
In a series of recent developments, the Balkanization of sex has continued to intensify.
These just in:
- John Paul II, the Pope, in his recent encyclical "The Splendor of Truth," insists on the moral unacceptability of certain acts, including homosexual activity, birth control and premarital sex.
- A national Lutheran study group urges church members to consider sanctioning gay and lesbian marriages.
The group's report emphasizes the "created goodness" of sexuality.
It considers masturbation healthy.


Nafta's Precedents; War, Pillage and Other Traditions in Trade Policy
H MM . . . let's see . . . the North American Free Trade Agreement is good for Detroit automakers and Midwestern corn growers, but bad for sugar and citrus.
And what about all those poor Mexicans who Ross Perot says haven't even begun to dream about indoor plumbing?
Could this mean an export bonanza for Kohler?
While we're at it, is the Pacific summit meeting this week in Seattle a good time to twist a few arms?
The unions have been on a tear about all those cotton-blend undies coming in from Indonesia -- or was it Malaysia?


Rain Dates: The Action Goes Indoors
It may be miserable outside, but New York has plenty of indoor places where you can swim, skate or play tennis in blissful, if temporary, ignorance, of all that.
Here is a sampling.
CITY CENTERS
ASHER LEVY RECREATIONAL CENTER F.D.R. Drive at 23d Street. (212) 447-2020.
Membership fee: $25 annually; aerobics, weights, machines, Universal equipment, rowing machines, indoor and outdoor pool; Monday through Friday, 7 A.M. to 9:30 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday 8 A.M. to 5 P.M.
CARMINE STREET POOL 3 Clarkson Street, at Seventh Avenue South, Greenwich Village. (212) 242-5228.
Membership Fee: $25 annually; $10, age 13 to 17; $5, age 12 and under; $10, age 55 and over; indoor pool, weights, volleyball, aerobics; Monday through Thursday, 7 A.M. to 11:15 P.M.; Friday, 7 A.M. to 1:15 A.M.; Saturday, 10 A.M. to 1:15 A.M.; closed Sunday.
EAST 54TH STREET RECREATION CENTER 348 East 54th Street between First and Second Avenues, East Side. (212) 397-3154.
Membership Fee: $25 annually, age 18 to 54; $10, age 13 to 17; $5 under age 12; indoor pool, Nautilus equipment, running track, basketball; Monday to Friday, 3 to 10 P.M.; Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; closed Sunday.
WEST 59th STREET RECREATION CENTER 533 West 59th Street between 10th and 11th Avenues, West Side. (212) 397-3166.
Membership Fee: $25 annually; $10, age 13 to 17; $10, age 55 and up; $5 under 5; indoor pool; Monday to Friday, 3 to 10:30 P.M.; Saturday, 10:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
HANSBOROUGH RECREATIONAL CENTER 35 West 134th Street, Harlem. (212) 234-9603.
Membership: $25 annually; 13 to 18, $10; 12 and under $5; indoor pool, gym, dance and aerobic classes; Monday to Friday, 9 A.M. to 10 P.M.; Saturday 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
ICE SKATING
SKY RINK , 450 West 33d Street (between Ninth and 10th Avenues), 16th Floor, Midtown. (212) 695-6555.
Hours: Monday, Wednesday through Friday 8 to 9:45 P.M.; Wednesday 12:10 to 2:20 P.M. and 3:40 to 5:50; Friday 12:10 to 1:40 and 3:40 to 5:20.
Saturday 12:30 to 4:30 P.M. and 8:30 to 10:45; Sunday, 12:30 to 4:45 P.M.
Admission: $7.50, children $6. Skate rentals cost $3.50.
ICE STUDIO 1035 Lexington Avenue, at 73d Street, 2d floor, Upper East Side. (212) 535-0304.
Hours: Monday through Wednesday, 12:30 to 1:30 P.M.; Thursday, 8:30 to 10 P.M.; Friday, 5 to 6 P.M. and 8:30 to 10 P.M; Saturday, noon to 1 P.M. and 5:15 to 6:15 P.M. and Sunday, noon to 1 P.M., and 5:15 to 6:15 P.M.
Admission: $5 for a one-hour session, or $6 for a one and a half-hour session.
Skate rentals are $2.75.
ABE STARK RINK Surf Avenue and West 19th Street, Coney Island. (718) 946-6536.
Hours: Saturday, 1:15 to 4 P.M.; Sunday and holidays, noon to 4 P.M.
Admission: $5.50. Skate rentals are $3 weekdays, $3.50 weekends.
WORLD'S FAIR RINK New York City Building, Flushing Meadows, Corona Park. (718) 271-1996.
Hours: Saturday, noon to 4:45 P.M. and 8:30 to 10:30 P.M.; Sunday, noon to 4:45 P.M. and 7 to 9 P.M.; Wednesday, 3:30 to 5:30 P.M.; Friday, 3:30 to 5:30 P.M. and 7:30 to 9 P.M.; holidays, noon to 4 P.M.
Admission: $3.50 to $5.50. Skate rental is $3.50. TENNIS
PROSPECT PARK TENNIS CENTER 305 Coney Island Avenue, Kensington Park. (718) 438-1200.
No membership fee. Court fees $15-$40 an hour; 10 courts; 6 A.M. to 2 A.M.
BREAK POINT TENNIS CENTER 9000 Bay Parkway, Bensonhurst. (718) 372-6878.
No membership fee. Court fee: $16-$40 an hour; 8 courts; daily, 7 A.M. to 12 A.M.
STADIUM TENNIS CENTER, 11 East 162d Street, the Bronx. (718) 293-2386.
Fees: October 22 to April 21 $725, seasonal rate; court fee: $30-$57; 8 courts; daily, 6 A.M. to 12 A.M.
ALLEY POND TENNIS CLUB 79-20 Winchester Boulevard, Queens Village. (718) 468-1239.
Fees: seasonal rate, October 21 to April 20, $468-$1,196; court fee: $18- $46; 11 courts; daily, 24 hours.
CUNNINGHAM PARK TENNIS 196-00 Union Turnpike, Fresh Meadows. (718) 479-7766.
Fees: seasonal rate Oct. 25 to April 30, $295 to $995; court fee $15 to $38; 10 courts; daily, 7 A.M. to midnight.
U.S.T.A. NATIONAL TENNIS CENTER Flushing Meadows, Corona Park. (718) 592-8000.
Fees: no membership fee; court fee, $25 to $35; 9 indoor courts; daily, 8 A.M. to midnight.
ERIN ST.
JOHN KELLY


Nafta and Jobs: In a Numbers War, No One Can Count
IF Congress gives in and approves the North American Free Trade Agreement, then the Clinton Administration undoubtedly will proclaim a new era for jobs.
More than 400,000 already have been created from the expanding trade with Mexico and many more will come -- unless the President has his math mixed up.
But tens of thousands of jobs might in fact have disappeared, as the AFL-CIO insists.
Could they both be right?
Probably they both are wrong.
Abundant evidence is emerging that jobs are shifting across borders too rapidly to declare the United States a job winner or a job loser from the trade agreement.
Counting the gains and losses could add jobs one year and subtract them the next, with this pattern persisting into the 21st century.


Time to Inspect the Heating Systems
THE inspection and maintenance of a home heating system are important and should be done before the heating season begins in earnest.
For safety and to obtain the best results, have the job done by a qualified heating technician.
Finding a reliable technician often can be done by checking the furnace for the label of the company that installed it.
Invariably, companies that install heating systems are available to service them.


Starks Is a Shooting Star With 35 As 6-0 Knicks Soar to Best Start
Patrick Ewing, his damaged neck attached to ultrasound electric cords before the game and his body thus attached to the bench for the night, did not play.
The hole for the Knicks was huge.
John Starks, with little prompting and absolutely no inclination to stop, decided he would fill the void with shots -- from everywhere, over everybody, from start to finish.
And so if he does not own a basketball conscience, Starks, making the first shot for the Knicks as well as the final one, last night owned the game.
His 35 points enabled New York to demolish the Milwaukee Bucks, 99-86, made the Garden forget for the moment about Ewing and gained for the 1993 Knicks a 6-0 record, and with it the distinction as the best start in franchise history.


Time to Inspect the Heating Systems
THE inspection and maintenance of a home heating system are important and should be done before the heating season begins in earnest.
For safety and to obtain the best results, have the job done by a qualified heating technician.
Finding a reliable technician often can be done by checking the furnace for the label of the company that installed it.
Invariably, companies that install heating systems are available to service them.


Time and Place
May 14, 1994, is the date not only of the Antique Fire Apparatus Muster in Frederick, Md., but it is also the opening of the Rhododendron Show at the National Arboretum in Washington.
You'll find tidbits like these in the 1994 Mid-Atlantic Weekenders Calendar covering events in Maryland, Virginia, Washington, West Virginia, Delaware and Pennsylvania and illustrated with hand-colored photographs.
There's one for New England, too, with charming pastels of regional scenes.


Building's New Look Shaped by Old Zoning
"ZONING calculations with a skin strapped on." That is Richard S. Hayden's description of the architecture at 320 Park Avenue, an obsolete 32-year-old office tower that he and his colleagues are redesigning from the bones out as the new headquarters of the Mutual of America Life Insurance Company.
Mutual bought the 34-story structure from the ailing Olympia &amp; York last year for $130 million and is spending $73 million to reconstruct it.
Since 320 Park Avenue was constructed just months ahead of the 1961 Zoning Resolution, it has about one and a half times as much floor space as would be allowed in a new building on the same site, making it well worth an owner's while to rebuild it rather than replace it.
Mutual plans to occupy 10 floors and lease the rest when the building reopens in the spring of 1995.


On Adopting a School and the Power of One
THE voice on the answering machine sounded familiar. A young man's voice, very young.
"Hey, Mr. Rhoden. You probably know this already," it began.
Then, with just the teeniest hint of trash talk, the voice sang an improvised chant: "Michael Jordan's gone. Michael Jordan's gone. The Knicks are going to win the N.B.A. championship."


Washington Was a Boys' Club
ELEANOR ROOSEVELT A Life of Discovery.
By Russell Freedman.
Illustrated. 198 pp.
New York:  Clarion Books. $17.95. (Ages 10 and up) A WOMAN UNAFRAID  The Achievements of Frances Perkins.
By Penny Colman.
Illustrated. 129 pp.
New York:  Atheneum. $14.95. (Ages 10 to 14)


Rhode Island Is Seeking to Keep a Killer of Four in Jail When He Reaches 21
On the night of July 27, 1987, a 13-year-old boy walked from his house in Warwick and broke into a home two doors away, took a knife from the kitchen and stabbed Rebecca Spencer, a 27-year-old mother of two, 58 times.
On Sept. 1, 1989, when he was a 15-year-old ninth-grader, the same boy, Craig Price, stabbed to death three other neighbors: Joan Heaton, 39, and her two daughters, Melissa, 8, and Jennifer, 10.
The cuts were so deep that some of the knives broke off in the bodies.


Neo-Nazi Spurs A German City To a Reaction
One of Germany's most prominent young neo-Nazis, Frank Hubner, has been certified as a candidate for Mayor here, and the problems he will face in delivering his message were made clear today when the police forbade a march he had planned.
"The form he submitted yesterday to notify us of the march had no telephone number, only a mailing address," a police officer in the eastern town said.
"We weren't able to contact him to make security arrangements, so we ordered the march canceled."


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Monday
Industrial production, Oct., percent change
0.2
0.4
Business inventories, Sept., pct. change
0.2
0.1
Auto sales, early Nov., millions, annual rate
6.9
7.0
Wednesday
Housing starts, Oct., millions, annual rate
1.35
1.35
Housing permits, Oct., millions, annual rate
1.27
1.26
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
354
350
Tuesday
Federal Reserve Open Market Committee meets
Wednesday
House to vote on North American Free Trade Agreement
Thursday
Bundesbank council meeting
Friday
President Clinton to meet Prime Minister Hosokawa


Business Diary, November 7-12
THE ECONOMY Heeeere's Al!
Heeeere's Ross!
It's the Nafta Follies!
It was the television equivalent of historical fiction.
The subject was serious, but it had "entertainment" written all over it.
As entertainment it scored: Last week's Gore-Perot "chart wars" (as a White House aide labeled it) drew the largest audience ever for a scheduled cable program.
The subject was the North American Free Trade Agreement, which Ross Perot has gleefully blasted, but kernels of serious debate were hard to spot amid the charts, pictures and what were generously called facts.
After the dust cleared, the battle raged hotter than ever for lawmakers' hearts as this week's House vote neared.
Many Mexicans did not take kindly to Mr.
Perot's depiction of a destitute country almost totally lacking in customers with enough money to buy American products.
"Before he opens his mouth," a Mexico City lawyer said, "he ought to come down here and take a look." And one newspaper termed Mr.
Perot's comments a "series of calumnies and lies."  Getting, Spending: A Balancing Act  Lawmakers, by and large, decide how this nation gets and spends.
If getting doesn't keep up with spending, it's clear where to point fingers.
But many lawmakers are saying, in effect, "We can't do it, so make us do it." That's what a balanced-budget amendment comes down to.
The idea creates some odd Senate bedfellows -- Paul Simon, liberal stalwart, who favors more getting (taxes), and Orrin Hatch, conservative extraordinaire, who advocates less spending.
Cries are getting louder for a vote, but last week, bowing to Thanksgiving, its backers put it off till February.
A Pass Is Just a Pass?
No Way!
The debate heats up daily: Where, in that vast gray area between leer and lunge, does sexual harassment lie?
Several Federal courts have ruled that lawsuits should show workplace harassment so bad that it caused "severe psychological injury." Or, in effect, someone can shoot at you as long as you don't get hit.
But last week the Supreme Court stepped in and stretched the definition considerably, ruling that harassment that creates a "hostile and abusive" environment is illegal.
"The time for strained legal arguments is over," said Marcia Greenberger of the National Women's Law Center.
Inflation: It's Gone!
It's Back!
Inflation was pronounced dead on Tuesday, but some people swore they saw it wink on Wednesday.
First came a report that producer prices, having trended downward most of the year, fell another 0.2 percent in October.
That provided reassurance that inflation had been tamed, and interest rates retreated.
But then came news that consumer prices rose 0.4 percent, the most in six months.
The main culprit was a higher gas tax, clearly a one-time blip, but rates headed up again.
And the economy is stronger, as the numbers keep showing.
On Friday came a report that October's retail sales had risen 1.5 percent, the biggest gain in six months.
Slowing Down 10-Ton Speeders  Speeding is a big killer on our highways, but it's all relative.
A sports car tooling along at 80 is far less lethal than a 10-ton truck.
So last week the Transportation Department proposed a ban on radar detectors in trucks over 18,000 pounds.
Independent truckers don't like it -- any more than they like the higher diesel prices that spurred last week's protests -- but most other people do, so it will probably happen.
Looking Joblessness in the Face  Strong as some economic statistics are, they don't help those who are left behind as this nation goes through wrenching changes and dislocations.
And their pain could be seen vividly last week on the streets of Detroit, a city that has had its insides torn out by the icy streamlining of the auto industry.
Detroit's jobless -- the city's unemployment rate is 13 percent, twice the national rate -- are so hungry for decent work that thousands of them lined up in the cold dawn for jobs that may never exist.
The very iffy jobs were advertised by sponsors of a casino in downtown Detroit to be owned by an Indian tribe in northern Michigan.
The casino has slim chances of being approved, underscoring the job-seekers' desperation.
But as one applicant said, "There's nothing else happening but crime." COMPANIES A Drug Maker Goes to the People  Makers of prescription drugs have long stayed above the consumer fray, their prices untouched by the messiness of the marketplace.
But pressures have mounted from all sides, whether it's Hillary Rodham Clinton scolding them for high prices or upstart generics turning the competitive screws.
So, as in so much of the health care universe, times are changing.
Last week, in a vivid demonstration of this shift, SmithKline Beecham said it would give $10 rebates for a month's supply of Tagamet, its big-selling ulcer drug.
The company's patent on Tagamet runs out in May, and a generic version is on the way, so this could be a signal that name brands will try harder to hang onto their market.
Instant Rival for Cellular Phones  Wireless communications: two words that define a big slice of our future.
But in the flick of an antenna, that future can take on a far different shape, as was proved last week when a relatively obscure company called Nextel Communications agreed to buy a bunch of mobile-radio licenses from Motorola for $1.8 billion in stock.
Suddenly everyone looked at the numbers and realized that with the theoretical ability to serve 180 million people nationwide, Nextel had vaulted itself into a force that has to be taken very, very seriously by cellular phone companies.
And Nextel, whose shares have quadrupled in a year, has an edge: In addition to voice conversations, it can offer built-in paging and data communications, which most cellular services don't offer.
It faces a long, bumpy ride, though; the cellular industry has a huge head start.
Going Hog-Wild Over a Chicken  Some elf clearly went around Wall Street whispering "rotisserie chicken" in eager ears, because last week a lot of investors decided that was the place to put their money.
When Boston Chicken, a franchiser, made an initial offering at $20 a share, so many investors scrambled for feathers that when trading opened, the shares more than doubled, ending at $48.50.
The shares passed through a lot of hands that day: The offering had just over 2 million shares, but volume was 8.4 million.
Investors' ardor cooled by Friday, and the stock slid to $39.75.
Paramount Does Its Own Buying  Bored with would-be buyers hammering on its door, Paramount made its own big-money acquisition last week.
Paramount, which owns Simon &amp; Schuster, agreed to pay $553 million for Macmillan, to create the world's No. 2 book publisher, after Bertelsmann.
And whether it's method or madness, this adds a wrinkle to the Paramount war.
The book deal is so big it already raises antitrust flags, but if QVC wins Paramount, the antitrust issue gets even thornier: Advance Publications, owner of Random House, is backing QVC.
And let's not forget the latest bulletin on Paramount's dance card: BellSouth has agreed to slip $1.5 billion into QVC's pocket as QVC courts the popular studio.
INTERNATIONAL Haiti's Children Pay the Price  When Americans hear of the oil embargo and other sanctions against Haiti, their mental image may well be of Haiti's military rulers holed up in a bunker, isolated by rising international pressure.
The reality might be far more cruel.
Harvard public health experts said in a study last week that the sanctions are killing as many as 1,000 Haitian children each month.
As another, less painful tack, the Administration is trying to get other nations' support for freezing overseas assets of Haiti's leaders.
Starving children might prefer that.
Disney's French Albatross  The Walt Disney Company is probably wishing it had never tried to translate its magic formula into French.
Disney is taking in plenty of money back home, but Euro Disney, clearly the victim of a sorcerer's curse, just drains away the profits.
Last week, in fact, Euro Disney -- 49 percent-owned by Disney -- reported a $900 million yearly loss, dragging Disney itself into a quarterly deficit.
If it doesn't get fresh cash, Euro Disney said it would face a "liquidity problem" (that's American for "no money").
While banks might fear throwing good money after bad, Disney has too much at stake to walk away.
Can Japan's Doors Be Opened?
Japan's economy has long been a prime American target.
The goods flow out, we say, but tight regulations keep them from flowing in, giving a nasty tilt to the trade balance.
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, three months in office, is determined to hack away at that regulatory wall.
Last week a panel he appointed called for easing or ending hundreds of regulations, and even, in a nation built on monopolies, advocated strict application of anti-monopoly laws.
So Mr.
Hosokawa now has a snazzy bouquet to offer President Clinton when they meet in Seattle this week.
But it remains to be seen whether he'll really be able to nudge Japan toward freer markets.


Some Fear Rationing of Care
Of all the facets of President Clinton's plan for overhauling health care, few have generated as much heated debate as his proposed constraints on medical spending.
The proposal has prompted warnings that it will undermine the quality of care and possibly lead to rationing.
Braking medical spending as sharply as the President proposes -- cutting annual growth by more than half of what it has been in recent years -- could force strapped medical groups to shortchange patients, denying them useful tests and treatments, some doctors and insurance executives maintain.
While these critics also fear for their own incomes and profits under the Clinton plan, their warnings are echoed by many economists.


Dreams Are on the Wane for Miami After Rusty Victory
The University of Miami football team did not get a much-wanted crack today at Bryan Fortay and, with the Florida State-Notre Dame game taking much of the day's spotlight, may have seen its hopes for a national championship reduced by scrappy Rutgers.
Consider: At halftime Miami was ahead of the Scarlet Knights, 16-10, and had watched the visitors control the ball for 22 minutes 41 seconds.


Winning a Round at Goose Pond, an Unlikely Battleground
The proof that Goose Pond, the shimmering centerpiece of Captain Tilly Park in Jamaica Hills, is a work in progress is the solar-powered aerator drifting listlessly around the pond's center.
Moored by two bobbing crimson barrels on which stenciled white letters spell "DANGER," the aerator, which has all the grace of a pterodactyl attempting the sidestroke, was set afloat recently to suppress the wild growth of algae in the pond.


Habitats/A Hamptons Gwathmey House; The One, but Not the Only
THE original plans, rolled up and tied with the strings from a vintage green and white flowered apron, lie slightly dog-eared on the slab of polished white marble.
The marble, anchored to the floor by a thin vertical piece of shiny steel, is the dining table in the living room of the extraordinary house, high in the pine woods about four miles from the center of East Hampton, L.I.


MY EMPTY LOT
Kastner's saga of nature's uninvited (and undefeated) guests (a.k.a. weeds) may open other eyes to our environment.
I have long marveled at the persistence of crab grass thrusting through cement cracks, and at the miraculous makeup of a chickweed blossom revealed under a magnifier.
As for dandelions, anywhere, I love Van Gogh's sentiment: "a juicy, joyous sigh." CLAIRE GERBER Port Republic, N.J.


True or False, Account Leaves Ministers Stung
Either way, says the Rev. DeForest B. Soaries Jr., the damage has been done.
Whether one believes Edward J. Rollins Jr. when he said this week that the campaign of Christine Todd Whitman had funneled money to black ministers so they would not urge their congregants to vote, or believes Mr.
Rollins when he later retracted the comments, angry ministers say one thing is clear: Mr.
Rollins has diminished the credibility of the black clergy at a time when blacks can least afford it.


A Sense of Epic, a Love of the Ordinary
Jacob Lawrence's career is one of continuity, consistency and integrity.
It began more than half a century ago, when he was a very young man thriving in the midst of a vibrant artistic community in Harlem, and it shows little sign of slowing down, although he is  now 76.
Mr.
Lawrence's gifts are well known.
As a storyteller and historian of the experience of black Americans, he combines a sense of the epic with an appreciation of the ordinary -- or perhaps it is more accurate to say that he appreciates the epic in the ordinary.
This allows him to paint horrific and momentous events without rant or pomposity, and therefore all the more movingly.
His art is human and immediately accessible.
It values fairness and accuracy at the same time that it abstracts big subjects into precise symbols.
It is funny.
It is colorful.
It is musical.


Get Off My Laptop
In my growing file on computer subnotebooks, I have this letter on a related subject: "Recently, in speaking to a British friend in London," writes Roni Finkelstein of Colchester, Conn., "I referred to my pocketbook. When it became obvious that he was totally confused as to my meaning, I pointed to it. 'Oh,' he said, 'your handbag.' How and when did the word pocketbook come into common American usage?"
That's easy; in 1617, the word first surfaced to denote a small book, now called a notebook; it was a book of addresses, or notes, that fitted in a pocket.
By 1816, women were carrying a booklike case with compartments for papers and knickknacks, and they called it a purse, handbag or -- extending the old term -- pocketbook.


No Headline
The freedom to die before you're a teen-ager is not what Martin Luther King lived and died for. -- PRESIDENT CLINTON.  [ 24:4. ]


Karen Miller, Matthew Henley
Karen Gayle Miller, the daughter of Nancy and Henry Miller of Somerset, N.J., was married yesterday to Matthew Joseph Henley, the son of Betsy and Joseph Henley of Bedford, Ind.
The Rev.
John J. Barbella performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Kirkpatrick Chapel at Rutgers University in New Brunswick, N.J.
Mrs.
Henley, a Rutgers graduate, is a production editor in Piscataway, N.J., with a book publishing division of the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, the engineering standards organization.


SUNDAY, November 14, 1993; This Number Has Been Disconnected
The victims of the new isolationism are everywhere.
In the latest attempt to trim Government, funds for NASA's Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) have been cut from the 1994 budget.
SETI is an easy target, of course, since it has a small constituency: a few scientists, some space buffs and an unknown number of extremely undocumented aliens.
The idea is that intelligent life might well produce radio waves and eavesdropping is cheap.
Over the past 20 years, Federal expenditures have been $58 million.


Miriam F. Herman, Sanford W. Stark
Miriam Florence Herman, a law clerk for Judge Morton I. Greenberg of the United States Court of Appeals in Trenton, was married last evening in Washington to Sanford Weil Stark, an associate in the Washington law firm of Hogan &amp; Hartson.
Rabbi Joseph Weinberg performed the ceremony at the Washington Hebrew Congregation.
Mrs.
Stark, the daughter of Odette K. Herman of Chevy Chase, Md., and Harry H. Herman Jr. of Washington, graduated summa cum laude from Yale University.
Her father is a consulting engineer in Washington.


Traffic Alert
TODAY Because of the New York City Marathon, several streets will be closed for much of today, including, in Manhattan, First Avenue from 59th to the Willis Avenue Bridge; Fifth Avenue from 102d to 120th Street, and Central Park South from Fifth Avenue to Columbus Circle.
In Brooklyn, parts of Fourth Avenue from 84th to Flatbush Avenue will be closed.
In addition, some lanes on the Queensboro, Willis Avenue, Pulaski and Madison Avenue Bridges will be closed for parts of the day.
The upper level of the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge will be closed in both directions from midnight to 2 P.M.
All Staten Island-bound traffic on the bridge will be halted from 8:30 A.M. to 12:30 P.M. and the bridge will be completely closed from 10:30 A.M. to about 11:20 A.M., as the race begins.


Supplements Useless? It Ain't Necessarily So
Dr.
Victor Herbert  [ Westchester Q&amp;A: "The Case Against Vitamin Supplements," Oct. 24 ]  is quoted as saying that there is almost no medically sound reason to take any vitamin or food supplement.
Instead he advocates a balanced diet and exercise.
In answer to the question, "Are all vitamin therapies, whether for prevention or for cure, worthless?" his reply was "Almost all," and he went on to mention a few exceptions.
"Otherwise," he is quoted as saying, "supplements have no value whatsoever, and in fact can do a lot of harm."


The Year's Best Illustrated Books
The illustrations on these pages have been taken from the Book Review's choices of the 10 best illustrated children's books of 1993.
The Book Review has annually asked a panel of three judges to make a selection from among the several thousand children's books published each year.
The judges this year were Linda Perkins, a children's librarian at the Berkeley Public Library in California; Leonard Marcus, author of "Margaret Wise Brown: Awakened by the Moon" and children's book reviewer for Parenting magazine, and Ron Barrett, an artist whose children's books include "Cloudy With a Chance of Meatballs." As a matter of note, Gennady Spirin was a winner once before, John Burningham and Peter Sis three times before.


Jennifer DeRose, Graham McAleer
Jennifer Ann DeRose, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. DeRose, and Graham James McAleer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Graham McAleer, were married yesterday in a Quaker ceremony at the Haddonfield (N.J.) Friends Meeting House.
The bride, 24, graduated magna cum laude from Haverford College and received a master's degree in sociology from the University of California at Los Angeles, where she is a doctoral student in the subject.


About Foreign Capital
To the Editor:
"How to Get, and Keep, Foreign Capital" (Viewpoints, Oct. 31) ignores that for every seller there must be a buyer, for every borrower there must be a lender.


Nafta: Something to Offend Everyone
The Clinton Administration's biggest problem in promoting the North American Free Trade Agreement is that the seven-inch-thick pact contains something to offend almost anyone.
Truckers, vegetable growers, dolphin lovers, seamstresses, nurses and human rights activists have all been critical of the agreement for very specific reasons.
The Clinton Administration's supplemental agreements on labor and environmental issues placated some environmentalists but alarmed conservative Republicans afraid that the agreement's international commissions would infringe on American sovereignty.


THE WORLD: Next Worry: North Korea; Uncertain Notes In Foreign Policy
WITH its foreign policy under fire, the Clinton Administration last week forced the resignation of Clifton R. Wharton Jr., the amiable Deputy Secretary of State.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher made clear that he didn't blame Dr.
Wharton for his foreign policy woes, but he felt that he hadn't contributed to their solutions either.
So the distinguished educator (and highest-ranking black in State Department history) is to be replaced by someone -- just who is undecided -- with stronger foreign policy credentials.
Still in their jobs were the three much-criticized officials who have struggled to set America's course in the world as President Clinton has preoccupied himself with domestic matters: Mr.
Christopher, Defense Secretary Les Aspin and Anthony Lake, the national security adviser.


Predicting Weather and Helping Children
SUNDAY, Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday: rain or snow, then windy and colder.
That's the forecast for the next few days, according to the 1994 edition of a 14-month weather calendar produced by the WHUD-WLNA Fleetweather Foundation.
This is the eighth year the calendar has been available to residents of the Hudson Valley.
The calendar, which looks very much like an illustrated monthly wall calendar, carries daily weather predictions and separate pages of information on a variety of weather topics in the back.
The 1994 edition starts this month and ends December of next year.
The calendar is also unusual in that all the proceeds generated by its sales are earmarked to benefit children.


Same-Day Delivery From the North Pole
HARVEY SLUMFENBURGER'S CHRISTMAS PRESENT Written and illustrated by John Burningham.
Unpaged.
Cambridge, Mass.
Candlewick Press. $15.95. (Ages 5 to 8)


Signa Lynch Read and Larry Mills
Signa Lynch Read, the founder and president of Three Meadows Riders Inc., a horseback riding center for people with disabilities, in Peru, Vt., was married on Tuesday to Gordon Lawrence Mills, a retired investment executive.
The Rev.
Richard H. Sterns performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Greenwich, Conn.
The bride graduated from Bennington College.
She is a daughter of the late Edmund Calvert Lynch and the late Signa Fornaris McDonald.
Her father was a founder, with the late Charles E. Merrill, of Merrill, Lynch &amp; Company, in 1915.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce, as did that of the bridegroom.


A Dozen Squatters, Ousted From Vacant Storefronts, Disappear
Until about a week ago, a dozen homeless men and women made a dwelling for themselves in "the Hole," three vacant storefronts below a six-story concrete parking garage at Livingston and Bond Streets.
Inside the neglected and abandoned buildings, which are owned by the city, they had their own rooms, complete with heaters, mattresses, chairs, sofas, hot plates and television sets.
Far from their living quarters was a room without running water or a toilet that served as their bathroom.


CLINTON DELIVERS EMOTIONAL APPEAL ON STOPPING CRIME
From the pulpit of the church where the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. delivered his last sermon, President Clinton warned black ministers today that the victories of the civil rights movement were being sullied by a "great crisis of the spirit that is gripping America today."
In an emotional appeal for people to take responsibility for the ills around them, Mr.
Clinton said it would be hard to explain to the civil rights leader how crime and violence have soared even as blacks have won a larger role in American society.


Birds Find Unlikely Sanctuary
In Gowanus Bay, just beyond the warehouses and small manufacturing outlets of Bush Terminal, birds from all over the world can be found feeding and mating amid abandoned and derelict piers and a landfill.
"It's cause for amazement," said Neil Walsh, a 55-year-old retired publishing administrator and longtime bird watcher who has been recording his discoveries weekly for about a year for the Sunset Park Historical Association.
"Every time I go down there, there's something new. It's the only place on the Brooklyn shoreline that we know of that attracts birds."


Harriet Madoff, Kent Oswald
Harriet Madoff, a daughter of Dr.
Irving M. and Janice Madoff of Menemsha, Mass., and Gregory Kent Oswald, the son of Marilyn and Peter Oswald of New York, are planning a January wedding.
Ms.
Madoff works in the international institutional sales department of Josephthal, Lyon &amp; Ross, a brokerage firm in New York.
She graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree in Russian studies from Yale University and an M.B.A. from Boston University.


Corrections
An article in the special Education Life section last Sunday about Manhattan's new Stuyvesant High School located the old one incorrectly.
It was on East 15th Street.


New Ektachromes Add Detail and Color
BY now you may have seen the advertisements slither across the pages of photo magazines.
Kodak recently introduced several new members of its Ektachrome family of color slide films and announced some of them with ads that show a luridly colored chameleon ensconced in an equally bizarre-looking garden.
The new films, Ektachrome Elite for amateurs and Lumiere for professionals, are among the first color slide films Kodak has made using its T-Grain method of applying light-sensitive emulsions to film.
Over the last decade, Kodak has introduced T-Grain emulsions on various products, most notably on its line of black-and-white T-Max films.


At Work; Little Discord on Harassment Ruling
COMPANIES and business associations reacted with surprising equanimity to a Supreme Court decision last week that would make it easier to sue over sexual harassment in the workplace.
"It further outlines what is a 'hostile environment,' " said Diane Generous, director of risk management at the National Association of Manufacturers.
"To the extent it helps define sexual harassment, it helps employers relay what harassment is or isn't and what employees should or shouldn't be doing." The decision, she said, was neither major nor startling.


Late Buses, Missing Buses And Buses That Drip in Rain
To the Editor:
There's no doubt that bus service is worse than ever, as your article says, but you omit any mention of one of the main reasons for the decline -- the inconsiderateness of riders and the failure of bus drivers to enforce the rules.


Who's Singing Now?
Alternative rockers are entering the pop-music establishment's songs-for-charity world, which began with "Do They Know It's Christmas?" in 1984 and "We Are the World" in 1985.
Sonic Youth, Pearl Jam, Cowboy Junkies, Concrete Blonde and Soul Asylum are currently contributing to group albums.  *
"No Alternative," due out this month from Arista Records, was produced by the Red Hot Organization and will benefit various AIDS centers.
On Monday night at midnight and Wednesday at 8 P.M., MTV will broadcast an hourlong show titled "No Alternative Special," with performances by the Breeders, Smashing Pumpkins and Buffalo Tom.


Broadway Baby
MY NEW YORK Written and illustrated by Kathy Jakobsen. 33 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $15.95. (Ages 5 and up)


Fair Is Only Fair
To the Editor:
For the moment I'll smile and be silent about most of Walter Goodman's mean-spirited, cynical essay -- the one on my recent speech in Miami and other recent work  [ "What Parson Rather Left Out of His Sermon," Oct. 17 ] .


Bill Dickey, the Yankee Catcher And Hall of Famer, Is Dead at 86
Bill Dickey, a Hall of Fame catcher and a member of the New York Yankees as a player, manager and coach during four decades, died Friday night at Rose Care Nursing Center in Little Rock, Ark.
He was 86.
A cause of death wasn't available, a funeral home spokesman said.
Rated by many as the finest all-round catcher in the history of the sport, Dickey was one of the brightest stars of Yankee teams that held sway over the American League between World War I and World War II.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 At a 'Y' in Flushing, In Sook Hong teaches Korean immigrants to navigate the new world, and respect the old.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 The stars?
The dancing?
The songs?
What to advertise?
How Serino Coyne calls the shots on Broadway.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 13 "Carnival of the Animals" in Riverdale; Spalding Gray on Columbus Avenue.
MOVIE CLOCK 14 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
GOOD EATING 16 Around Chinatown: octopus or salt-baked shrimp at 20 Mott Street; roast suckling pig at the Nice Restaurant.
SOAPBOX 21 The business of sex: What limits?
Two women speak out.
Plus, letters and "Eye of the Beholder."


Vienna's Decorative Spirit In Tables and Teapots
ELEGANT bentwood chairs with cane seats are as much a trademark of Vienna as the Sacher torte or the Blue Danube Waltz.
Developed by the cabinetmaker Michael Thonet some 150 years ago, the curved late-Biedermeier furniture has inspired dynasties of modern everyday objects.
It is only fitting that a parade of some 40 "Viennese chairs" and settees, cleverly floodlighted and silhouetted on canvas screens, greets visitors to the Austrian Museum of Applied Arts.
The complex is locally known as MAK, the acronym of its official name in German, Museum fur Angewandte Kunst.
The vast, internationally renowned collection of decorative arts and design has been largely inaccessible for nearly six years as the two adjoining buildings housing it were thoroughly reconstructed and expanded in a $40 million renovation program.
The museum is reopening in stages: the last of its exhibition spaces, this one occupying the basement, is an expansion and amplification of the permanent collection, and is scheduled to open on Nov. 28.


Monuments of the Maya
COPAN was so tempting.
The ruins of this major Maya city in Honduras, a mere eight miles over the border, seemed a simple excursion from Guatemala City.
But getting there is not so simple.
Travelers to this important archeological site known for its exquisite monuments face mountainous roads of dirt and rubble for a good part of the trip, red tape at the border crossing and even on paved highways, and lines of decrepit trucks that often slow the pace to 20 miles an hour.
The trip is also complicated by the fact that travel after dark is not advised because of the army's taste for randomly stopping and searching vehicles.
And if there is rain some roads may be flooded.
The grueling if sometimes scenic 120-mile drive between Guatemala City and Copan requires a minimum of five hours in good weather.
Although many guidebooks suggest that one quick day there with no overnight stay is all that is needed, a comfortable expedition to Copan is definitely a two-day affair.
We spent three days and two nights.


Heidi Udell, Vladimir Tseytlin
Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley W. Udell of Stamford, Conn., have announced January wedding plans for their daughter, Heidi Udell, and Vladimir Tseytlin, the son of Jakov Tseytlin of St.
Petersburg and the late Aleksandra Tseytlin.


Workers on Free Trade: A Split Along Class Lines
Huffing and puffing to catch the 6 o'clock train bound for the woodsy North Shore suburbs, a lawyer with a briefcase slowed her pace long enough to praise the virtues of free trade.
"We've got to keep up with the world," Leslie Sammarco said cheerfully, as she stepped on board.
"It's just smart economic policy."
For the lawyers and stockbrokers and accountants rushing from Loop offices to the Northwestern Station one recent evening, support for the proposed North American Free Trade Agreement comes easily, or, as one pipe smoker in tweed said, it is "a no-brainer."


As Sutton Said, It's Where The Money Is
IN AN overly warm New York conference room last week, Trevor Manuel was trying to persuade investors to put money into South Africa.
A senior official of the African National Congress, he is widely expected to hold a top economic job when majority rule comes to that country next spring.
Mr.
Manuel, a former community organizer who was classified as colored, or mixed-race, under apartheid, and who spent time in prison, said all the things the assembled money managers wanted to hear.
He talked of making it easy for investors to repatriate their dividends and profits, of understanding the need for good profits, of a determination to end the country's harsh exchange controls.
He understood the need for fiscal restraint.


Two Romantics Explore Old Wounds to the Heart
"Where the touch of the lover ends/ And the soul of the friend begins/ There's a need to be separate and a need to be one/ And a struggle that neither wins." So writes Jackson Browne in "Sky Blue and Black," a searching reflection on a relationship's demise from his new album, "I'm Alive."
In Phil Collins's "Both Sides," an album that, like Mr.
Browne's, consists entirely of ballads, the narrator of "Can't Turn Back the Years" muses: "If your heart's in pieces, you look for the truth/ And when I look deep down inside I know, it's too bad I love you."


Streetscapes/Central Park's 79th Street Transverse; A Sublime Landmark Lurks Beneath the Feet
THIS is a particularly good time to visit one of New York's great landmark interiors, the rock tunnel in the 79th Street transverse in Central Park.
The transverse is closed for repairs, so you will not faint from exhaust fumes or be run over.
Get in from the hidden stairway southeast of Belvedere Castle and stroll through the open-ended cavern.
As your eyes adjust to the light, you can see the abuse the tunnel has taken, and the majesty that remains.


Why Nassau Lagged in Counting the Vote
ON Election Night returns from Suffolk County rolled into the Board of Elections at a steady pace, and so did the tallies from New York City, New Jersey and other areas along the Eastern Seaboard.
In Nassau County returns dribbled out for hours, leaving candidates, the press and residents in the dark over the winners and losers.


Boteros Make a Quiet Getaway


Trevor Lange and Ellen Glasgold
Ellen Glasgold, the daughter of Dr.
Alvin and Joyce Glasgold of Highland Park, N.J., was married last evening to Trevor Lange, a son of Mervyn and Elaine Lange of Bulawayo, Zimbabwe.
Rabbi Bennett F. Miller performed the ceremony at the Hotel Macklowe in New York.
Mrs.
Lange, 29, graduated from Boston University.
She is the director of the skin spa at the Center for Facial Plastic Surgery in Highland Park, a medical office owned by her father, a plastic surgeon, and for which her mother is a business manager.
Her father also is the chairman of the departments of head and neck surgery at the Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital and at St.
Peter's Medical Center, both in New Brunswick, N.J.


Amtrak Trims Runs And Closes Offices
In a move to save $10 million a year, Amtrak has reduced rail service throughout the United States.
Early this month the frequency of the Pioneer between Denver and Seattle and the Texas Eagle between St.
Louis and San Antonio and Houston was cut back from daily to three times a week.
The River Cities train between St.
Louis and Carbondale, Ill., was discontinued and replaced by a bus that takes passengers to Centralia, Ill.
There they can connect with the City of New Orleans, which continues to run daily between Chicago and New Orleans by way of Memphis.
Ticket offices have been closed at stations in Delray Beach, Fla.; Pocatello, Idaho; Centralia, Chillicothe and Mattoon, Ill.; Fort Wayne, Ind.; Hattiesburg and McComb, Miss.; Malta, Mont.; Southern Pines, N.C.; Devils Lake, N.D.; Amsterdam, N.Y.; Youngstown, Ohio; Temple, Tex., and Cheyenne, Wyo.
Trains are continuing to stop at the stations, but passengers planning to board at stations with no ticket offices must buy tickets elsewhere, either at other Amtrak stations or offices or from travel agents.


Trade Debate Rubs Salt in Canada's Wounds
To the Editor:
I am a Canadian who experienced strong flashback feelings after listening to the Nov. 9 debate on the North American Free Trade Agreement between Al Gore and Ross Perot.
Vice President Gore's comments took me back to 1988, when Canada adopted a Free Trade Agreement with the United States.
Many of his comments could have been scripted by the Progressive Conservatives, the party that brought free trade to Canada.


LITTLE BIG PEOPLE
I do not consider myself a success as a parent when one of my children delivers a quick retort.
But when he or she shows genuine concern for a sibling (or for anyone else), I know that I have succeeded.
EILEEN J. PACKARD Simsbury, Conn.


Confusion, Errors and Fraud in Medical Bills
After Frederick Ruof had hip replacement surgery, he received a $27,000 bill that divided the total into broad categories like nursing, radiology and laboratory fees.
But Mr.
Ruof, who works in Baltimore, wanted to know exactly what his insurer was paying for and requested an itemized bill.
He received eight pages of tiny type, containing mysterious entries like "hip-uni 2 die," "auto whole bl," and "PT-PTT" -- a long list of codes, technical terms and abbreviations that was virtually indecipherable.
"I found a few things I thought were wrong, but I couldn't interpret a lot of it," said Mr.
Ruof, president of the National Emergency Medicine Association, a consumer group.
"You have to be in the hospital business or accounting business or both to understand the charges."


CAN I INTEREST YOU IN A SCHNABEL, MR. OVITZ?
Just what the art world needs to lift it out of the doldrums -- a one-sided pitch that makes the Pace Gallery look as if it has parlayed all the aces in the only game in town ("Can I Interest You in a Schnabel, Mr. Ovitz?" by Allan Schwartzman, Oct. 3).
And pardon me, if I bristle with amusement at the baroque seduction scene of collectors anticipating the pleasures of Arnie's "killing room." Outsiders can only pray that Ovitz and his fellow collectors will leave the beaten path on occasion.
EDWIN RUDA New York, N.Y.


Alyson Martin, William Landers
Alyson Anne Martin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward R. Martin of Whitehouse Station, N.J., was married yesterday to William Mark Landers, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Landers of Pelham Manor, N.Y.
Msgr.
Richard Behl performed the ceremony at Our Lady of the Mount Roman Catholic Church in Warren, N.J.
Mrs.
Landers and her husband, both 24, graduated from Georgetown University.
She is an assistant in the equity research department at Salomon Brothers, the investment bank in New York.
Her father is a partner in Martin &amp; Simmonds, a law firm in Whitehouse, N.J., and the municipal judge for Readington Township, N.J.
Her mother, Virgina Martin, is a health educator at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.


Andrew H. Plevin, Susan J. Steinthal
Susan Judy Steinthal, the daughter of Nancy Stein Steinthal and Arthur D. Steinthal, both of New York, was married last evening to Andrew Howard Plevin, the son of Gloria and Leon Plevin of Shaker Heights, Ohio.
Rabbi Haskel Lookstein performed the ceremony at Congregation Kehilath Jeshurun in New York.
Mrs.
Plevin, 23, graduated from Princeton University and is a second-year law student at Columbia University.
Her father heads his own accounting firm, Steinthal &amp; Steinthal, in New York.
Her mother is a divisional vice president at Paine Webber Inc., the securities brokerage in New York.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
HUMOR  BUBBA TALKS  Of Life, Love, Sex, Whiskey, Politics, Foreigners, Teenagers, Movies, Food, Football, and Other Matters That Occasionally Concern Human Beings.
By Dan Jenkins.
Doubleday, paper, $10.


Lack of Doctors for the Poor Is Obstacle to Health Plans
In early October, Earn J. Lloyd of the Bronx staggered into the emergency room at Montefiore Medical Center nearly comatose, nearly blind and barely able to walk.
Doctors discovered he had severe diabetes, which kept him in the hospital for the next 10 days.
But Mr.
Lloyd's more serious medical problem was the lack of a decent general doctor, which for him and hundreds of thousands of others in New York's poorer neighborhoods, turns treatable outpatient diseases like diabetes into life-threatening conditions.
In vast stretches of inner city New York -- from Harlem to Crown Heights to Morris Heights, where Mr.
Lloyd lives -- there are only a handful of doctors and virtually none who offer patients a reasonable standard of primary care.


"Anthem for Doomed Youth"
In "A War Imagined," Samuel Hynes called World War I "perhaps the most powerful force in the shaping not only of our conceptions of what war is, but of the world." The war that ended 75 years ago last week killed 20 million, among them Wilfred Owen, who wrote this poem.
What passing-bells for these who die as cattle?
-- Only the monstrous anger of the guns.
Only the stuttering rifles' rapid rattle
Can patter out their hasty orisons.
No mockeries now for them; no prayers nor bells;
Nor any voice of mourning save the choirs, --
The shrill, demented choirs of wailing shells;
And bugles calling for them from sad shires.
What candles may be held to speed them all?
Not in the hands of boys but in their eyes
Shall shine the holy glimmers of goodbyes.
The pallor of girls' brows shall be their pall
Their flowers the tenderness of patient minds,
And each slow dusk a drawing-down of blinds.


Using Cable TV to Get Child Support
Supervisor Sunne McPeak wants fathers to support their children so the cash-starved county doesn't have to.
District Attorney Gary Yancey wants the public to tattle on delinquent parents who pretend they're broke.
And Nancy Sanchez wants her former husband branded a deadbeat.


Reporter's Notebook; The Sad, Angry Vigils at Rifkin's Court Hearings
Ever since Joel Rifkin was arrested in June and confessed to killing 17 women, Margarita Gonzalez has missed only one of his court appearances in the nine counties where he said he disposed of his victims' bodies.
"And that one hearing was way out in Riverhead in Suffolk County," she said.
"I'm sorry I missed it, but I think Jenny would understand."


Still Another People-Mover In Hong Kong
Residents of Hong Kong have an amazing variety of transport -- from harbor ferries to a funicular railway -- and now there is one more: a covered outdoor escalator, built to move 27,000 people a day.
Like Hong Kong's Star Ferry and its Peak Tram, the 800-meter (about 2,600 feet) Hillside Escalator Link, which opened just weeks ago, is a serious form of urban transportation that offers yet another view of this intriguing colony.


I'll Trade You Two Callases For a Mel Ott
This is a column about collectors, something its author is not.
Being in music makes collecting hard.
It's the nature of the art.
It frustrates the acquisitive impulse.
It's different with a coin-silver spoon or a rose medallion bowl.
Things make collecting easier.
Three-dimensional objects are holdable, touchable and, if only for the moment, possessable.
Yet things create their own problems: admiration and ownership get tangled up together.
The ultimate sensual satisfaction in a piece of Italian majolica isn't just knowing it's beautiful.
It comes in paying its price, taking it home and saying, "It's mine."


A Tale of Many Mexicos
IN THE MATTER OF Mexico, I hold a position that is committed but incomplete, fragmented but constant, and lopsided but affectionate.
I am, for instance, perfectly well aware that Mexico City is, in demographic and ecological terms, a disaster.
The capital, which was in the 16th century described by Bernal Diaz del Castillo, a companion of Cortes, as a floating metropolis with a more than Venetian abundance of canals, is today literally sinking under its own weight.
Buildings old and new have trouble standing up straight on ground that is basically unstable.
Progressive overcrowding (at a reported daily increase of 1,200 more human beings), a level of pollution that is almost beyond measurement, a garbage dump from which thousands of people scratch a miserable living -- all these suggest a catastrophe in progress.


An Upscale Cafe With Southwestern Flair
THE same sure touch responsible for Gates in New Canaan, Centro in Fairfield and Greenwich and Pompano Seafood Grille in Westport is now evident in the mini-conglomerate's newest venture.
Situated right next door to Gates in New Canaan, it is called Tequila Mockingbird, a sendup of Harper Lee's novel, "To Kill a Mockingbird."
Despite the jokey name, Tequila's decor is decidedly upscale (as are its prices).
Space last occupied by Nantucket Cafe has been transformed into a mellow, Mexican-style cafe, with terra cotta tiled floors, and maize-yellow, rose-red and Mexican sky blue walls.
A vibrant mural of a vegetable market scene fills the end wall; other walls contain Tamayo-like pictures and a three-panel mirror.
There are elongated milk cans full of sunflowers and cattails, and roomy booths and tables are set with colorful plates.
A denim-clad staff members add a casual but uniformly efficient look.


Divorce Mediators And Job Preparation
As a divorce mediator, I was delighted to see such a large article devoted to mediation on Aug. 29  [ Westchester Q&amp;A: "Helping Couples Go Their Separate Ways" ] .
Mediation is getting increasingly broad coverage and progressively good press.
But this article has not served the profession -- or the public -- well at all.
It is a charming story but ignores the fact that people seeking divorce mediation should be prepared to ask a mediator some important questions relating to his or her credentials and background.
For instance, what did the mediator do to prepare for the job?
What training did he or she have?
What standards of practice does the mediator adhere to?
What code of ethics does he or she abide by?
Many people who read the story could get the impression that any individuals who think they are good with people and who have been divorced can call themselves divorce mediators.
Not!


Corrections
Because of a mechanical error, the Westchester Weekly today carries the Guide column twice, on pages 22 and 23, and omits a review of "Six Degrees of Separation," which plays today, Friday, Saturday and next Sunday at the Schoolhouse Theater in Croton Falls, N.Y.
Readers wishing copies of the review may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Voters League Marks Its 75th Year
IT was the day after the elections, and the League of Women Voters of Westchester had reason to throw its own victory party.
As an organization devoted to promoting citizen participation, the league had sponsored 27 political debates and sent out 225,000 Voters Guides during the campaign season.
The Fair Campaign Practices Committee, an independent body established by the league to hear complaints of unfair political practices, had received 26 complaints from candidates and conducted 17 hearings.
And over the last two years the league registered more than 2,000 voters in the county and held many pubic forums on local, county and state issues.


Nov. 7-13: The Media Wars; Paramount Makes Its Own Acquisition
Paramount, the well-known object of a fierce takeover war between two communications giants, took time out to make a purchase of its own last week, announcing that it planned to spend $553 million to buy Macmillan Inc., the last vestige of Robert Maxwell's publishing empire.
Macmillan has been in limbo since Mr.
Maxwell was found floating in the Atlantic on a yacht trip two years ago.
It is considered a rich property because of its strong children's and educational divisions and because of its wide range of titles, including "The Elements of Style," "Gone With the Wind" and "Jonathan Livingston Seagull." If the purchase passes legal review, it will make Paramount the second largest publisher in the world, after Germany's Bertlesman A.G.


Immigrant Pummeled in Riot Discovers the American Nightmare
Fidel Lopez, a Guatemalan immigrant who lives here in the South-Central section, is a man with serious health problems and no medical insurance.
The American dream of Mr.
Lopez, who moved to this country 20 years ago, was dashed in seconds during the riots here in April when he was dragged from his pickup truck and beaten senseless.


'Medical-Industrial Complex': Who Wins
Remember that callous wisecrack about the people the Wall Street crash of 1987 put out of a job?
Question: "How do you call a stockbroker?" Answer: "Waiter!" In the 1990's, the unwitting targets of such gallows humor could well be surgeons, hospital workers, health-insurance brokers and pharmaceutical researchers.
Under President Clinton's health proposal, which would light a fire under a number of trends already happening, a lot of Americans in the medical business, many of them well paid, would be looking for new and often less lucrative lines of work, or at least seeing their incomes fall substantially.
Others, however, would adroitly seize new opportunities and come out far ahead.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE DIAMOND LANE By Karen Karbo.
Tusk/Overlook, $13.95.
In this hilarious sendup of Hollywood, a documentary film maker is drawn into a plan to turn her own wedding into a commercial blockbuster.
In 1991 our reviewer, Robert Ward, said, "Not only is the plot ingenious, but the writing remains deft all the way through."  WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE . . .
AND YOUNG Ia Drang: The Battle That Changed the War in Vietnam By Harold G. Moore and Joseph L. Galloway.
Harper Perennial, $13.
This book chronicles four days and nights in November 1965, when American soldiers in the central highlands of Vietnam endured what proved to be the bloodiest campaign of the war.
It was also an experience that was emblematic of the entire conflict: the United States used new technological weaponry, only to be overwhelmed by the sheer numbers and persistence of the enemy.
Written by a retired officer and a journalist who were there, the book reveals "equal rations of pride and anguish, and it goes as far as any book yet written toward answering the hoary question of what combat is really like," Nicholas Proffitt said here last year.
Also reissued is THE TRAGEDY OF CAMBODIAN HISTORY: Politics, War, and Revolution Since 1945, by David P. Chandler (Yale University, $17), which shows how Vietnam's neighbor has been exploited by foreign powers and by its own leaders.
Last year our reviewer, Henry Kamm, called it "as complete a historical narrative as has ever been compiled."


Fear, Hope and the Changing of the Guard
Mayoral elections are referendums of faith in the city.
But they are also experiments in terror.
Every four years, New Yorkers are bombarded with grotesquely magnified images of urban horror.
The challenger tries to persuade us that things have never been worse.
The incumbent insists that even greater catastrophes lie ahead if he is turned out of office.
Though the contest is local, the contestants act out a national drama.
Their alternating appeals to hope and fear reverberate throughout urban America.
Four years ago, New Yorkers united behind David Dinkins with the hope that the election of New York's first black mayor could reinvigorate the city's embattled liberal tradition.
Architecture, planning and urban design have long been part of that tradition, and many New Yorkers who supported Mr.
Dinkins hoped that his administration would revive a place for design in urban affairs.
After a decade of explosive real estate development (the anarchic cityscape parodied by Anton Furst's set design for the 1989 film "Batman"), people had wearied of the argument that real estate development automatically benefits the city's quality of life.
They were looking for a governing intelligence capable of elevating architecture from the bottom line toward loftier ideals.


Who's Afraid of the Big Bad Pig?
THE THREE LITTLE WOLVES AND THE BIG BAD PIG By Eugene Trivizas.
Illustrated by Helen Oxenbury.
Unpaged.
New York:  Margaret K. McElderry Books. $15.95. (Ages 5 to 10)


Arthur D. Brennan; Judge, 94
Arthur D. Brennan, for 25 years a judge, first in Westchester County and then in the New York State courts, died on Friday at the King Street Nursing Home in Rye Brook, N.Y.
He was 94 and lived in White Plains, N.Y.
The cause was old age, said his daughter, Patricia B. Stanley of Pine Plains, N.Y.


HOW FASHION BROKE FREE
I wonder where Zaldy and Mathu "go out," dressed in their klutzy hip-high boots and sleazy gauze skirts ("Chaos Theory").
Dinner at Le Cirque?
Opera at the Met?
Shopping at Bloomie's?


The Library as Main Street's Ally
To the Editor:
I'd like to add one recommendation to the pointers for survival for small merchants that accompanied the article "Message for Mom &amp; Pop: There's Life After Wal-Mart" (Oct. 24).
If there's a public library convenient to Main Street, make sure it has enough money to stay open.
Libraries, one of the most inexpensive public services in most places, build repeat traffic for area merchants because borrowers must return regularly to bring back their books.
Wal-Marts don't provide library service.
MARVIN H. SCILKEN  New York, Oct. 26  The writer is editor of The Unabashed Librarian.


Popularizing the Classics in Order to Expand the Audience
IN a well-equipped music-editing studio in a modest single-family house here, a small group of people sat transfixed, listening to Mendelssohn.
The shimmering sounds of the Third String Quartet in D major passed through a forest of wires and cables and emerged as dancing green lines on a computer screen.
Adam Abeshouse, the recording engineer and musician who lives and works in the house, watched the moving lines and then closed his eyes to block out all but the music.
"I get goose bumps every time I hear that," he said of one ethereal passage.
"You feel lucky to have captured a moment like that on tape."


Screenplay


Subway Express Battle
Three years after ending express service on the N subway line because of deterioration on the Manhattan Bridge, Transit Authority officials hope to restore it in parts of Brooklyn next spring for a six-month trial.
But some residents in Sunset Park, which would benefit most from the restored service, say they could end up waiting twice as long for trains that would be twice as crowded.


Trade Debate Rubs Salt in Canada's Wounds; Job Export Program
To the Editor:
"If Nafta Loses" by Anthony Lewis (column, Nov. 5) ignores history.
During the last 120 years workers and employers in industries susceptible to low-wage foreign competition, like iron and steel, lobbied for and benefited from tariff protection.
Jobs and profits were preserved.
When American businesses operated almost exclusively in the United States, they shared a basic common interest with their employees.


LITTLE BIG PEOPLE
Children are just children and should be treated that way.
Stop looking at them as a reinvention of the wheel.
Stop dragging them to grownup parties and other places where adults want to be left alone.
Your children will thank you for it someday.
PAT NOONAN Rockville Centre, L.I.


Officials Try Many Routes to Goal of Cleaner Air
Using almost every tool they can think of, from changes in gasoline to new regulations on hair spray, officials in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut have pieced together plans to reduce smog-causing chemicals by at least 15 percent by 1996.
Tomorrow, they will submit those plans to the Environmental Protection Agency in Washington, then cross their fingers and hope the agency approves.
If it does, consumers would see a slew of changes, including stricter environmental testing of cars, higher gasoline prices and new household paints that take longer to dry.


THE DEBATE: An Alternative Plan; Insurance Financed by Taxes
They are the guerrilla fighters of the health-care debate: outfinanced by the industry groups, outmuscled by the policy gurus in the White House, viewed by most of the pundits as hopeless idealists.
But advocates of installing a Canadian-style health-care system in this country have a simple message: They are not dead yet.
The only true reform in health care, they argue, is a system of national insurance financed by taxes.


Natalie M. Stella, Steven M. Judelson
Natalie Marie Stella, an assistant vice president and counsel in the New York office of Societe Generale, the Paris bank, was married last evening to Steven Merrill Judelson, an associate at the New York law firm of Rosenman &amp; Colin.
Rabbi Richard Steinbrink performed the ceremony at the Franklin Institute Science Museum in Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Judelson, 29, and her husband, 33, graduated from Tufts University and received law degrees from Boston College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack J. Stella of Gwynedd Valley, Pa.
Her father is the vice president of C. A. Spalding Inc., an aircraft manufacturing company in Philadelphia.


Moment of Decision For Health Care
IT was only two or three years ago that the phrase "job-lock" began to appear in public discourse.
The ugly new term described an ugly new condition faced by millions of people: fear of leaving or switching jobs out of a well-founded concern that health coverage, once given up, might not be regained because of price, "pre-existing conditions" or other factors.
Now less than three weeks after President Clinton's 240,000-word proposal for health care was placed before Congress, now as months of intensive debate begin amid a chorus of hope about the goals and a cacophony of warnings about the details, it is easy to forget the serious underlying problems -- spreading job-lock being symptomatic of them -- that led to calls for drastic change on the scale of the New Deal or the Great Society.
For his part, Mr.
Clinton was moved to gamble his own place in history on an issue that had been a nonstarter for many Presidents before.


Lisa Nathanson and Howard Busch
Lisa Iris Nathanson, the daughter of Sue and David Nathanson of Muttontown, L.I., was married last evening to Howard Benjamin Busch, a son Nikki and Kenneth Busch of Merrick, L.I.
Rabbi Charles Klein performed the ceremony at the Woodbury Jewish Center in Woodbury, L.I.
Mrs.
Busch, 25, is a candidate for a master's of law degree at New York University.
She graduated from Duke University, and she and her husband received law degrees from Yeshiva University.
Her father is the chief executive of the Michael Friedman Corporation in Brooklyn, a manufacturer of accessories for infants, where her mother is the director of human resources.


Pamela Triolo, Robert Spellman
Pamela Elizabeth Triolo, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank R. Triolo of Manhattan Beach, Calif., was married yesterday to Robert Nelson Spellman, a son of Cecile Spellman of Saratoga Springs, N.Y., and Arthur Spellman of Ballston Spa, N.Y.
Msgr.
Anthony Maltese performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Immaculate Conception Church in Tuckahoe, N.Y.
Mrs.
Spellman, 32, graduated magna cum laude from Bucknell University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from Georgetown University.
Her father is the senior officer for planning and account development at the NCR Corporation, a computer services subsidiary of A.T.&amp; T., in Short Hills, N.J.


Rowan Routs Montclair; Hofstra Stomps Fordham
Rowan 41, Montclair State 15
Steve Anderson, a sophomore running back, scored three touchdowns on runs of 73, 10 and 4 yards and threw a 33-yard scoring pass to Kirby Johnson for another as Rowan crushed Montclair State, 41-15, yesterday afternoon to win its third straight New Jersey State Conference title.


You Say Anything Goes In Politics? Only if It Works
POLITICAL consultants are not as widely trusted as, for example, television diet pitchwomen.
But when Ed Rollins told two dozen reporters that he had paid off ministers in New Jersey to hold down the black vote, everyone believed him. (The next day, when the Republican operative said he had been fibbing, he fell back to the confidence level his trade usually inspires.)
On Tuesday, Mr.
Rollins attributed the upset victory of Christine Todd Whitman in New Jersey's gubernatorial race one week earlier to his brilliance in offering money to black preachers so they would forgo their usual pre-election appeals to their flocks to go out and vote.
On Wednesday, Mrs.
Whitman and Mr.
Rollins said that never happened.


Hold the Turkey
When Anne Rosenzweig thinks Thanksgiving, she has everything-but-turkey sort of thoughts.
Most people, she says, have mixed feelings about the holiday's mandatory centerpiece.
"I happen to love turkey," she says, "and people who love turkey have their own recipe." But for those who don't, Rosenzweig makes a meal of the trimmings.
Besides, Thanksgiving is an excuse for indulgence.
And even the diminutive 39-year-old chef and co-owner of the Arcadia restaurant in New York admits to tucking into three or four meals on T-day.


Building's New Look Shaped by Old Zoning
ZONING calculations with a skin strapped on." That is Richard S. Hayden's description of the architecture at 320 Park Avenue, an obsolete 32-year-old office tower that he and his colleagues are redesigning from the bones out as the new headquarters of the Mutual of America Life Insurance Company.
Mutual bought the 34-story structure from the ailing Olympia &amp; York last year for $130 million and is spending $73 million to reconstruct it.
Since 320 Park Avenue was constructed just months ahead of the 1961 Zoning Resolution, it has about one and a half times as much floor space as would be allowed in a new building on the same site, making it well worth an owner's while to rebuild it rather than replace it.
Mutual plans to occupy 10 floors and lease the rest when the building reopens in the spring of 1995.


Sanctions Killing Haitian Children, Report Says


Louise Burnham, George Packard
Louise Campbell Burnham, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David C. Burnham of Providence, R.I., was married there yesterday to George William Warren Packard, the son of Mrs.
Peter F. Packard, of New York, and the late Mr.
Packard.
The Rev.
Ruth Boling, a Presbyterian minister, and the Rev.
Kate Penfield, a Baptist minister, performed the ceremony at the First Baptist Church in America.
Mrs.
Packard, 32, is a development officer for the business school at Stanford University.
The bride graduated from Yale University, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in English from Middlebury College.


Taking the Writing Off the Wall
James Vacca has been organizing residents, merchants and local police officials to help rid Pelham Bay's storefronts, playgrounds and highway overpasses of graffiti.
And he's been using a lot of paint.
Mr.
Vacca is the district manager of Community Board 10 who several weeks ago started an anti-graffiti crusade that has slowly spread throughout this quiet neighborhood of single-family houses.


Garden at Risk Near Cathedral
The Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, the largest cathedral in the Western Hemisphere, faces a garden on Amsterdam Avenue, a rare patch of open space on a thoroughfare crowded with institutions and apartment buildings.
But the nursing home that owns the garden has plans to build a 13-story extension there, and the effort by some neighbors to rescue a little green space for the Cathedral is heading into its last ditch.
"They didn't consider the garden something worth saving," said Robert E. Roistacher, the acting chairman of the Morningside Heights Residents Association, who filed a suit against the extension last year.
"The effects on the Cathedral will be incredible. I can only think of one or two cathedrals in the world that don't have some kind of open space in front of them."


Stern's Complaint
PRIVATE PARTS By Howard Stern.
Illustrated. 446 pp.
New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.


'The People of the Abyss'
To the Editor:
In his review of "Travels With Lizbeth" (Oct. 10), Jonathan Raban calls Jack London an "amateur pauper." I would like to give your readers a brief biographical sketch of London's early life.


Amy Kreisberg and Michael Nathan
Dr.
Amy Lynn Kreisberg, a resident in ophthalmology at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx, and Michael David Nathan, a partner in the New York law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett, were married last evening at the Water Club in New York.
Rabbi Robert A. Raab officiated.
The bride, 35, is a daughter of Gerald and June Kreisberg of Newburgh, N.Y.
The bride graduated from Tufts University and received a master's degree in occupational therapy from New York University and her medical degree from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
Her father is president of the Affiliated Contractors Corporation, a development company in Newburgh.
Her mother is a horticulturist there.


Actually, Florida State Isn't Quite Convinced
If you wandered into the Florida State locker room this afternoon looking for concession speeches, you walked into the wrong place.
The Seminoles, 31-24 losers, were anything but humble and said they would like nothing better than another chance to go up against the Irish.
"I'm still saying we're the greatest team," Seminoles receiver Kevin Knox said.
"Yeah, they beat us this day. But just like Riddick Bowe beat Evander Holyfield on that one day, Evander came back to haunt him. So, hopefully, we can come back to haunt Notre Dame in the Fiesta Bowl."


Mitchell Storch and Stacy Teich
Stacy Teich, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Teich of Pine Brook, N.J., was married last evening to Mitchell Brian Storch, a son of Victor Storch of Los Angeles and Joy Storch of Springfield, N.J.
Rabbi Asher Krief officiated at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.
Mrs.
Storch, 26, is a sales manager at the Hyatt Regency in New Brunswick, N.J.
She and her husband are graduates of George Washington University.
Her father is the president of the Marvel Pharmacal and Packaging Company in Fairfield, N.J.
Her mother, Hope Teich, is the president of the Complete Collegiate Mail Order Company in Fairfield.


Q and A
Awaiting Payment In Overcharge Case  Q. In November 1985 I filed a rent overcharge complaint against my East Village landlord.
I lived in the apartment from March 1985 to February 1990.
In October 1992, the Department of Housing and Community Renewal sent me a notice saying that "the preponderance of evidence indicates that the overcharge is willful," and that therefore the landlord would owe three times the amount of the overcharge, a total of $66,810.


Film Festival Starts Planning for '94
IN the Hamptons, long recognized as an outpost of the New York art world, where artists have traditionally monopolized the cultural spotlight, the movie people have been stealing the show.
Before the Hamptons International Film Festival opened in East Hampton at the end of last month many people had not seen the changes.
But after the publicity for the festival, it is difficult not to know that Steven Spielberg has a house in East Hampton, that Alec Baldwin and Kim Basinger haunt local hangouts and that producers, screenwriters and others are in the area.


H. Gates Lloyd; Investment Banker, 92
H.
Gates Lloyd, a Philadelphia investment banker who also served for 10 years as a deputy director of the Central Intelligence Agency, died Thursday at his home in Haverford, Pa.
He was 92.
The cause of death was a stroke, said a son, Wingate Lloyd.


An Unlikely Sanctuary in Sunset Park


Officials' Deadline Looming
Representatives of the National Hockey League and the officials union held a brief telephone conversation yesterday, but no new meetings were scheduled between the two sides.
Without a new collective bargaining agreement, the referees and the linesmen will walk out after tonight's games.
"I have no idea if anything has been set up," said Gary Bettman, the N.H.L. commissioner.
Bettman, who took his children to see the movie "Rudy" last night, added, "If something is set up, it will be later tonight or tomorrow."


Nobody Ever Said Taxol Was a Miracle Drug
To the Editor:
Re "Aura of a Miracle Fades From a Cancer Drug" (front page, Nov. 7): The scientific community never suggested that taxol, which is derived from the Pacific yew tree, was a miracle.
All of the scientists whom your article quotes reiterate that they never claimed miracle status for the agent when positive results were first announced.


A Pilot's Ultimate Flight of Fancy: An Airplane Built at Home
SOME people build model rockets.
Others might try their hand at a deck or a picnic table.
Mathew P. Fairy of Norwalk is building a Sonerai single-engine aircraft in his spare time.
After two years, it still doesn't look like an airplane, he acknowledges, because it's in pieces scattered all over his house.
"It's a tremendously absorbing hobby," Mr.
Fairy said.
"You work on it in your attic, your basement, your garage. Basically, wherever you have a slab of space, you're putting something together." Putting Passion to the Test
When he is finished in a few years, he will have a plane that will have cost him about $12,000 that would match a factory-built craft costing well into six figures.
Then it will be time to put his passion to the test, and take the first flight.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA  $600,000
241 West 23d Street  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 3,400-sq.-ft. loft co-op; dining area, 4 skylights, private roof rights, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,859, 65% tax-deductible, listed at $669,000, 36 weeks on market (Brokers: Kingman Associates; Corcoran Group)


3 Ways to Stand Tall While the Accusations Fly
State Senator John B. Larson's campaign for governor of Connecticut got off to a textbook rocky start last week: On the very day he was starting his effort with a bus tour around the state, The Hartford Courant, quoting documents and unnamed sources, said that the Democratic candidate's financial records had been subpoenaed by a Federal grand jury.
The newspaper said the grand jury was looking into possible connections between a legislative vote on interstate banking in 1989 and bank loans to lawmakers.
What has commenced now is perhaps another chapter from that same textbook: How does a candidate who has professed absolute innocence get beyond what is, for the moment at least, nothing more than an anonymous, if toxic, cloud that somehow leaked from a supposedly confidential jury room?
What tools do you use, and what tools do you avoid using, in trying to put it behind you?
How do you recover your balance?


For a New Jersey Teen-Ager, Every Day Is Wednesday
There comes a critical moment in "Addams Family Values" when the 13-year-old Christina Ricci must stretch -- literally and figuratively -- in her portrayal of Wednesday, the saturnine daughter of Gomez and Morticia Addams.
The scene in the movie, which opens on Friday, involves an extreme closeup of Christina's face, which she transforms, muscle by muscle, from the familiar, morose Wednesday countenance into a rictus of a smile of such determined brightness that it borders on the hideous.
"That was my favorite thing in the whole movie," says Christina, looking very un-Addams-ish in a Red Hot Chili Peppers T-shirt and blue jeans at Serendipity, a restaurant on Manhattan's East Side.
"Doing that smile was my most dramatic scene. At first I wasn't sure whether it should be a deliberately evil smile, an obvious-looking fake smile or the way Wednesday really might smile if she had to."


A.M.A. Challenges the President's Plan
The American Medical Association has urged doctors to lobby patients to oppose central elements of President Clinton's health plan, including Federal regulation of health insurance premiums and cuts in the growth of Medicare and Medicaid.
At a political education conference here and in documents sent to all doctors across the country, leaders of the A.M.A. punctured the spirit of bipartisan euphoria that briefly hovered over the plan after Mr.
Clinton presented it to Congress in September.


Staten Island Youth Is Charged In Killing of Livery-Cab Driver
A 16-year-old Staten Island youth was arrested yesterday and charged in the shooting death of a livery-cab driver, the police said.
The youth, Shaeem Chavis, of 82 Osgood Avenue, was charged with second-degree murder, robbery, attempted robbery and criminal possession of a weapon.


Wednesday's the Day as Qualifying for the World Cup Finally Ends
By Wednesday evening, nine more nations will have realized their soccer dreams by securing the final spots in next summer's 1994 World Cup on the last day of qualifying while others will experience their country's worst athletic nightmare.
For all, the goal has been to become one of the 24 countries to earn the right to appear in the sport's monthlong extravaganza to be staged in nine United States cities starting on June 17.
Eight of the nine remaining qualifiers will come from Europe and the other will be determined in a playoff between Argentina and Australia in Buenos Aires.
The two teams played to a 1-1 draw in the first game of the playoff in Sydney, Australia, last month.
If the teams should tie, 2-2, Australia would qualify after having scored more away goals.
If the result is again a 1-1 draw then the qualifier would be determined by penalty kicks.


Downtown Surge Pinches Schools; No Relief in Sight
With its population more than tripled in two decades, to 25,366 in 1990, the area covered by Community Board 1 has become the fastest growing in the city.
Its two elementary schools are full, and parents are pressing for more, but school officials say that appears unlikely anytime soon.
The population boom in lower Manhattan was propelled by the construction of Battery Park City, the Independence Plaza apartments on Greenwich Street and loft conversions in commercial buildings.


Corrections
A picture in the Neighborhood Report last week showing two limestone slabs in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park was published in error.
The intended picture was of Nick Micros's sculpture, "Monument With Niches and Burl," above.


Facing Social Agency, Residents Say Their Backyard Is Full
Two blocks away from the historic brownstone homes that line the quiet, leafy side streets of Boerum Hill stands a former milk plant, now at the center of a plan to create a social service office serving hundreds of AIDS and welfare clients.
Residents have been blunt: they don't want it.
They say their neighborhood is already saturated with social service agencies.
The residents have gained the support of elected officials, including Councilman Kenneth K. Fisher and United States Representative Edolphus Towns, who say that the area of Community Board 2, downtown Brooklyn, already has 50 social service agencies.


Success Against the Mafia Doesn't Seem to Soothe Italy
When Sicilian magistrates announced on Friday that they had struck a major blow against the Mafia, the contrast between the hoopla surrounding the announcement and the questions that followed it evoked a land that seems unsure of itself, even in victory.
For some, the identification of the suspected killers of Judge Giovanni Falcone, who died in a bombing attack in May 1992, was cause for celebration.
"This is a magical moment in Italian history," said Giovanni Tinebra, who headed the inquiry that led to the announcement on Friday of arrest warrants for 18 suspects.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
HARLEM  Blackface From a Time When It Didn't Shock
Inspired by the Friars Club roast of Whoopi Goldberg, during which Ted Danson appeared in blackface, the Museum of African American History and Arts will present a four-hour program, "History of Minstrels and Blackface."


NOTES
The photographer William Wegman has designed a line of socks to benefit Amfar, the American Foundation for AIDS research.
The socks, along with things like ties by Robert Rauschenberg, vests by Ross Bleckner and boots by Francesco Clemente, go on sale at the two Barneys New York stores in Manhattan on Nov. 23.
That is the day after Amfar's benefit "Disco Ball," which will feature a performance by the Village People.
Mr.
Wegman said he could almost imagine putting together an entire outfit from the benefit items.
"I think since the late 50's, coordination in fashion has been blown away," he said.
"People even wear plaid with stripes these days."


THE IMPACT: The Consumers; More Choices, but Also More Costs
The heart of the Clinton strategy for holding down medical spending is to make people aware of the true cost of their health care.
And that may be jarring for many who receive generous benefits at work.
In the structure outlined by the White House, many people may find themselves choosing among unfamiliar new health plans and accepting new limits on their freedom to choose doctors or hospitals, or paying extra to use the system as freely as they are accustomed to.


Children's Ability To Change The World
"THE Secret Garden," a lulling musical now on a two-week stopover at the Shubert Performing Arts Center, can never fancy itself as having something for everyone.
In a dogged attempt to delve into every nook of Frances Hodgson Burnett's Victorian children's classic, and at the same time create a Broadway musical, Marsha Norman (book and lyrics) and Lucy Simon (music) had the integrity to make few concessions to popular entertainment and to go for art.
That is theoretically admirable, but it turned out to be a counterproductive way to treat a story beloved by millions.
In its avoidance of sentimentality, this "Secret Garden" casts an antiseptic chill.
It is hard to imagine a more morose musical.


The Supercollider's Demise Disrupts Many Lives and Rattles a Profession
Still stunned by the Congressional decision last month to terminate the $11 billion Superconducting Supercollider project, hundreds of scientists are casting about for new positions in high-energy physics, in hopes not only of pursuing their profession but also of continuing to support their families.
But their prospects seem bleak.
Many of the 200 or so physicists dispossessed by the demise of the big Texas accelerator hope to find jobs at CERN, Europe's premier accelerator laboratory, on the border of France and Switzerland near Geneva.
CERN now seems destined to be the world's center for high-energy physics research well into the 21st century.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  U.S.
Team Still in Lead The United States team of Fred Couples and Davis Love 3d expanded its lead to three shots at the World Cup of Golf in Orlando, Fla., yesterday.
Couples had a round of 70, which included seven birdies and five bogeys, and Love shot a 71 that included a double-bogey 7 on No. 11.
The Americans are at 418, 14 under par, after 54 holes.
The Zimbabwe team, with Mark McNulty's 72 and Nick Price's 71, was three shots back at 421. (AP) Daly in Mexican Open: Frank Funk shot a seven-under-par 65 for 198 and a one-shot lead over Donnie Hammond yesterday in the Mexican Open at Mexico City.
John Daly, suspended by the PGA Tour through at least the start of the 1994 season for failing to complete a round at the Kapalua Invitational in Hawaii last week, shot 78 yesterday to tie for 36th place at 218.
Daly can play in the Mexican Open because it is not under the control of the PGA Tour. (AP) TENNIS  Graf to Face Martinez  Steffi Graf, the world's top-ranked player, scored a 6-3, 6-1 victory over Kimberly Po last night in the semifinals of the Virginia Slims of Philadelphia.
In today's final, Graf will face Conchita Martinez of Spain, who eliminated Amy Frazier, 6-2, 6-4.
"She makes the court seem very small," Po said of Graf.
"I feel like I don't have two many spots to hit the ball." Nevertheless, Graf missed half her first serves and made 11 unforced errors in the 46-minute match. (AP) Pioline and Becker Out: Cedric Pioline and Boris Becker were eliminated in the European Community Championship in Antwerp, Belgium.
Pioline fell to the world's top-ranked player, Pete Sampras, 4-6, 7-5, 6-1.
The slumping Becker lost in a sluggish performance against Magnus Gustafsson, 7-6 (7-5), 6-3. (AP) SOCCER St.
John's Eliminated  Okereke Emesih, a senior forward from Nigeria, scored an unassisted goal at 42 minutes 32 seconds of the opening half to break a 1-1 tie, and Boston University went on to a 2-1 victory over previously unbeaten St.
John's in the opening round of the N.C.A.A.
Division I Northeast regional playoffs at Redmen Stadium in Jamaica, Queens.
The Terriers (14-6-1) will oppose the winner of today's game between Rutgers and Hartwick.
St.
John's (18-1-3), two-time Big East Conference champions, took a 1-0 advantage when Hue Ferguson scored on Ben Hickey's pass 12:19 into the game.
Boston University tied the score when Bjarte Skuseth scored on a feed from his fellow Norwegian, Gisle Sorli, at 32:47.
HORSE RACING  No. 1, With Proof Though top-ranked Florida State lost to Notre Dame yesterday, it wasn't a bad day for all Seminole backers -- especially those who are hunch bettors.
At Aqueduct, the 7-1 shot Seminole Spirit won the $60,000 Damon Runyon Stakes in a three-horse photo finish.
The 2-year-old paid $16.80 to win, $6.20 to place and $4.20 to show. (AP)


Catch-22: Lose Health, Lose Policy
In a new practice, some health insurance companies are starting to divide the sick from the well, even in large groups that were once a bastion of security in a tumultuous industry.
Families in large groups had always felt that if they had been part of the group for at least six months or a year, their medical costs would be covered and their premiums would remain stable.
But now, some insurance companies are dramatically raising rates for sick people, and even for people they think may become sick.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-16 A CHILD OF THE C.I.A.
Dr.
Patrick Moloney has cultivated the reputation of a humble defender of the poor.
But yesterday, as he stood accused of helping to steal $7.4 million, a more complex question of identity arose: Is he a saint, a robber, or even both?  1  N.A.A.C.P.
URGES WHITMAN DELAY  The New Jersey chapter of the N.A.A.C.P. urged Gov.-elect Christine Todd Whitman not to take office until investigations clear her of allegations that the Republican Party spent $500,000 to suppress the urban black vote.  37  MARIJUANA OFFERED FOR HEALING  Every two weeks, Rabbi Isaac P. Fried visits a businessman in Brooklyn who is dying of cancer.
They talk for a while, and the rabbi hands over a small bag of marijuana with a hopeful blessing.  37  MANY TACTICS IN POLLUTION WAR  Officials in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut have put together plans to cut smog-causing chemicals by at least 15 percent by 1996.  37  FROM POLITICS TO GOLF  The next Mayor of New York City, Rudolph W. Giuliani, found himself yesterday in a tough spot, but for a golfer, not a politician.  39  Obituaries 46  Bill Dickey, baseball player.


On a Divided Island, Two Estranged Peoples
THOUGH Haitians and Dominicans inhabit the same Caribbean island, Hispaniola, they can scarcely be said to share it.
Despite their proximity, differences of language, culture and race and, above all, the burden of their common history have conspired to make them less neighbors than virtual strangers and intermittent enemies.
"We are two peoples who have distanced ourselves from one another," laments Max Puig, a member of the Dominican Senate who is also a sociologist, and few on either side of the border would disagree.
Unfortunately for the United States and the United Nations, that tradition has now become a factor complicating efforts to solve the crisis in Haiti and restore the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the country's democratically elected President, to power.
Under intense international pressure to enforce an oil and arms embargo against Haiti's military rulers, the Dominican Republic, whose compliance is vital to that process, is dragging its feet, if not surreptitiously sabotaging sanctions that its leaders see as detrimental to Dominican interests.


Culinary Culture, on Paper
THOSE who cook are always looking for new books to instruct them, and those who don't often like to own cookbooks anyway, if only for new dishes to demand from friends who are gifted in the kitchen.


Beyond Fried Rice And Moo Shu Pork
CANTON *  (212) 226-4441; 45 Division Street, near Bowery; $$; no credit cards
Blond-wood tables, royal-blue banquettes and bentwood chairs make for a comfortable setting at Canton.
This is a fine restaurant for those who feel insecure ordering from encyclopedic Chinese menus.
The document provided here is only one page, and Eileen Leong, who owns the restaurant with her husband, Larry, the chef, invites patrons to dispense even with that.
Mrs.
Leong usually greets her seated customers with a question: "You want to order or you want to talk to me?"


LITTLE BIG PEOPLE
Come down to earth.
Few families can afford to so thoroughly indulge their kids.
These are the lean, mean 1990's, where two paychecks are mandatory for middle-class aspirations, especially if you live in an urban area.
And middle class means middling: older cars, bargain vacations and children who have to use their imaginations instead of high-tech toys.
DENISE BOSTROM San Francisco


Family Matters
To the Editor:
Regarding your review of "The Sixties" (Aug. 8), my father, Edmund Wilson, did not die in the manner Lewis M. Dabney describes in the book's introduction: "Wilson died . . . attached to an oxygen machine but managing to get to the chair by his desk, just as Karl Marx was found dead 'at his worktable.' " In fact, he died a room away from his worktable in his easy chair, with his delightful trained nurse, Elizabeth Stabb, administering oxygen to him.
I know.
I was there.
ROSALIND BAKER WILSON  Boonville, N.Y.


Corrections
A chart on page 10 of the Travel section today with the What's Doing column, about New York City, refers imprecisely to the 1990 population of the New York metropolitan area.
The figure given, 8.5 million, is for New York City and Westchester, Rockland and Putnam Counties only.
But the Census Bureau defines the Consolidated Metropolitan Statistical Area as also including Orange, Nassau and Suffolk Counties in New York State as well as Fairfield County, Conn., and parts of New Jersey.
The 1990 population of that larger area was 18 million.


Trade Debate Rubs Salt in Canada's Wounds; Neither of the Above
To the Editor:
I wish there had been a third debater on the Larry King program on Nov. 9, along with Vice President Gore and Ross Perot.
Perhaps then, instead of a mass media event, we could have witnessed a constructive discussion focusing on some of the real issues of international trade:
*
The debate over the North American Free Trade Agreement is not a clash between "free trade" and "protectionism." Neither of these code terms accurately describes the accord or the positions of most of those who oppose it.
These terms just make it harder for people to focus on the agreement's actual provisions and their likely effects.
*
Before the North American Free Trade Agreement was negotiated, and whether or not it passes, the strategy of transnational business has been, and will continue to be, to move operations to lower-cost sites.
The issue is whether or not we will change our trade policy to discourage that strategy.
*
When the European Community countries formed their trading bloc, they made agreements that will raise the wages and standards of the countries at the low end of the scale.
*
There is significant opposition to the North American Free Trade Agreement in Mexico (as I learned when I studied there this year) from independent unions, small farmers and community groups.
They fear the trade agreement will bring more exploitation of low-paid Mexican workers; increased unemployment of some of the higher-paid workers employed by Mexican companies that cannot compete with higher-tech companies based in the United States; radical changes to the traditional culture of Mexico, and benefits for a very small number of upper- and middle-class Mexicans.
*
If this version of the North American Free Trade Agreement is defeated (and I think it should be defeated), trade with Mexico and Latin America will continue.
The real issue, as I see it, is whether or not the people of the United States, Mexico and Canada will demand a trade policy that promotes real development of the Mexican economy and that sets and enforces decent standards of living for workers in North America and throughout the world.
KEN MARGOLIES  Director of Labor Programs School of Industrial and Labor Relations, Cornell University New York, Nov. 10, 1993


Rebels a la Mode
A group of British fashion reporters, photographers, models and stylists now working in New York have a rebellious style of dress that represents the other side of the fashion coin.
It's a scruffy androgynous look consisting of sweaters and shirts in children's sizes, shirt cuffs that hang unbuttoned and trouser legs that sit unhemmed over sneakers.
The signature coiffure is short, chopped-up, haystack blond hair that these fashionables cut and color themselves to avoid the problem of having to explain it all to a hairdresser.


Fashion Imagery That Can Upstage the Clothes
In 1953 the french movie director Francois Truffaut proposed that certain directors should be considered auteurs, the authors of their films, though they had not written the scripts.
In 1963, the critic Andrew Sarris introduced the term over here and expanded it to include American film makers like Alfred Hitchcock and John Ford, who had not been mentioned before in the same breath as the likes of Jean Renoir or Ingmar Bergman.
That movie making was a collective enterprise was well known; the auteur theory acknowledged that some directors stamped a personal, distinctive and consistent style on a variety of films.
The recent documentary film "Visions of Light" broadly hinted that some cinematographers also considered themselves worthy of the honor.
Now it appears that the term could be applied to still photographs too, or at least to the field of fashion photography.
Not to the photographer -- all photographers are already authors of their own work and studio photographers are usually directors as well, and no one has ever said otherwise -- but to the fashion director.
"Short Stories: Celebrating 25 Years of Vogue Fashion by Grace Coddington" at the James Danziger Gallery in SoHo pays tribute to a fashion director's influence not just on fashion but on photography.
Apparently the first show ever to do so, "Short Stories" gives credit to the woman behind the scenes.
Fashion photographers are stars, but the heat and light they give off was generated in a cooperative venture.


Old-Master Paintings


CUTTINGS Why Street Trees Live or Die
ONCE you start thinking about what's happening to a street tree under the sidewalk, you can't get it out of your mind.
You see one of those stumps sticking out of its little square of hard, bare ground -- or some spindly little tree that just gave up the ghost -- and you think, uh-oh, its roots must have hit a barrier underground.
Maybe salt killed it, or a dog.
Maybe the soil was too alkaline.
Who knows? There are so many ways to die if you're a street tree.


The Fall of the Condor: Chile's National Disgrace
On Wednesday, nine countries will qualify for the last spots in the 1994 World Cup finals, to be played next summer in the United States.
Chile will not be among them.
What follows is a story of blind nationalism taken to the extreme in the name of sports.
Roberto (the Condor) Rojas remembers the visitors' steamy dressing room at Maracana Stadium in Rio de Janeiro.
He remembers lying on his back on the trainer's table, bleeding down his left temple.
Rojas's Chilean teammates milled around him in confusion, cursing the Brazilian national soccer team and its fans.
The angry stomping of a teeming grandstand rumbled through the room.


Off Duty
WHAT DO CIVIC and national emblems do when they've finished a hard day's work posing for tourists?
Well, like the mascots of half a dozen places treated in this magazine, they might get together for refreshments.
The Matterhorn smiles over a cup of Swiss chocolate; the Chinese dragon, who once savored the refined, smoky taste of a fine Lapsang souchong, now laps up locally bottled Coca-Cola; Australia's kangaroo kicks back with a wallop of lager, Lappland's reindeer warms up with a snort of aquavit, and Key West's conch is happy with anything, provided that it's a funny color and contains at least five kinds of rum.
As for Munich's little monk -- well, you never see him without that beer stein.


Roll On, Thou Deep and Dark Blue Series, Roll!
THE WINE-DARK SEA By Patrick O'Brian. 261 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $22.


MY EMPTY LOT
Joseph Kastner speculates, in "My Empty Lot" (Oct. 10), that the vacant land at the northwest corner of Elizabeth and Houston Streets may have been one of Peter Stuyvesant's holdings.
As a local historian, I recognize it as part of "The Plantation of the Blacks," made up of tracts owned by former slaves of the Dutch West India Company.
This particular parcel was deeded to Christoffel Santomee, whose house was located across Elizabeth Street.
His relative Pieter was among those freed on Feb. 25, 1644, probably as a result of service against the Indians.
It is likely that Christoffel was among the first immigrant children born in the New World (c. 1628).
His next door neighbor to the north, Manuel de Gerrit de Ros, was famous for having escaped hanging for murder, in 1641, when two ropes broke.
RANDALL BROWN Staten Island


From Parking Lot To Serene Green
New Yorkers often dream of a grassy oasis with flowering trees, baroque fountains and benches where they can watch squirrels at play.
Just such a place is planned for the southeast corner of 63d Street and Second Avenue -- although that bench could be bought right out from under them.
The bucolic plot will be a business, not a city park, the fruit of an unusual arrangement between the city and an art dealer who created a similar garden in SoHo two years ago.
With a five-year lease, Allan Reiver, who owns the Elizabeth Street Gallery, will establish a 100-by-80-foot garden where he can exhibit and sell statues and other decorative pieces, and where neighbors can sit at leisure.


View From the Thompson Cancer Center
To the Editor:
I am writing to express my concern regarding "A Father's Dream, a Son's Nightmare" (Oct. 24) about the Thompson Cancer Survival Center.
The portion of the article that referred to me was taken completely out of context.


How to Photograph a Wolf
TO THE TOP OF THE WORLD Adventures With Arctic Wolves.
By Jim Brandenburg.
Edited by JoAnn Bren Guernsey.
Photographs by the author. 44 pp.
New York: Walker &amp; Company. $16.95. (Ages 8 and up)


A Hellish Story From the Naked City
With relentless ferocity, the playwright Howard Korder describes the decline and rot of the big city in "The Lights," a work that effectively undoes in two and a half hours all the good will ever generated by the "I Love New York" campaign.
If this corrosive drama is no commercial for urban life, it is nonetheless a whale of an advertisement for the British director Mark Wing-Davey, who has staged it with a cold and gleeful fury all his own.
Those from "outtatown," who don't have "the city thing" -- to borrow the play's vernacular -- will find all their worst suspicions confirmed here.
Mr.
Korder's metropolis is hell with a higher decibel count.
The streets are filthy, the subways are perilous and the homeless lurk everywhere.
Once-glorious buildings have been abandoned.
So have basic principles of hygiene.


DEATH BENEFITS
In "Death Benefits" (Endpaper/Life and Times, Oct. 3), Malcolm W. Browne writes that he is not among those journalists who "enjoy the public esteem accorded to entertainment stars." Perhaps not.
But he has more fans than he may realize.


A Battleground For Iconoclasts
Fighting for the new, American composers have repeatedly selected the piano as their battleground.
In his youth, Charles Ives hit on a method of "piano-drum-playing," subjecting the keyboard to a heedlessly dissonant attack; pieces like the "Three-Page Sonata" of 1905 were the revolutionary result.
Several years later, a California teen-ager named Henry Cowell pounded out cluster chords with his fists and forearms, influencing Bartok and later European experimentalists.
John Cage "prepared" the piano with trinkets in the late 1930's, and Conlon Nancarrow began to punch dizzyingly complex rhythmic patterns into the rolls of player pianos at about the same time.
These solitary experimenters are archetypes of Yankee iconoclasm in American piano music.
But they are not quite as solitary as they seem.
Piano composition in this country stretches back deep into both native and European traditions, and 20th-century composers inherited as much as they invented.


Corrections
The contents page in The Times Magazine last Sunday carried an erroneous credit for the cover illustration, of an Army Nurse Corps advertisement.
It was created by the N. W. Ayer agency, not Young &amp; Rubicam.


Timman Goes Out With a Final Victory
AFTER Game 16 of the International Chess Federation world championship match, Anatoly Karpov, holding an enormous 10 1/2-5 1/2 lead, satisfied himself with making the four draws that would give him victory and the $440,000 prize.
No one could reasonably expect his opponent, Jan Timman, to suddenly produce 5 points and come back from such a deficit in a limited series of 24 games and, of course, he did not.
Nevertheless, besides receiving the loser's prize of $260,000, Timman did enjoy scoring a last victory, in Game 20, before a final draw in the next game ended the contest.
In that last victory on Oct. 30 in Jakarta, Indonesia, Timman thoroughly humbled the Russian with sharp counterattacking play as Black.


HOW OTHERS DO IT: Hawaii; Setting an Example for the Rest of the Nation
Residents of the Hawaiian Islands, more than 2,400 miles from the American mainland, have long complained that they are left out of major debates that ripple across the nation.
But on at least one big issue -- how to provide adequate medical care to all citizens -- health policy analysts say Hawaiians are well ahead of the rest of the country, and their state is being studied in Congress and by other state governments as a potential national model.


Nov. 7-13: Disney Loses $900 Million; More Trouble at France's Magic Kingdom
Euro Disney, a victim of Europe's lingering recession and the hubris of its Californian parent, reported a staggering $900 million loss for its first full fiscal year, sending its stock into a nose dive and raising the possibility that Mickey's stay in Europe may be singularly brief.
In effect, the 18-month-old theme park, which opened amid endless hoopla and occasional grumblings about a "cultural Chernobyl," is now in need of rescue from Walt Disney.
Without a substantial injection of new capital -- analysts reckon something close to $2 billion -- Euro Disney will buckle under about $3.5 billion of debt and the cost of running a resort that is still well short of paying its way.


Growing Consensus on Covering All, but How?
PRESIDENT CLINTON and Hillary Rodham Clinton have won the first battle of health care, with hardly any notice of how important the victory was.
Business, labor, consumer groups, the elderly, doctors, nurses and hospitals, the insurance industry and even many once-reluctant members of Congress have come together on a central issue as never before.
They agree that the nation needs universal health care coverage.
This success has gone largely uncelebrated, mainly because the perils of the long march ahead allow no indulgent, if deserved, respite for self-congratulation.
Reconstructing the way Americans relate to doctors, hospitals and insurers is the most profound social task Congress has undertaken since the 1964 Civil Rights Act, and it is being mounted without the same national sense of moral command that underlay that law.


THE IMPACT: The Elderly; Those With Large Bills See Aid in Clinton Plan
Millions of older Americans share the problem of paying for expensive prescription drugs and long-term care at home.
The Clinton health care plan includes three broad provisions that are likely to be special boons for them.
*It would create a prescription drug benefit, under which those eligible for Medicare would pay an extra $8 a month, and in return the Government would pay for most of their medications, after a $250 deductible.


CAN I INTEREST YOU IN A SCHNABEL, MR. OVITZ?
After working at the Pace Gallery on Arnold Glimcher's exhibit about film directors, I was not surprised to see him on your cover surrounded by a team of all-star, all-male, all-white artists.
That invincible wall of white men explained to me "the wall" I came up against, after many attempts to include talented women film directors in his exhibit.
It is ironic that a man who rode to his position on the coattails of Louise Nevelson does not represent women artists.
I believe that someone who sets the tone for the commercial art world carries with him a responsibility at least to make an attempt to reflect the whole artistic community.


From 'Rocka My Soul' to 'Revelations'
ALVIN AILEY By Andrea Davis Pinkney.
Illustrated by Brian Pinkney.
Unpaged.
New York: Hyperion Books for Children. $13.95. (Ages 5 to 9)


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
SUNY DANCE BENEFIT Cynthia Gregory, former principal dancer of the American Ballet Theater, will be honored at the State University of New York at Purchase on Thursday from 6 to 10 P.M. with a gala reception and performance.
Proceeds from the evening will enlarge the endowment for the school's 20-year-old dance division, one of the country's premiere training grounds.
More than 75 percent of its students enter the professional dance world.
One of them, Terese Capucilli, a 1978 graduate who is now a member of the Martha Graham Dance Company, will perform during Thursday's festivities.
In addition, Ms.
Gregory's own choreography for a piece called "Solo" will be danced by a student from the Purchase Dance Corps, and the corps will also perform.


Pentagon's New Somalia Bill Is $300 Million
The Pentagon plans to ask Congress for an additional $300 million to pay for the military operation in Somalia through next March, when American forces are to withdraw, a senior Defense Department official said on Friday.
The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the extra money was needed because the Somalia operation was being paid for with money earmarked for other activities, like routine training, in the 1994 fiscal year.


THE DEBATE: The Red Tape; Less Paperwork or New Headaches?
President Clinton's promise to cut the mounting paperwork clogging the American health care system will be welcomed by consumers befuddled by complex benefit forms.
And it could save a great deal of money for doctors and hospital administrators who have to employ staffs to cope with the bewildering range of forms and requirements imposed by insurers.
But at the same time, critics are asking whether Mr.
Clinton's proposed new layers of state and Federal agencies would simply replace one set of costly bureaucratic headaches with another.


Where the Bay Meets the Sea, Thoughts of a Life in Space
"EVENTUALLY I would like to think of the earth as a park-like place we could come back to visit from time to time," Jerry Grey, recently the president of the International Astronautical Federation, said to me, with a slight twinkle in his eye.
I had stolen a few hours of his time, in between telephone interviews and the relaying of scientific information, as we talked in the upper reaches of his Bridgehampton house on Dune Road, where the bay meets the sea.
Over the years of his long and varied career in aeronautics and space, Jerry Grey has been chairman of the Congressional Solar Advisory Panel and has served on the Moon Treaty Panel, the Space Nuclear Systems Task Force, the Secretary of Energy's Advisory Board, and as Deputy Secretary General of the United Nations Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, to name just a few.


Sara Kaplan and David Perlmutter
Sara Ellen Kaplan, a daughter of Helen and Howard Kaplan of Stamford, Conn., was married last evening to David Stuart Perlmutter, a son of Harriet Perlmutter-Pilchik of Short Hills, N.J., and the late Milton Perlmutter.
Rabbi Ely E. Pilchik, the bridegroom's stepfather, performed the ceremony at Temple B'nai Jeshurun in Short Hills.
Ms.
Kaplan, 31, is keeping her name.
She is an architect at Buttrick White &amp; Burtis, an architectural firm in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Yale University and received a master's degree in architecture from Columbia University.
Her father is a partner in Wofsey, Rosen, Kweskin &amp; Kuriansky, a law firm in Stamford, Conn.
Her mother was formerly the marketing director at Her Majesty, a manufacturer of children's clothing in New York.


County Is First to Add Environment to Its Charter
WESTCHESTER has become the first county in the country to adopt an environmental code of conduct based on 10 principles drawn up after the Exxon Valdez accident in 1989 by the Coalition for Environmentally Responsible Economies.
The principles cover many concerns, ranging from protection of the biosphere to energy conservation and waste disposal through recycling.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: November 14, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
KEEPER OF THE HEART, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A woman flees yet yearns for a man chosen to be her mate on a distant planet.
2
46
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-American women and their mothers.
3
7
THE AGE OF INNOCENCE, by Edith Wharton. (Collier/Macmillan, $5.95.) The 1920 novel about New York society life in the 1870's.
4
3
THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $6.50.) The investigation of the murder of an officer, a general's daughter.
5
3
INADMISSIBLE EVIDENCE, by Philip Friedman. (Ivy, $5.99.) A prosecutor struggles to convict a real estate tycoon of murder.
6
4
THE KILLER ANGELS, by Michael Shaara. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A 1974 novel about the Battle of Gettysburg.
7
2
AMERICAN STAR, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $6.50.) The vengeful wife of a Hollywood star menaces his romance with a celebrated model.
8
39
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
9
5
LORD OF HAWKFELL ISLAND, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) Romantic passions and feminist feelings at play in 10th-century Britain.
10
2
THE COPPER BEECH, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $5.99.) The romances, plots and crimes that go on behind closed doors in an Irish village.
11*
3
DEVIL'S WALTZ, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $6.50.) A psychologist-detective investigates a small child's strange illnesses.
12*
83
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
13
9
THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) "The Vampire Chronicles," continued.
14
7
MITIGATING CIRCUMSTANCES, by Nancy Taylor Rosenberg. (Signet, $5.99.) A woman's revenge after she and a daughter are attacked.
15
12
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
523
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.
2
9
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
3
2
RARE AIR, by Michael Jordan. (Collins, $25.) Photographs of and observations by the retired basketball superstar.
4
6
THE PRESIDENT'S HEALTH SECURITY PLAN. (Times Books/Random House, $8.) The Clinton Administration's health care proposals.
5
39
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
6*
3
SUBMARINE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $14.95.) A guided tour through a nuclear warship and the world of which it is a part.
7
109
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
8*
7
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Bantam, $6.99.) The autobiography of the general.
9
29
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
10*
13
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on life's commonplaces.
11*
3
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $10.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
12
18
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $6.99.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
13
130
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
14*
36
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
15*
11
PRINCESS, by Jean P. Sasson. (Avon, $5.50.) Life as lived by a member of the royal family and other women in Saudi Arabia.
16*
2
RUSH! by Michael Arkush. (Avon, $4.99.) A biography of the talk show host Rush Limbaugh.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
7
THE DAYS ARE JUST PACKED, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A new collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
143
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
3
159
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
3
BOTTOMS UP! by Joyce L. Vedral. (Warner, $12.99.) Exercises for women to achieve good health and fitness.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 30, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Bostic, the Last of the Hogs, Remains Busy in the Trenches
In the Washington Redskins' training camp in 1982, Joe Bugel, then the Redskins' offensive line coach, turned to his troops and said:
"All right, you hogs, come over here."


BEST SELLERS: November 14, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
2
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
2
1
66
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
3
3
5
NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.) Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.
4
4
7
LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching Hour."
5
8
4
A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A young student's mysterious drowning has repercussions in Victorian England's high society.
6*
6
3
THE FIRES OF HEAVEN, by Robert Jordan. (Tor/Doherty, $24.95.) The fifth volume of "The Wheel of Time," a fantasy saga.
7
5
12
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
8
1
MR.
MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $23.95.) A mystery writer's happy family life is threatened by a madman determined to kill him and take his place.
9
7
3
DECIDER, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $22.95.) An architect-engineer gets caught between the warring factions of a clan that owns an English racecourse.
10
9
31
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
11
10
7
SACRED CLOWNS, by Tony Hillerman. (HarperCollins, $23.) Two Navajo tribal policemen undertake to unravel a web of politics and murder.
12
11
10
THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Concluding the "Griffin &amp; Sabine" trilogy.
13
12
35
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
14
15
43
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through illustrated cards and letters.
15
16
14
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The abduction of their young son creates a crisis for a New York man and woman and for the woman's first lover.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
4
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
2
6
12
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior by a novelist and anthropologist.
3
3
27
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
4
2
10
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
5
4
6
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
6
8
4
STAR TREK MEMORIES, by William Shatner with Chris Kreski. (HarperCollins, $22.) Reminiscences from the man who played Capt.
James Tiberius Kirk.
7
5
6
A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ...
OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Reflections on 43 years of marriage.
8
10
66
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
9
7
6
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem, relationships and spiritual growth.
10
1
SECRETS OF A SPARROW, by Diana Ross. (Villard, $22.) The memoirs of the pop star.
11
9
18
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A psychiatrist discusses mood-changing medications and their effects on a person's self.
12
11
23
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
13
12
13
MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Essays suggesting that inspiration can be found in most unexpected ways and places.
14
1
THE DOWNING STREET YEARS, by Margaret Thatcher. (HarperCollins, $30.) The former British Prime Minister recalls her 11 1/2 years in power.
15*
13
7
THE FOUNTAIN OF AGE, by Betty Friedan. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A call for men and women to regard life after age 60 as an exciting adventure.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
5
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological health and fitness.
2
2
26
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.
3
4
16
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
4
3
20
EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Counsel from a physician about diet and nutrition.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 30, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
BEFORE NIGHT FALLS, by Reinaldo Arenas. (Viking, $25.) Arenas, a Cuban writer and exile who suffered from AIDS, killed himself in New York in 1990.
His passionate autobiography turns the usual circumstances -- persecution, betrayal, coerced confessions, forced labor, attempts to "reform" him -- into something exalted.
THE COLUMBIA ENCYCLOPEDIA: Fifth Edition, edited by Barbara A. Chernow and George A. Vallasi. (Columbia University/Houghton Mifflin, $125.) A 3,000-page foot-high volume that gracefully succeeds the 1975 edition.
GENET: A Biography, by Edmund White. (Knopf, $35.) A monumental biography, meticulously researched, that places Genet's literary vision squarely in his homosexuality and confronts the mystery of how a man who left school at 12 became a great master of the French language.
HONEY: Stories, by Elizabeth Tallent. (Knopf, $22.) In her third fine collection, set mainly in New Mexico, Ms.
Tallent's characters are tempered in the crucible of marriage while their creator revels in comely language and summons accurately the sensations of daily life.
KAFKA WAS THE RAGE: A Greenwich Village Memoir, by Anatole Broyard. (Carol Southern/Crown, $18.) A nostalgic portrait of New York's bohemian life in 1946 and 1947, written by a book reviewer for The New York Times who died in 1990.
NEVER STOP RUNNING: Allard Lowenstein and the Struggle to Save American Liberalism, by William H. Chafe. (Basic Books, $28.) A historian captures the rootlessness and personal insecurity of an aggressive reform politician from New York who could accomplish almost anything except getting himself elected.
OPERATION EPSILON: The Farm Hall Transcripts.
Introduction by Sir Charles Frank. (University of California, $30.) Eavesdropping on the private and unremorseful conversations of 10 German scientists during their internment by the Allies after World War II.
PRESIDENT KENNEDY: Profile of Power, by Richard Reeves. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A journalist's judicious appraisal that casts Kennedy as a pragmatic cold-war power broker and a manager of international confrontation.
THE ROBBER BRIDE, by Margaret Atwood. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $23.50.) Ms.
Atwood's funniest novel in years concerns three women who are friends and the mini-skirted Iago who worms her way into their lives.
STRANGE PILGRIMS: Twelve Stories, by Gabriel Garcia Marquez. (Knopf, $21.) Some nearly 20 years old, all these stories were rewritten before publication; their overall mood is celebratory, relishing the oddness and incongruity of life.
WHAT IS FOUND THERE: Notebooks on Poetry and Politics, by Adrienne Rich. (Norton, $20.) A distinguished poet's reflections on the work of poetry, its social and cultural authority, its power to help us "invent what we desire."


Voices of the People: Struggles, Hope and Fear
For four families in the middle of America, President Clinton's promise of health care coverage "that can never be taken away" has hit home, addressing what is clearly a shared yearning.
In interviews before and just after the President's speech to Congress in September proposing a new national health care system, the families, including people who are insured and uninsured, employed and unemployed, healthy and sick, all said they welcomed the promise of secure health insurance for all.
They were first interviewed about their health and needs in May.


Data Bank/November 14, 1993


Just Like Old Times for Devils and Fans
The Devils reverted to an old habit this afternoon.
They played spiritless hockey against one of the weakest teams in the league and the result was a 4-2 loss to the San Jose Sharks.
"The guys knew they won two big games before," a surprisingly calm Coach Jacques Lemaire said afterward, referring to victories over the Islanders and Flyers, "and probably thought it would be easy to come here and play San Jose."


A Long-Running Hour


Nameless Fear Stalks the Middle-Class Teen-Ager: Perhaps It Is the Fear of Boredom
WHAT with all the mind-numbing sitcoms on television and the gory horror films just waiting to be rented from the neighborhood video store, it's nice to know that lots of young people are still avidly reading books.
Let's take a peek at what many kids are devouring on school buses and just before bedtime these days, shall we?
"When Janice opened her eyes she saw the most savage of human sufferings. Every part of Caroline was on fire: her hair, her face, her chest and her legs. . . . The blood on Caroline turned black, and smoke spun through the ash of her disintegrating hair. Janice clenched her eyes shut again and prayed that Caroline would just die. Die. Die. Stop screaming!" (From "Collect Call I," by Christopher Pike, in the book "Thirteen: 13 Tales of Horror.")


After the Sale of Macmillan, Fears of Concentrated Power
It is by now commonplace in the publishing industry that every time one publisher is swallowed by another, as Macmillan Inc. was by Paramount Communications for $558 million last week, the sale sends tremors of fear through the publishing world as authors, agents and editors bemoan the concentration of power into fewer companies.
Transactions similar to the Macmillan purchase were frequent in the 1980's, when medium-sized publishers bought small publishers, only to be bought by large media conglomerates.
At the time, people in the industry were predicting that when the smoke cleared, only a handful of publishers would be left standing.


It's Game, Set and Yawn at Slims
The most reassuring aspect of the Virginia Slims Championships, where the world's 16 best available players will do battle beginning this afternoon at Madison Square Garden, is that it guarantees an end to a truly disturbing year for women's tennis.
The most notable event was the stabbing of the former No. 1 player, Monica Seles, but there were other casualties on the Kraft Tour in 1993, including the tour sponsor itself, which begged its way out of the final year of its commitment.
For 1994, the women's tour will be sponsored as it undergoes a bickersome internal restructuring and steps up the search for a $7 million replacement for the Philip Morris company.


Many Cities Skeptical of Giuliani's Drug Strategy
In emphasizing increased arrests as a way of reducing drug dealing and violence on the streets of New York, Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani is choosing a strategy that many cities, from Boston to San Diego, have abandoned as costly and ineffective.
Although their experience is by no means universal, many cities found that aggressive arrest policies not only failed to ease the drug problem, police officials and crime experts say, but have also overloaded the courts and jails in an exercise that often provides little punishment.


Environmentalists Help On Utility's 20-Year Plan
While environmental groups have worked with utilities in the past, New England Electric System is going further than any other has so far, allowing a leading environmental group to help develop its new 20-year strategic plan.
The plan, which is to be announced today in Boston, emphasizes renewable resources like wind power, and will use a wide variety of small-scale generating options and will recycle waste to produce more electricity.


Heat and Humidity Dogged Yesterday's Marathoners
He staggered past the finish line.
As he came through the chutes, race volunteers asked whether he was all right, whether he needed help.
"He started to have that look," said Dr.
Dario Gonzales, associate medical director of the New York City Marathon.
"He had no idea of his time. That was a dead give-away."


NATION CONSIDERS MEANS TO DISPOSE OF ITS PLUTONIUM
In 16 unremarkable concrete bunkers built by the Army for a war with Hirohito and Hitler, the United States has begun assembling about 50 tons of plutonium, one of the most expensive materials ever produced and perhaps the most important to safeguard.
The Energy Department says the bunkers, each about the size of a two-car garage, are going to be used for interim storage, meaning six or seven years.
But plutonium, which was invented by the Energy Department's predecessor, the Manhattan Project, may turn out to be the hardest thing on earth to dispose of.
And at the Energy Department, "interim" can have an elastic meaning.
"Immediate" tends to mean several years.
"Several years" can mean never.


Who's No. 1? 8 Small Colleges in Region Go to Playoffs
William Paterson (7-3) was a surprise selection among the 16 teams named yesterday for the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division III tournament, which begins Saturday.
The Pioneers from Wayne, N.J., the only team with three defeats to make the playoffs, will meet Union (9-0) in Schenectady, N.Y., in a first-round match.


PUERTO RICO VOTES TO RETAIN STATUS AS COMMONWEALTH
Rebuffing their Governor and his efforts to make this Caribbean island commonwealth the 51st state, Puerto Ricans voted narrowly today to continue their existing ambiguous relationship with the United States.
By choosing to maintain the commonwealth status that has been in place here for more than 40 years, Puerto Ricans made it clear that they prefer "the best of two worlds," in the words of a pro-commonwealth campaign slogan, to the prospect of more intimate ties with the United States.
By an overwhelming margin, they also rejected independence, the third option that had been offered to them in the nonbinding vote today.


The Aim of the Turkey Shoot Is a Paper Target


Review/Comedy; Revisiting the Stops On a 60's Head Trip
Baby-boomers of a certain age can recall sitting around college dorm rooms in the late 1960's and early 70's, giggling and listening to albums by Firesign Theater until they'd learned every non sequitur by heart.
They still knew the lines, and shouted them out, when the reunited Firesign Theater performed on Saturday night at the Beacon Theater as part of its 25th-anniversary tour.
The material dated to 1968 to 1971, and only the occasional drug jokes fell flat.
Although most of the group's material has been audio only, its four members -- Philip Austin, Peter Bergman, David Ossman and Philip Proctor -- can also act.
The group staged its sketches with quick-change costumes, hats and wigs, along with an old-fashioned sound-effects setup (squeezing a cornstarch box for steps through snow, popping bubble wrap for a fire).
Now and then, there were updates, noting a bumper sticker that said: "Are you co-dependent? I can rescue you!" or envisioning Rudolph Giuliani battling an armed, seceding Staten Island.


In War for Bosnia, the Only Winner Is Despair
From a balcony of one of the apartment blocks that make up the suburb of Dobrinja, neighbors watched aghast one day last month as a middle-aged man walked slowly into an area of open ground that has been under sniper fire since the siege of Sarajevo began 19 months ago.
As one witness described it, the man, a Muslim, turned toward the Serbian gun positions and beckoned, inviting the city's attackers to open fire.


Harassment Covers A Multitude of Sins
To the Editor:
The accusations against Senator Bob Packwood focus attention on sexual harassment.
The law recognizes two kinds: quid pro quo ("this for that") and hostile environment.
The first refers to making hiring, job retention, a raise or promotion conditional on submission to sexual activity.
Hostile environment harassment refers to sexual harassment so severe or pervasive as to interfere unreasonably with an individual's work performance or to create an intimidating, hostile or offensive environment.
The harasser is not threatening to block a career, but is exercising a need for power or expressing indifference to the feelings of others about sexuality in the workplace.


Israel Hunts Antiquities, Angering the Arabs
As if Israelis and Palestinians did not have enough to fight about on the ground, they found a new dispute today beneath the surface.
Sixteen teams of Israeli researchers fanned out across the Judean Desert today in a hunt for ancient religious scrolls that may be buried in caves and dry riverbeds near the Dead Sea -- similar to the famous manuscripts that were found in the same area four decades ago and that constitute one of the great archaeological discoveries of the century.


In Voting Out Dinkins, New Yorkers Showed Disappointment; He Understood
To the Editor:
As a black native New Yorker, I thank Bob Herbert for his Nov. 3 column on the mayoral election.
What white New Yorkers, native or otherwise, didn't understand was that David Dinkins was a peacemaker.
For the first time black people knew there was someone in Gracie Mansion who understood them.


NATION CONSIDERS MEANS TO DISPOSE OF ITS PLUTONIUM
In 16 unremarkable concrete bunkers built by the Army for a war with Hirohito and Hitler, the United States has begun assembling about 50 tons of plutonium, one of the most expensive materials ever produced and perhaps the most important to safeguard.
The Energy Department says the bunkers, each about the size of a two-car garage, are going to be used for interim storage, meaning six or seven years.
But plutonium, which was invented by the Energy Department's predecessor, the Manhattan Project, may turn out to be the hardest thing on earth to dispose of.
And at the Energy Department, "interim" can have an elastic meaning.
"Immediate" tends to mean several years.
"Several years" can mean never.


San Antonio's Wild About Free Trade
More than half of all the goods exported from anywhere in the United States to Mexico pass through San Antonio.
Two hundred companies based here, with 65,000 workers, have major business in Mexico.
About 1.2 million Mexican visitors come here each year, spending $500 million.
And, as Mayor Nelson Wolff puts it, "I have only one picture of a president in my office, and it's President Salinas."


Review/Television; A New Round of Programs on J. F. K.
The 30th anniversary on Nov. 22 of the John F. Kennedy assassination is bringing forth yet further replays of images seared in the national consciousness: the shocking scene at Dealey Plaza in Dallas; the bizarre gunning down of the accused assassin; the small boy saluting his father's funeral cortege.
The reverberations remain powerful.
And, of course, television is ready with a new batch of documentaries and dramas to ride the emotional coattails.
Among the John F. Kennedy biographies on tap are "Jack," a CBS documentary on Wednesday and, beginning Sunday, "J. F. K: Reckless Youth," a mini-series on ABC dramatizing the Nigel Hamilton book that angered the Kennedy family when it was published last year.
More to the immediate point here: two productions dealing with the accused assassin.
An indirect approach is taken, tonight on NBC, in "Fatal Deception: Mrs. Lee Harvey Oswald." Tomorrow on PBS, a three-hour "Frontline" documentary, produced in association with the BBC, attempts to answer the still-lingering question, "Who Was Lee Harvey Oswald?"


CHRONICLE
JEAN MACARTHUR , 95, the widow of Gen.
Douglas MacArthur, received a medal from the Philippines, the country her husband liberated the from the Japanese during World War II.
President FIDEL RAMOS gave the Legion of Merit to Mrs.
MacArthur because of her "abiding faith in the enduring and warm bond of friendship between the Philippines and the United States," the Philippines News Agency said.


Foreign Horizons Lure U.S. Broadcast Networks
Before it was acquired by NBC in early October, Super Channel, a pan-European broadcaster, struck Patrick Cox as a bewildering mishmash of paid religious programming, rock videos, news and home shopping.
But Mr.
Cox, the managing director of NBC's operations in Europe, also saw a great opportunity.
So, along with NBC programming executives from the United States, he tossed much of the junk from the broadcaster's schedule.
He began improving the more promising of the existing shows, especially those that focused on European culture, business and news.
He is stirring in liberal quantities of NBC programming from the United States, including "The Tonight Show with Jay Leno," the "NBC Nightly News" and the "Today" show.


Review/Dance; Troupe From Colorado Makes New York Debut
As the old Chinese proverb says, "If you do not enter a tiger's den, you cannot get her cubs." The Colorado Ballet from Denver, a professional regional company unfamiliar in the East, made a daring bid for national attention in less than optimum circumstances with its New York debut on Saturday night.
The gamble paid off.
Martin Fredmann, the troupe's artistic director, used this single performance in Whitman Hall at Brooklyn College, presented by the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts, primarily as a showcase for his dancers.


Abroad at Home; To Make It Gridlock Squared
In the American system of government it is famously difficult to get anything done.
The Framers of the Constitution built in checks and balances because they believed, wisely, that efficiency was less important that preventing abuse of power.
But their design has become encrusted with further frustrating devices.
To get any significant legislation passed, a President has to make private deals with members of Congress to give them projects or appointments they want.
The process has become a series of mutual vetoes and extractions.
To change any vested privilege -- sugar protection, cheap grazing on Federal land, whatever -- has become virtually impossible.


He Saw and (Pretty Much) Conquered
One New York Times sportswriter ran -- mostly -- in yesterday's marathon.
Up at 5 A.M. for an oatmeal kickstart, out the door by 6:30.
Times Square is streaming with marathoners in a Day-Glo, air-cushioned hurry to catch a bus to the start from the Public Library.
What becomes a race begins as a cattle drive.
Forty-five minutes to the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge.
Exiting the Brooklyn Battery Tunnel brings the first warning.
The weather forecast is wrong.
It is not yet 8 A.M., and mostly cloudy has become dangerously sunny.
We have gone to sleep in New York and awakened in New Orleans.


Has the Electorate Grown More Infantile?
To the Editor:
Among the postelection analyses, "An Electorate in Revolt" (front page, Nov. 4) begs the question.
Are we seeing an electorate in revolt or one petulantly pulling levers to indicate not thought-out positions, but entrenched biases, and a mindless search for instant gratification.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY SWEEPS WOULD REVIVE A FAILED DRUG TACTIC In emphasizing increased arrests as a way of reducing drug dealing and violence on the streets of New York, Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani is choosing a strategy that many cities, from Boston to San Diego, have abandoned as costly and ineffective.
Although their experience is by no means universal, many cities found that aggressive arrest policies not only failed to ease the drug problem, police officials and crime experts say, but have also overloaded the courts and jails, often providing little punishment.
Instead, cities are balancing arrests and imprisonment with tactics aimed at disrupting drug dealing as well as encouraging addicted, nonviolent dealers to enter treatment.
A1.
A POWER LIFT TO INVESTIGATIONS Rudolph W. Giuliani said that he would consider measures to make the city's Department of Investigation more independent and aggressive in rooting out corruption.
Mr.
Giuliani said he would increase the size of the department, as the budget allows, and consider proposing that the department's commissioner serve a term of five years, rather than at the mayor's discretion, making it an appointment like that of the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
B2.


For Pippig, Running Is the Best Medicine
Uta Pippig, a 28-year-old medical student who will not become a full-fledged physician for another four months, earned a doctorate in road racing yesterday.
On a day when most of the 26,000 other runners were bedeviled by unseasonable heat and humidity, Pippig won the New York City Marathon in a breeze.
She crossed the finish line in 2 hours 26 minutes 24 seconds, more than two and a half minutes ahead of her nearest rival, Olga Appell of Mexico (2:28:56), and bettered her personal marathon record by almost half a minute.
Nadia Prasad of France was third (2:30:16).


Merchant Marine Sees Its Academy in Peril
The Merchant Marine Academy, whose graduates have played a role in every armed conflict involving United States forces since World War II, is now fighting for its own survival.
The battle began when the Clinton Administration, as part of its budget-cutting bill, proposed a sharp cut in financing for the academy.
The move would force the school to close unless it breaks with tradition and bills its students $15,000 a year for tuition, academy officials say.


Young &amp; Rubicam Wins Digital PC Job
The Digital Equipment Corporation said it had selected Young &amp; Rubicam New York to handle its personal computer business unit's account, previously handled by Ketchum Advertising in Pittsburgh and Krupp/Taylor USA in New York, for two years.
Billings were estimated at $30 million.


Deal Seen on Abortion Pill
The researcher who developed the French abortion pill RU-486 has won a preliminary agreement to let a group of scientists make and distribute the drug in the United States, Newsweek reported yesterday.
The researcher, Dr.
Etienne-Emile Baulieu, told the news magazine that he had reached a preliminary agreement with his former employer, Roussel-Uclaf, which makes the pill, and its parent company, the German chemical giant Hoechst AG, allowing him to set up a pharmaceutical concern to make and distribute the pill as soon as it received approval in the United States.


Review/Music; Washington Opera's 'Anna Bolena'
When the Washington Opera orchestra went on strike earlier this season, the company had to cancel its production of D'Albert's "Tiefland." But contract issues have been resolved, and the season opened strongly on Saturday night with Donizetti's "Anna Bolena," in a brilliant production first done at the Canadian Opera.
Nelly Miricioiu was absorbing if not entirely persuasive in the title role.
"Anna Bolena" has been staged more often in recent years, and with good reason.
It is the most dramatically convincing of Donizetti's operas, even if the score contains no all-time hits.
Felice Romani's libretto focuses on elemental emotional conflicts: Anne Boleyn, wedded to Henry VIII, suppressing her prior love for Percy; Jane Seymour, lady-in-waiting, guilt-ridden over her hidden attachment to the King, and the King himself, manuevering his wife into a compromising situation so that he can cast her off and marry Jane.


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: Political Memo; After Debate, Perot Is Down, but Definitely Not Out
Just three weeks ago, Representative Dick Swett of New Hampshire sounded awestruck as he warmed up the crowd for Ross Perot at a rally in Manchester intended to stir opposition to the North American Free Trade Agreement.
"It's very intimidating sharing this stage with such a national political leader like Ross Perot," he said.
But now, he is not sure he would want to share a stage with Mr.
Perot ever again.
"He has many people feeling he will eventually fade," Mr.
Swett said Friday night.
"He has run into trouble where he has started to delve into issues and not treated them with great depth."


Absolut Greeting Urges AIDS Support
Absolut vodka and its agency TBWA Advertising in New York, are introducing the company's annual fanciful holiday advertisement.
In addition to bestowing a practical gift, this year's ad adds another dimension by urging others to offer support to AIDS research.
The ad features a colorful packet that opens to reveal the theme "Absolut Wishes," accompanied by five festive greeting cards and envelopes.
The seasonal cards, which were created by California artist Joanna Taylor, will first be inserted in the Dec. 13 issue of The New Yorker, with circulation estimated at 800,000.
On the opposite page of the packet is an ad that urges readers "to be an Absolut giver" by joining Absolut in sending donations to the American Foundation for AIDS Research.


Water, Not Fire, Now Threatens Weary Malibu
In advance of the floods and mudslides that are all but inevitable as the winter rains begin, crews worked busily with nature this week to reseed the fire-blackened hills that rise steeply here from the Pacific Ocean, even as they raced against nature to dig trenches and fill sandbags.
The newly homeless rich prowled the ruins of their hilltop villas, accompanied by architects and insurance adjusters who sketched floor plans on yellow pads.
Below, along the seaside highway, poorer residents visited Red Cross centers to collect oranges, apples and plastic bottles of water.


Redskins No Longer Dynasty's Darlings
Two seasons ago, the Washington Redskins were the Super Bowl champions, and people asked whether they might become a dynasty.
Now, when people ask about the Redskins, the first question may be, "How did the Redskins get this bad this fast?"
And now the Redskins are often bad, as they were for most of today's 20-6 loss to the Giants.
The defense allowed the Giants to drive for 80 yards and a touchdown with the opening kickoff.
It could never stop the Giants' running game.
The offense could not score a touchdown or come close, could not make a killing play, could not finish off a drive.


A Heavyweight Bout That Just Won't End
Lou Holtz's theory on pep rallies is simple.
No human being should ever be held accountable for anything that has ever been said at one.
That context having been established, it is worthwhile to return to two moments last week at Notre Dame, one during the passion of the memorable Friday night rally, the other behind closed doors in a meeting Holtz held with his players.
At the pep rally, as the little big man helped the shrieking masses apply their game faces, his determined voice reminded them that the Fighting Irish were not there to play Rocky for the benefit of Florida State's Apollo Creed.
But privately, as he warned his players to prepare for 60 minutes of competition, Holtz took his metaphor in another direction.
"I said, 'It's not like a heavyweight fight. They're not going to stop it.' "


Linda Sue Friedner and David Cowen
Linda Sue Friedner, the special counsel to Time Inc., and David Hancock Cowen, the vice president of Fanning Personnel Inc., an employment agency in New York, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Peter Weintraub officiated at the Waldorf-Astoria in New York.
Mrs.
Cowen, 30, the daughter of Ralph and Audrey Friedner of Great Neck, L.I., graduated from Columbia University and received her law degree from New York University.
Her father is the president of Litchfield Management Corporation, a stock fund affiliated with Cantor, Weiss &amp; Friedner Inc., an investment management company in New York of which he is a principal.
Her mother is a second-grade teacher in the Great Neck school system.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Business Inventories September Industrial Production October


NEW YORK CITY MARATHON: 5 Boroughs. 26.2 Miles. 52,000 Feet. 1,000,000 Stories. 1 Marriage.; Elbow in the Ribs Starts the Test
As the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge filled for the unleashing of the New York City Marathon, Henry Nacht, a 44-year-old Manhattan physician, took his proper position at the "blue" start for men faster than 3 hours 30 minutes.
He stood in the section marked "2:41 to 3:00" and took a few elbows in the ribs by competitors fighting for every inch of space.
This was no time to be aggressive, but these were not marathoners who would be satisfied just to finish.
They wanted to run fast.
Heat or no heat, these runners wanted personal bests.
If they couldn't, they wanted to at least break 3 hours.
"It was chaos," said Nacht, whose best time was 2:39 in 1984.
"It makes the subway seem courteous."


Patents
PROCTER &amp; GAMBLE may have been overly earnest in lobbying for patent extensions on Olestra, its long-languishing no-calorie fat substitute.
On Wednesdaythe Senate passed an authorization bill for the Patent and Trademark Office.
Tacked on were provisions that would extend until Dec. 31, 1997, two Olestra patents due to expire in January and one that will expire in July.


Jets Eat Up the Colts And Head for Dessert
Coming off impressive victories over the Giants and the Dolphins, teams that led their respective divisions and had winning records, the Jets went up against the Colts, an old nemesis with a losing record, and stared down some ancient demons this afternoon.
The Jets had a 2-10 record against the Colts in their last 12 meetings and the team hadn't won three consecutive games in Coach Bruce Coslet's four-year tenure.


Essay; Rollins, the Unlikely Reformer
Ed Rollins, the political manager who out-strategized White House guru James Carville in the recent New Jersey gubernatorial, reminds me of the mentalist in the old movie "The 39 Steps": when asked a question, he is compelled to blurt out the dangerous truth.
His need to expose the existence of what pols have long called "walking around money" -- henceforth to be known in the annals of psychiatry as Rollins's Compulsion -- has provided the healthiest revelation in politics this year.
To the victor belongs the spoiler.
The horrified goo-goos denouncing his time-dishonored tactics do not recognize a true reformer.


Wage Proposal May Hurt Affordable Housing, Critics Say
A proposed amendment to a New York State labor law scheduled for a vote in the Assembly this week would deal a severe blow to the development of affordable housing throughout the state, housing advocates say.
The amendment seeks to broaden the definition of public works to include all private projects that benefit from public subsidies like grants, tax breaks or low-interest mortgages.
The state's labor law already requires that workers on public projects be paid what is known as "prevailing wage," which usually amounts to the standard union wage.
A similar bill has already passed in the Senate.


In Dallas, the Refrain Is: Bernie! Bernie!
Cowboys 20, Cardinals 15
Bernie Kosar didn't look like a quarterback with diminished skills.


CHRONICLE
Speaking of book signings, MARGARET THATCHER , more used to statesmanship than salesmanship, has finished a seven-city tour to promote her book, "The Downing Street Years."
In Los Angeles, the final stop, about 200 people waited in line Friday for autographed copies, The Associated Press reported.
"I saw all of your interviews and I think you're just great," a transplanted Londoner, Lillian Cole, said.
"Thank you," the former Prime Minister responded. "I think I'm great sometimes, too."


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Advanced Technology Material Inc., Danbury, Conn., an initial public offering of two million shares.
Needham &amp; Co.


In Voting Out Dinkins, New Yorkers Showed Disappointment
To the Editor:
"Tuesday's Tea Leaves" (editorial, Nov. 5) continues an unfortunate pattern in your reporting and editorials of viewing the 1993 mayoral election primarily through a racial prism.


Recycling
New York, New Jersey and Connecticut all recycle solid waste at a higher rate than the national average of 19 percent, and efforts to recycle a greater percentage are on track, state environmental officials say.
States have encouraged industries to use recycled materials and expanded municipal recycling.
Recyclables collected through municipal recycling increased 54 percent in New York from 1991 to 1992.
New York City is the only large city in the country that requires recycling by all households.
Its goal is to recycle 41 percent of the city's residential waste by the year 2000.


Far From the Sunday Crowd, With Man's Best Friend


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Couples and Love Win  Fred Couples and Davis Love 3d cruised to a front-running victory in Orlando, Fla., yesterday in defense of their title in the World Cup of Golf and completed an American sweep of all the major team championships this year.
Love and Couples both played on the American Ryder Cup team, and Couples was a member of the three-man American team that won the Dunhill Cup.
The other team triumph was in amateur play, in the Walker Cup.
This one came with something approaching ease.
The Americans led after all four rounds, held a three-shot advantage when play started on the final round and won by four strokes over the Zimbabwe team with a 20-under-par total of 556.
The Americans led by a minimum of two shots throughout the final round and were never in danger. (AP) Funk Wins as Daly Loses Big: Fred Funk, who received a good lie when his wedge shot on the closing hole hit a spectator, shot a two-under-par 70 yesterday and won the Mexican Open by a stroke.
John Daly, playing in his first tournament since his latest suspension from the PGA Tour, finished 25 strokes behind the leader. (AP) TENNIS  Sampras Still No. 1  Pete Sampras overwhelmed Magnus Gustafsson, 6-1, 6-4, yesterday in Antwerp, Belgium, to win the European Community Championships, assuring the American he will remain the world's No. 1 player this year.
The victory in the $1.11 million tournament was Sampras's eighth title in 1993 and gave him an edge of more than 500 points in the ATP Tour rankings, making it impossible for his closest challenger, fellow American Jim Courier, to make up the difference next week in the season final -- the ATP finals in Frankfurt. (AP) Rosset Wins in Moscow: Top-seeded Mark Rosset defeated Patrik Kuhnen, 6-4, 6-3, to successfully defend his title in the Kremlin Cup in Moscow.
Russian President Boris Yeltsin, an avid tennis player, watched as Rosset defeated the unseeded Kuhnen in the $325,000 tournament at Moscow's Olympic Sports Complex. (AP) AUTO RACING  Earnhardt Is Champion  The finishing touch to Dale Earnhardt's sixth Winston Cup championship really didn't have much suspense.
Earnhardt had the title wrapped up before the midway point in yesterday's season-ending Hooters 500 in Hampton, Ga., and spent most of the last half of the race watching Rusty Wallace, his closest rival in the point race, dominate and win the 328-lap event. (AP) HOCKEY  Ricci Paces Quebec  In Miami, Mike Ricci scored his second goal of the game with 2 minutes 44 seconds remaining as the Quebec Nordiques defeated the Florida Panthers, 5-2, last night.
With the score 2-2 late in the third period, Florida's goalie, John Vanbiesbrouck, lost his stick in a scramble in front of his net when Steven Finn's slap shot was deflected by Ricci for the game-winning goal. (AP) SOCCER  U.S.
Scores and Scores  Dominic Kinnear, Joe-Max Moore and Mark Chung had two goals each yesterday as the United States beat the Cayman Islands, 8-1, in Mission Viejo, Calif.
It was the most goals by Americans in 254 international games since they began playing in 1885. (AP)


As Sanctions Bite, Haiti's Poor Feel the Pinch
Turn on the television, and the picture flashes on and off.
Pick up the telephone, and rather than a dial tone, the pulsing sound of a busy signal is likely to be heard.
Look for a restaurant, and the sign on the door may read: "Closed. Out of gas."
Since an international embargo on oil and arms supplies was imposed on this country nearly one month ago to punish military leaders for blocking a return to democracy, signs of a crumbling country are everywhere and growing.


Elusive Competitors of the Global Market
To the Editor:
"Foreigners Find New Ally in U.S. Industry" (front page, Nov. 2), on lobbying tactics in international trade, detects a new trend in American politics.
Often when a United States company or industry seeks protection from low-price foreign imports, large United States companies lobby against the exclusion of the foreign product.


Espinosa Shakes Off Those Terrible 2's
This time when the difficult conditions felt right for Andres Espinosa, and the New York City Marathon was finally there for his taking, only a 6-foot blond he knew nothing about appeared to be in position to stop him.
His name was Bob Kempainen, a 27-year-old American and part-time medical student from Minneapolis, who had not run a marathon since finishing 17th in the 1992 Olympics in Barcelona, Spain.
He was not among the runners who were expected to contend.
Who was he, and what was he doing, matching one of the pre-race favorites stride for stride on a perilous day of 70-degree heat and 65 percent humidity?
Heat and humidity that contributed to at least 55 runners being hospitalized, including two who had to be rushed by helicopter to Bellevue Hospital.


Pacific Chiefs to Meet Where 2 Worlds Mix
A visitor to Seattle, the largest city in a mythical land called Cascadia, arrives at the airport and is whisked to a baggage area in a subway where the robot voice speaks Japanese, as well as Spanish and English.
About 140 miles north of here, Vancouver, British Columbia, is about to become the first large city in North America with an Asian majority.


Bonner Earns a Place In the Knicks' Scheme
The scene on the floor had become an intense schoolyard struggle for the basketball.
Arms were flying, as were legs, kicks, punches and trash talk.
Anthony Bonner, more strong than graceful, with greater determination than gift, at last won the war and rose for the basket.
The hoop was automatic.


No Headline
In the eyes of the whole world the people of Puerto Rico have shown their class and their commitment to democracy. -- GOV.
PEDRO ROSSELLO, of Puerto Rico, where voters narrowly chose to continue the island's status as a United States commonwealth.  [ A1:6. ]


Pacific Trade Bloc Is Divided Over Chile's Membership Bid
As the leaders of 15 Pacific nations prepare to meet this week in Seattle to debate trade and growth, another issue has split both the group and the Clinton Administration: does the Pacific Rim extend as far as Chile?
The argument is not about geography.
It is about whether accepting Chile into the group, the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, or APEC, would give a lift to Latin America's most dynamic economy or whether it would just blur the focus of an organization that is trying to define the relationship between East Asia and the United States.


Trying to Stanch Blood In an Urban War Zone
THE resonant pop of a 75-millimeter cannon at the marathon's starting line set 26,000 people running through New York yesterday.
But throughout the city, the daily report of gunfire in some neighborhoods may be driving thousands of people a year out of New York in search of a safe haven.
On average, someone is hit by gunfire in New York City every 88 minutes.
As of last week, 4,769 people had been reported shot this year.
Of those, 306 gunshot victims -- 80 of them less than 17 years old -- were described as presumably innocent passers-by or bystanders.


Long Ratings Climb Ends for Cable Television
For the first time since cable television began its explosive growth in the 1980's, the level of cable-channel viewing has declined this fall.
The drop was modest; the average prime-time rating for basic cable channels during the first seven weeks of the new television season, which began the week of Sept. 20, fell to 13.4 this year, from 13.7 for the comparable period last year. (Each rating point represents 942,000 homes.)


No Progress in N.H.L. Talks
Representatives of the National Hockey League and its officials union held contract talks yesterday at La Guardia Airport, but no progress was reported in efforts to avert a threatened strike today.
The league's 58 referees and linesmen have said they will strike before the three games scheduled for tonight if a pact is not agreed upon.
Replacement officials have been called up from minor and amateur leagues.


Arthur D. Brennan; Judge, 94
Arthur D. Brennan, for 25 years a judge, first in Westchester County and then in the New York State courts, died on Friday at the King Street Nursing Home in Rye Brook, N.Y.
He was 94 and lived in White Plains.
The cause was old age, said his daughter, Patricia B. Stanley of Pine Plains, N.Y.


Piracy or Just Insolvency? Women's Saga Continues
The crew shake-up last week aboard the 60-foot sailboat, U.S.
Women's Challenge, was as brutal as it gets in yacht racing.
But the real hardships are likelier to surface during the next few weeks as the fragmented crew tries to regain its sea legs.
The newly named boat, Women's Challenge, left Punta del Este, Uruguay, Saturday in the start of the second leg of the Whitbread Round the World Race.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11 DESPAIR IS WINNER IN BOSNIA In all the Muslim enclaves, including Sarajevo, the deprivations have been aggravated by a plague of lawlessness, of Muslims preying on Muslims for the means of survival.
A1


Terry C. Reiner, Robert L. Berenson
Terry Cohen Reiner, a senior vice president of the Grey Direct Marketing Group in New York, was married there yesterday to Robert Leonard Berenson, the president of Gray Advertising in New York.
Rabbi Mark Winer performed the ceremony at the Carlyle hotel.
Mrs.
Berenson, who received an M.B.A. from Columbia University, is a daughter of Sam Cohen of Boynton Beach, Fla., and Helen Rosenberg of Long Beach, L.I.
Her father retired as the president of the Team Distribution Company, a warehouse and distribution concern in Jersey City.


A Giant Surprise Destroys Redskins
Maybe the Giants should go to the Florida State type of offense: trick plays every so many possessions.
While the Giants' running game is cranking along, their passing game needs help.
Coach Dan Reeves didn't hesitate to reach into his bag of tricks to provide it during a 20-6 victory against the Washington Redskins at Giants Stadium.


Dividend Meetings


Review/Dance; Student Troupe Enlivens Program of Re-creations
The Purchase Dance Corps can be depended on for good dancing and lively dances.
But it may be hard to top the program presented tonight by these students in the dance division at the State University College here; it will be repeated on Friday night and next Saturday afternoon and evening at the college's Performing Arts Center.
The students are accomplished professional-level performers with a winning freshness and appetite for dance.
They act, too, an increasing rarity these days.
And the imaginative selection of works, several of which are seldom performed, had a resonance that belied the slightly dry tone of the program's title, "Sixty Years of Dance."
The evening opened with a glowing revival of "The Shakers," a 1930 signature piece by Doris Humphrey that was staged by Ray Cook with an overture of traditional Shaker songs sung by the Purchase Dance Corps Chorale.
Charles Weidman's wry humor shone through "The Combat Between David and Goliath" in choreography modeled on the 1946 Weidman original by Peter Hamilton, a long-time member of the Humphrey-Weidman and Weidman modern dance companies.


Police Officer Kills Himself In His Home
A New York City detective who guarded the Mayor's wife killed himself Saturday night at his home in Nassau County, becoming the seventh officer to take his own life this year and prompting police officials to increase suicide prevention efforts in the department.
Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said that he was particularly concerned because the suicide of Detective Donald Daal, 34, who as a member of the intelligence division guarded Joyce Dinkins, was the third by a police officer within two weeks.
A fourth officer who shot himself during that time is now on a hospital life-support system.


Accounts
*
Villa Nicola Ltd., Wellesley, Mass., to Castle Underwood, New York, as the first agency to handle advertising for a new, undisclosed food product.
Billings were estimated at $5 million to $10 million. *
Wolverine World Wide Inc., Rockford, Mich., to Ayer Inc., Chicago, to handle its Wolverine Work Boot and Wolverine Wilderness footwear lines account, previously at BBDO Chicago.
Billings are estimated at $4 million to $5 million.


Market Place; Wall Street rewards a tight strategic focus at La Quinta.
DID you hear the one about the traveling salesman?
Well, this one can be told in mixed company.
After lackluster earnings almost precipitated a proxy fight for La Quinta Inns two years ago, La Quinta stock has been flexing its muscles in recent months.
From trading mostly in the $10 to $11 range for much of last year (adjusted for a 3-for-2 split last month) the stock has about tripled, closing at $32.375 on Friday.


Dance in Review
Kathy Rose  Kabuki-Menco Visual Theater Hudson Guild Theater
By magically combining choreography with films, costumes and lighting effects, Kathy Rose made pictures dance and dancers look like moving pictures in the program her Kabuki-Menco Visual Theater presented on Saturday night.


Republicans Pressing Quest for Quomo Challanger
Only days after a Republican won New York City's mayoral race, the party's focus is now on Albany and its search for a 1994 gubernatorial nominee.
With Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato out of contention, the search has become a quest to find a candidate who fits a pollster's profile of the ideal Cuomo slayer.
And somewhat predicatably -- after all, this is the New York Republican Party -- the search has generated internecine squabbling that threatens to puncture the happy dream of the Republican and Conservative Parties coalescing around a single candidate.


Dance in Review
Choreographer as cinematographer.
Caribbean Dance Company of the Virgin Islands  Kaye Playhouse Hunter College
In making its New York debut on Wednesday night, the Caribbean Dance Company of the Virgin Islands became the first dance attraction of the inaugural week of the Kaye Playhouse.
Some energetic works choreographed by Monty Thompson, the artistic director of the St.
Croix-based troupe, certainly helped celebrate the remodeling and reopening of this theater at Hunter College.


Police Say Man Kills 2 Robbers In Self-Defense
A man held at gunpoint by two robbers in Brooklyn early yesterday used his own gun to shoot and kill his assailants, the police said.
The man, Arthur Boone, 41 years old, was arrested on weapons charges for carrying an unlicensed gun, the police said.
Investigators said they decided not to charge him in the killings after they determined that he had acted in self-defense.


NEW YORK CITY MARATHON: Sports of The Times; First One Runner, Then Thousands
JUST cross the finish line.
This is how runners approach the New York Marathon, or any marathon at all.
Just get there.
Whether the day is mercifully cool or punishingly warm, as it was yesterday, they must keep moving.
The finish line is the reward, waiting for them on the west side of Central Park.
Follow the signs.
Follow the noise.
Follow the crowds.
Follow the Yellow Brick Road.
Somewhere out there, at the end of 26 miles and 385 yards, is the finish line.
Whatever happens after that will take care of itself.
That is the promise they must make to themselves.


NATION CONSIDERS MEANS TO DISPOSE OF ITS PLUTONIUM
In 16 unremarkable concrete bunkers built by the Army for a war with Hirohito and Hitler, the United States has begun assembling about 50 tons of plutonium, one of the most expensive materials ever produced and perhaps the most important to safeguard.
The Energy Department says the bunkers, each about the size of a two-car garage, are going to be used for interim storage, meaning six or seven years.
But plutonium, which was invented by the Energy Department's predecessor, the Manhattan Project, may turn out to be the hardest thing on earth to dispose of.
And at the Energy Department, "interim" can have an elastic meaning.
"Immediate" tends to mean several years.
"Several years" can mean never.


Clinton's Tightrope; Presidency Takes on Shifting Politics Of U.S. Role in Curbing Violent Crime
Early this month, President Clinton was chatting with an old friend, Mayor Kurt L. Schmoke of Baltimore, when Mr.
Schmoke described his visit to the family of an 18-year-old man who had been killed on Halloween by a 13-year-old acting on a dare.
Around the same time, Mr.
Clinton picked up his copy of The Washington Post and read about an 11-year-old girl in a crime-ridden neighborhood who was planning her own funeral, down to the prom dress she would be buried in.


Bad Night: Rangers And the Ice Both Melt
It was a 65-minute air-conditioned nightmare.
The Garden wasn't filled.
The ice, soft and awful, was a 200-by-85-foot sandbox.
The play was erratic, but mostly strained and ordinary.
One player was carried off the ice, another was left to bleed face-first in a crimson puddle.
A third-period lead was blown.
The final result, then, wasn't much prettier: Rangers 3, Sharks 3.
It wasn't a defeat.
It wasn't a victory.
It definitely wasn't a classic.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
The Treasury's financings this week are confined to short maturities beginning with today's auction of new three- and six-month bills, and the auction of a new 52-week bill tomorrow.
Traders said that at the close of the New York cash market on Friday the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.09 percent, and the rate on the six-month issue was 3.22 percent.
The rate on the one-year maturity was 3.37 percent.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Agreed to terms with Robby Thompson, second baseman, on a three-year contract.


No. 325: Shula Rides the Shoulders
There were subplots aplenty when the Miami Dolphins met the Philadelphia Eagles here this afternoon on a warm, sunny day ideal for something special to unfold.
It was William (Refrigerator) Perry's first game in an Eagles uniform.
It was the return of three former Eagles -- Keith Jackson, Mike Golic and Keith Byars -- to Veterans Stadium.
It was Miami Coach Don Shula's attempt to surpass George Halas as the National Football League coach with the most victories.
Guess which plot took center stage?
Guess who got the game ball?


Elizabeth Okin, Jak Ninyo
Elizabeth Berakhah Okin, an assistant counsel for the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation, was married yesterday to Jak Yasar Ninyo, a benefits consultant for the Economic Group Pension Service Inc., in Manhattan.
Rabbi Marc D. Angel performed the ceremony at the Spanish and Portugese Synagogue in Manhattan.
The bride graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree from Yeshiva University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Okin, of New York.
The bride's father, a former member of the New York City Council, is a retired judge of the New York City Civil Court.
The bride's mother is a lawyer in private practice in Manhattan.


Dance in Review
'Alice in Wonderland' 'The Later Years'  Sharon Fogarty Context Studio
Sharon Fogarty took on a promising subject in "Alice in Wonderland:The Later Years," a theater-dance piece she presented on Friday night.
A good deal of that promise was not fulfilled.
But Ms.
Fogarty, a deceptively innocent-looking original with more than her share of imagination and daring, created a fully furnished little world in dance and music.


Signs of Investor Nervousness Grow
In the last several weeks, Curt Pippen, a semiretired oral surgeon in Glendale, Ariz., has taken three-quarters of his money out of stocks and put it into a less volatile fixed-income mutual fund, where his investments could earn a lot less but are safer.
"I think interest rates are going to be rising and I am not much of a Clinton fan," said Dr.
Pippen, 51, adding that he expected stock prices to tumble soon.
"In other words, I'm afraid."


People
*
Gary Wolfson was named executive vice president and chief creative officer at Ross Roy Communications Inc., Bloomfield Hills, Mich., succeeding Jack Frakes, who is retiring after heading the agency's creative output for 11 years.
Mr.
Wolfson was previously a senior vice president and creative director of W. B. Doner &amp; Co., Southfield, Mich.
*
Donald Ee was named managing director and executive creative director of BBDO Singapore, succeeding Spencer Chan, who will remain at the agency as a consultant for six months.
Mr.
Ee was previously a vice president and creative director of Dentsu, Young &amp; Rubicam, Singapore.


Sexual-Abuse Issue Clouds Bishops' Agenda
This week's gathering of the nation's Roman Catholics bishops in Washington was supposed to be different, a relief from recent meetings that dealt with explosive issues of sex and politics.
But it may not work out that way.
Meeting in Washington a year ago, the bishops faced a showdown over a pastoral letter on women's issues that they had debated for almost a decade.
Under the gaze of the press, the bishops failed to approve the document, which had become increasingly conservative as it went through successive drafts.


Unceremonious Ending for 3 Metropolitan-Area Teams
There will be no second round in the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I tournament for Columbia, St.
John's and Rutgers, the three New York metropolitan area schools in the field of 32.
Columbia lost at Princeton, 2-0, yesterday and St.
John's was beaten by Boston University, 2-1, Saturday night while Rutgers suffered a 2-0 loss to Hartwick College in Oneonta, N.Y., yesterday in the rain.


Officials Detail Two Lives of Brink's Robbery Suspect
In his Jackson Heights neighborhood, the man who called himself Andre Singleton was known as the owner of a bustling comic-book shop, a religious family man, a responsible tenant who lived quietly with his wife and three children.
In another life in Ireland, it had been a different story.
The trim, neatly dressed man was Samuel Ignatius Millar, a young rebel from Belfast who had spent at least eight years in prison, first for belonging to a "proscribed group," then on weapons and explosives charges.
In 1984, at age 29, he made his way to the United States under an assumed name.
He worked as a street vendor, seeking to start anew.


Perot Asserts President Is Using Pork Barrel to Pass Trade Accord
Stepping up his attack on the North American Free Trade Agreement, Ross Perot asserted today that President Clinton was involved in a "criminal" attempt to win Congressional votes for the proposal.
"They are buying Nafta votes with your taxpayer money," Mr.
Perot said in the last of some 90 rallies he has held around the country this year in an attempt to defeat the agreement, scheduled for a vote in the House of Representatives on Wednesday.


Corrections
A report by The Associated Press in the Company News column of Business Day on Tuesday, about the acquisition of Barclays Bank P.L.C.'s commercial finance unit by CIT Group Holdings, misstated the business of the Barclay unit.
It is engaged primarily in factoring, the purchase and collection of bills, commonly used in the garment industry.
It is not engaged in asset-based lending.


Thumbs Up for Allen and Chiefs
Chiefs 31, Raiders 20
Marcus Allen made his first game as a visitor to the Los Angeles Coliseum as successful as most of his homestands -- he won.


How to Win: Let Sleeping Voters Lie
Mired in a sea of clamoring reporters and a swirling controversy over reported payments to suppress black votes in urban areas, Gov.-elect Christine Todd Whitman delivered a political truism last week that is seldom broached in public.
"You make your effort to get your vote out where you know you are strong and you just hope that the vote isn't as strong in the areas where you are trailing in the polls," Mrs.
Whitman said last week.
"That's what an election is about."


Mr. Bryant's Moment
It now seems likely that the House will act on campaign finance reform legislation before Thanksgiving.
The Democratic bill, while too soft on political action committees, deserves passage.
This would advance the issue to a House-Senate conference, where it may be possible to undo some of the damage done by the nervous incumbents who are Washington's most formidable opponents of reform.
Meanwhile, the fate of another critical ethics bill remains hung up over four little words.
The four words, offensive to the junketeering members of the House Golf and Tennis Caucus, embody a basic principle of Congressional integrity: Pay your own way.


Both Sides Emphasize High Stakes of Trade Vote
Just three days before the decisive vote in Congress on the North American Free Trade Agreement, supporters and opponents today stressed the political, economic and diplomatic stakes riding on the outcome.
Vice President Al Gore maintained that "the consequences of a defeat for Nafta in the foreign policy arena would be really catastrophic."


CHRONICLE
PHYLLIS GEORGE has the art of signing books down to a science: She put her signature in 5,000 copies of "Craft in America," her new book, the other day in the Fort Worth, Tex., warehouse of her publisher.
"I can average 500 an hour, or 12 to 13 a minute, and I'm still dotting the 'i's,"' she said proudly.
Ms.
George has been in and out of the national spotlight for more than 20 years, as Miss America in 1971, as a television sportscaster and co-anchor of the "The CBS Morning News," and as First Lady of Kentucky when her husband, John Y. Brown, was Governor from 1979 to 1983.


Anna Sten Is Dead; Film Actress Touted As Another Garbo
Anna Sten, a melting-eyed but star-crossed Russian actress whom Samuel Goldwyn hoped to ballyhoo into another Garbo or Dietrich in the 1930's, died on Friday at her home in Manhattan.
Friends said she was in her late 80's.
The cause was cardiac arrest, said her lawyer, Hiram G. Shields.
He said she had been in poor health.


Viacom Bid Called Likely to Stand, for Now
The chairman of Viacom Inc., Sumner M. Redstone, is confident he can win his fight for Paramount Communications without raising his bid prior to a crucial hearing in Delaware Chancery Court tomorrow, according to several executives close to Viacom.
Late Friday night, QVC Network Inc., which has been trying to break up a friendly merger between Paramount and Viacom, raised its offer to $10.6 billion in stock and cash, topping Viacom's existing bid of $9.7 billion.
Most important, the chairman of QVC, Barry Diller, put $5.5 billion in cash into his offer, while Mr.
Redstone's offer has $5.1 billion in cash.


Topics of The Times; Millennial Chaos for Computers
According to Computerworld magazine, many of the world's computers are going to go bonkers on Jan. 1, 2000.
Due to a basic programming flaw, most "date based" calculations -- like mortgage payments and pension tables -- will be thrown off by the coming millennium.
As Computerworld explains it, the problem stems from the fact that many programs use only the last two digits of the year to run their computations.
Thus, 2000 will register as 00.
And to understand how this will affect things, consider the way a computer calculates age: Today, it would subtract 53 (this writer's date of birth) from 93, to conclude that the writer is 40.
In 2000, however, it will subtract 53 from 00, and deduce that he is -53.


Review/Jazz; The Sound of Improvisation Defined in an Earlier Epoch
The saxophonist and composer Anthony Braxton's first set at the Knitting Factory on Thursday night had a handful of moments.
The first one came after he and his band had worked their way through a tortured and angular melody, only to let it bleed slowly into free improvisation, with long, gentle notes dictating the piece's texture.
Others came occasionally, in the form of translucent group surfaces, or a bass solo, or Mr.
Braxton's own smooth lyricism.
He and his band, including Marilyn Crispell on piano, Mark Dresser on bass and Gerry Hemingway on drums, performed a long set without breaks, and though the musicians were using sheet music, the show sounded improvised.
It followed the classic limitations of free improvisation, with most of the music's movement coming from changing dynamics, shifting from soft passages to louder, intense ones.
The instrumentation might change, but the practice was the same, with meditative beginnings leading to frenetic endings.


Berlin Journal; The War Memorial: To Embrace the Guilty, Too?
German officials dedicated a national monument today that is intended to honor victims of past conflicts, but the angry protests and boycotts that marred the ceremony suggested that Germans have not yet reached a consensus about how to confront their recent history.
The monument stands in a Neoclassical 175-year-old former Prussian guardhouse on Unter den Linden, Berlin's most elegant boulevard.
It contains a single large room centered on a statue of a grieving mother holding the body of her son.
On the floor is the inscription, "To the Victims of War and Tyranny."


Balance Sheets Are Healthier
It has been slightly more than two years since Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, looked the huge amount of corporate, consumer and government debt in the eye and likened it to a "55-mile-an-hour headwind" buffeting the economy.
But changes in the last 24 months allowed the cautious Mr.
Greenspan to state publicly this fall that the problem is about half as bad as it was.


Weapon-Sale Loans Keep Americans Working
To the Editor:
"No Loans to Boost Arms Sales" (editorial, Nov. 3) not only misrepresents Senate proposals to establish a defense export credit facility, but it is also inaccurate.
A defense export credit facility would not be a subsidy program for our North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies, any more than it is a subsidy for countries that use the Export-Import Bank to buy such products as power generation or communications equipment.


Today's TV Listings
Television and radio news and listings appear today on pages B12-13.


Pass the Clinic Protection Bill
Federal help may soon be on the way for women who seek abortions at clinics threatened by Operation Rescue and other anti-choice fanatics.
The Senate is committed to take up immediately the Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances Act and to vote tomorrow after only limited debate.
A similar bill will reach the House floor on Thursday.
Congress is moving swiftly to fill a void created in January when the Supreme Court refused to read existing civil rights laws broadly enough to protect women from marauding extremists.
Attorney General Janet Reno has given hearty support and President Clinton is happy to sign the bill.


NEW YORK CITY MARATHON: 5 Boroughs. 52,000 Feet. 1,000,000 Stories. 1 Marriage.; A Cannon Starts The Long March
It was only two weeks ago that residents here voted to separate itself from New York City.
But yesterday this oft-maligned borough was a picture of togetherness -- a time for procession, not secession -- as the 26,000-plus runners gathered for the start of the marathon.
They marched from the Fort Wadsworth staging area toward the starting line in front of the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge.
A year ago, several hundred semi-elite runners took off too early, creating a surge of thousands who thought the race had begun.
That prompted the New York Road Runners Club to consult with the Police Department, and this year about 200 police officers running the race got a free spot at the head of the field.
Dressed in blue hats, blue shorts and yellow shirts, they resembled Legos in a wedge formation as they locked arms and held the crowd back until the starting cannon was fired.


Books of The Times; Kafka, the Lost Doll and Other Games of Allusion
A Table of Green Fields  Ten Stories  By Guy Davenport  149 pages.
New Directions. $21.95.
The most accessible and charming of the 10 pieces in Guy Davenport's latest collection of short fiction, "A Table of Green Fields: Ten Stories," is the second one, "Belinda's World Tour." Here Lizaveta, a little girl, leaves her doll Belinda in a park in Prague.
Her parents cannot console her.
"Her grief was the more terrible in that they had a guest to tea, Herr Doktor Kafka of the Assicurazioni Generali, Prague office."


Diverse interests place newspaper ads debating the trade pact, but how effective are the messages?
WITH the North American Free Trade Agreement heading for a crucial vote in the House of Representatives on Wednesday, an assortment of companies and organizations have been spending heavily on print advertisements to argue for and against the pact.
Among the more recent advertisers with half-page or full-page messages have been Toys "R" Us and the Toy Manufacturers of America, an industry trade group; American International Group, an insurance and financial services company; Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the big accounting firm; a consortium of business leaders from Mexico called Mexico Today; Citibank and United We Stand America, Ross Perot's organization.


Review/Pop; Siberry's Journey Of a Soul
At the end of a concert at the Bottom Line on Thursday that was an unusual mixture of music, recitation, video and question-and-answer session, Jane Siberry sat at a piano and sang her astonishing song "The Vigil." This folk-pop lullaby, which is a high point of Ms.
Siberry's recent album, "When I Was a Boy" (Reprise), is one of the few attempts by a pop performer to evoke death and the soul's journey into another dimension in language that doesn't seem trite or melodramatic.
In the lyric, Ms.
Siberry takes the role of a guardian angel singing to the soul of a loved one who is near death.
"Sail ho, heave ho, come on, let go," she urges softly.
Looking back on her relationship with a partner whom she is lifting in her arms, she recalls the two of them "running through the backstreets of the world." Their trip away from the earth becomes a journey across the sea at the end of which the soul she is bearing loses its identity, and she can no longer distinguish whether it belongs to a lover, a brother or a baby.
All that is left is a pure love.


A Beautiful Day to View a Race, Not to Run One
It was a Sunday of autumn splendor in New York: a chrome-yellow sun swimming in an azure sky, clumps of burgundy and pale-green foliage fading in the parks, and a record 72-degree heat wave -- just right for an outdoor wedding, a bit too warm for a marathon.
But wed and run they did, to the delight of thousands.


Trade Center Mysteries Deepen; Trial Raises Tantalizing Issues but Leaves Them Unresolved
The mysteries have begun to pile up: two shadowy figures who returned to Iraq after the World Trade Center was bombed; a Domino's pizza worker traveling long distance on first-class airline tickets; altered passports; fake I.D. papers; bomb-making manuals.
All are elements in the World Trade Center bombing trial, which finished its sixth week of testimony last week.
But while the mysterious Iraqis and the forged passports have been mentioned in the Government's case against the four defendants, there has been very little clear explanation of their meaning, or how they tie together.


Frederick D. Murphy; Publicist, 53
Frederick D. Murphy, a New York publicist who represented entertainers and philanthropies, died on Nov. 7 at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
He was 53.
He died of complications from AIDS, said Ida Lewis, a friend.


Corrections
A map in Business Day on Friday, with an article about American tobacco companies' operations in Eastern Europe, transposed the names of two countries.
Estonia is north of Latvia.


Oilers Get Well on the Toothless Bengals
Oilers 38, Bengals 3
Still wondering whether Houston's turnaround is real?
Look at what it did to Cincinnati in the rain.


New U.S. Troops in Somalia Are Still Tied to U.N. Operation
The American reinforcements sent to Somalia by President Clinton last month are now in place, but United States officials have come to recognize that the contingent will remain bound to United Nations forces in a kind of awkward symbiosis.
That is a somewhat different picture from that painted by Mr.
Clinton, who emphasized in a nationally televised speech on Oct. 7 that the soldiers would be placed under United States, rather than United Nations, command.
But the American officials say the need for close coordination with the United Nations makes it impossible for the United States troops to operate with more than nominal independence.


Review/Music; Frost-Laden Images In a Wuorinen Premiere
In Dylan Thomas's gnomic poem "A Winter's Tale," the images of ice, winter and death -- of "duck pond glass," of "rivers mouthed in night" and of "snow-blind love" -- accumulate in a catalogue of sensations that veers between ecstasy and elegy.
Then, in the final verses, suggestions of fulfillment emerge from the world of "numbed lakes," promising an erotic return to the "folds of paradise," a hint of flowering in the melting snow.
Charles Wuorinen's new composition, "A Winter's Tale," given its first New York performance by the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center on Friday night in Alice Tully Hall, is a 25-minute plunge into Thomas's poem, a brittle, crisp setting written for soprano, clarinet, horn, string trio and piano.
The music, a commission from a consortium of chamber music societies around the country, becomes almost a simultaneous translation of the words, imitating phrases and images, even pausing for silence when the poet's text commands, "Listen."


G.O.P. Hopes New Group Can Attract Support From Outsiders
It is no accident that the Republican Party chose a sedate college campus 750 miles from the United States Capitol to start what it bills as a bold strategy to define its future.
In a determined move away from the Beltway, the party has established a not-for-profit organization, the National Policy Forum, to hold public meetings around the country to hash out ideas on subjects like health care, foreign policy and the environment.


ISRAELI AIDES WANT MORE FROM ARAFAT
Israeli Cabinet ministers said today that Yasir Arafat's condemnation on Saturday of the killing of a Jewish settler did not go far enough and that the Palestine Liberation Organization had to show that it can curb anti-Israeli violence.
The remarks by the ministers after their weekly Cabinet meeting reflect growing concern in Israel about the P.L.O.'s ability to control the occupied territories and honor its commitments under an agreement with Israel on starting Palestinian self-rule in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.


Kasparaitis Is a Symbol Of a Team Gone Soft
When a team slumps as thoroughly as the Islanders have, it is misleading to blame only one struggling player for the widespread malaise.
Nevertheless, some seem to stand out as symbols.
For the Islanders, the symbol of the day is Darius Kasparaitis.
Last season, when Kasparaitis was a rookie, his jolting body checks and ebullient personality were the essence of a surprisingly successful team that overachieved into the third round of the Stanley Cup playoffs.


In an Effort to Lessen Turmoil, Whitman Goes to Black Churches
After a week of turmoil set off by a statement that money was paid to suppress the black vote in the gubernatorial election, Gov.-elect Christine Todd Whitman made a symbolic journey to two black churches today, continuing an effort to mend fences with black clergy and community leaders.
She said little about the controversy stirred by comments by her chief strategist and campaign manager, Edward J. Rollins Jr., and most ministers reserved their condemnations for Mr.
Rollins and his initial statement that $500,000 had been paid to black ministers and Democratic campaign workers to keep the black vote down.


Dance in Review
'American Landscape'  Brenda Bufalino American Tap Dance Orchestra Kaye Playhouse Hunter College
Brenda Bufalino and the American Tap Dance Orchestra have been in the forefront of the movement to preserve and re-energize tap as an American art form.
But judging by "American Landscape," a program of dances set to the music of Hoagy Carmichael presented on Thursday night, Ms.
Bufalino and her gifted dancers have not figured out how to grow and change without sacrificing the individualistic spirit, warmth and invention that is the heart of tap.


Despite New Evidence, A Prisoner Faces Death
The guards came for Lloyd Schlup the other day and moved him from his cell to the holding room where the condemned wait out their last days and hours, praying that the courts or the governor or God will save them.
There he waits for the last visits from his mother, trying to push away the fear that makes it too hard to sleep and leaves his mouth dry and his hands trembling.


Giants' New Switch-Hitter
Giants linebacker Michael Brooks was wired -- literally and figuratively.
Literally, because he had a wireless microphone attached to his body so NFL Films could get more of those pounding sound effects.
Figuratively, because he had a great game, thanks in part to a new defensive scheme the Giants tried yesterday against the Washington Redskins.
The Giants switched the positions of their inside linebackers, Brooks and Carlton Bailey.
Bailey went from the strong side to the weak side and Brooks went from weak to strong.
The Giants believe that putting the bigger Brooks on the side where the tight end is enables him to use his strength better and take on bigger players.
They hoped that Bailey could better utilize his speed on blitzes on the opposite end of the line.


Selma Weiser, S. S. Steinberg
Selma Heyman Weiser, the founder and chief executive of Charivari, the designer clothing chain in New York, and S. Sherman Steinberg, a lawyer in New York, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Morris Gordon, the bride's brother-in-law, performed the ceremony at her home in Bellport, L.I.
Mrs.
Steinberg is a daughter of the late Dr. and Mrs.
Julius Heyman.
Her father was a dentist in West Brighton, S.I.


World Economies


Bridge
Married couples sometimes have good bridge partnerships, but that is practically never true of formerly married partnerships.
Perhaps the only exception to this generalization is the pairing of Gail Greenberg, formerly Gail Moss, and Michael Moss.
Playing Saturday at Greenberg's Honors Club, 42 West 74th Street, they headed a strong field in the annual Ogust-Schenken event, commemorating two great players of yesteryear, Harold Ogust and Howard Schenken.
The winners' score was far ahead of their nearest rivals, and is probably a record for the event.
The standings were: 1st, Greenberg and Moss, 849 imps; 2d, Jon Greenspan and Bjorn Fallenius, 383.7; 3d, Konrad Dziekanski and Peter Kurtz, 302; 4th, Robb and Linda Gordon, 297.6.
All are from New York City.


Review/Theater; 200 Years of a Nation's Sorrows, in 9 Chapters
Remember plot?
In the often absorbing first half of "The Kentucky Cycle," a six-hour, two-part saga about 200 years of Kentucky history, Robert Schenkkan delights in the kind of robust, jam-packed narrative that the modern theater long ago ceded to movies and television.
Settlers battle with Injuns, parents with children, husbands with wives, families with their neighbors, the North with the South.
No one hesitates to use a gun, on relatives and strangers alike.
A character presumed dead can come back to life at the most dramatically exquisite moment.
Two grown boys who seem to have no genealogy in common can abruptly turn out to be long-lost brothers.


Giuliani to Consider Adding To Investigation Agency Role
Outlining another of his priorities as the next mayor of New York City, Rudolph W. Giuliani said today that he would consider measures to make the city's Department of Investigation more independent and aggressive in rooting out corruption.
Mr.
Giuliani said he would increase the size of the department, as the budget allows, and consider proposing that the department's commissioner serve a term of five years, rather than at the mayor's discretion, making it an appointment like that of the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Such a change would probably need City Council approval.


Press
THE strategies of the three New York City tabloid newspapers have begun to emerge.
Forever, it seems, the preoccupying questions were whether The Daily News or The New York Post would survive.
With that resolved, at least for now, the next question is this: How will The Post, The Daily News, and New York Newsday try to distinguish themselves from one another?


Critic's Notebook; Boulez's High-Tech Parisian Forces
When the first musicians decided that limbs and voice boxes were not enough, the musical instrument was born.
Instruments became tools in service of the soul, prostheses to compensate for all the expressive organs God had forgotten to give us.
Like other tools, musical instruments were slowly refined and empowered over the centuries, only to expand with extraordinary swiftness in the last 50 years.
Electrical circuitry has introduced almost limitless expressive possibilities and artistic choices.
The computer's vast power has cheered optimists; its subversions of old master-servant relationships, on the other hand, inspire a paranoia not entirely ill founded.


Newest Corporate Refugees: Self-Employed but Low-Paid
When Edward Gray lost his last job, as a patent agent defending filings before the Federal Patent Office, he gave up on corporate America.
Converting a bedroom of his Los Angeles home into an office, Mr.
Gray, 56, went to work for himself, recruiting inventors as his own clients.
He had tried to avoid self-employment.
Most of his career had been spent as a physicist in the military industry, developing rockets and aircraft for General Electric, the Rand Corporation, TRW Inc. and the like.
As those jobs disappeared, he took an 18-week course in patent law, passed a Federal exam and joined a law firm in 1991 as a patent agent.
But 16 months later, the firm closed Mr.
Gray's operation, and seeing no other choice, he became self-employed.
Harder Than Old Jobs
For millions of people like Mr.
Gray -- refugees from the corporate world -- self-employment, often as consultants, is turning out to be far harder work than their old jobs.
Although many of them are well-educated, skilled and experienced, they have difficulty matching their old incomes when they go out on their own -- and their reduced buying power weakens the economy.


Sports of The Times; L.T. Is Still A Presence
WHEN the Giant defensive unit was introduced, he got the biggest cheer as the public-address announcer Bob Sheppard intoned, "Linebacker, No. 56, Lawrence Taylor." And after the Giants' 20-6 victory over the Redskins, he got the biggest endorsement he has had lately.
"I thought Lawrence played really, really well, the best he's played all year," Coach Dan Reeves was saying now.
"He put tremendous pressure on the quarterback."


INSIDE
Preaching to the Choir
In Memphis, the President found a forum for making violence a Democratic issue.
News analysis, page B8.


Chiat/Day Combines Eastern Operations
Chiat/Day North America announced a substantial reorganization that links the creative resources of its New York and Toronto offices into one unified agency called Chiat/Day East.
"We think this provides our clients with more resources," Bob Wolf, the chief executive of Chiat/Day North America, said Friday.
He added that a prime reason for the change was "problems in New York," which included the loss of two big clients in the last year: American Express and Reebok.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Self-employment is a growing refuge for many from corporate life in these tough times of layoffs, restructurings and a weak economy.
Although many of the self-employed are well-educated, skilled and experienced, they have difficulty matching their old incomes when they go out on their own -- and their reduced buying power weakens the economy.  [ Page A1. ]


In Voting Out Dinkins, New Yorkers Showed Disappointment; Transit Strike of '66
To the Editor:
History is always being revised, but the facts never change.


Sanzo Nosaka, 101, Communist in Japan Ejected by the Party
Sanzo Nosaka, a founder and former chairman of the Japan Communist Party who was expelled last year after party leaders called him a traitor to the party, died yesterday at his home in a Tokyo suburb.
He was 101.
Mr.
Nosaka was by far the most respected Communist in Japan, where he had helped to found the party in 1922 after he returned from study in Britain, where he had helped to found the British Communist Party in 1920.


Weapon-Sale Loans Keep Americans Working; Risky Business
To the Editor:
"No Loans to Boost Arms Sales (editorial, Nov. 3) deserves all support. As you point out, it is neither in the long-term security interests of the United States, nor is it morally justified, to encourage defense contractors with United States tax dollars (that is, with loan guarantees) to export weapons to countries that could then turn those same weapons against United States troops.


At United, a Stormy Future Is One of the Few Certainties
The airline industry is a tough business for the largest carriers, whether they are pursuing the elusive goal of steady profits or operating with labor-management relations layered with scar tissue from years of tensions.
For Stephen M. Wolf, the chairman of United Airlines, life is about to get a lot tougher in both ways.
A stormy future at United is one of the few things that seems certain after an attempt by its pilots and machinists unions to gain control of the carrier failed last week.


Topics of The Times; Help Parents Get to School
One good result of the asbestos mess in New York City schools is that parents have become more involved and more vocal.
This week they have an appropriate mechanism to voice their concerns -- Open School Week, Nov. 15-19.
They could use cooperation from employers and flexibility from schools to make it easier for them to participate.
Each year, schools formally invite parents in for teacher conferences.
These sessions allow the teacher and parent to discuss a child's progress and familiarize parents with school programs.
To help parents prepare for these sessions, the United Federation of Teachers has distributed a pamphlet, in English and Spanish, suggesting topics for discussion and questions.


Too Much Johnson For Colts
Shortly before Johnny Johnson's 57-yard touchdown run that clinched the Jets' 31-17 victory over Indianapolis today, Brad Baxter, the Jets' bruising fullback, told Johnson that he felt the Colts' defense wearing down and that it was only a matter of time before one of them broke a long run.
Johnson thought so, too.
He had seen the Colts breathing deeply and he heard them talking.


LAND MINES CALLED A WORLD MENACE
Thousands of men, women and children in more than 60 countries are killed or maimed each month by land mines, a panel of experts has reported, and unless drastic international action is taken, the casualty rate promises to grow far worse.
According to a 510-page report published last week by the Arms Project, a branch of the research organization Human Rights Watch, some 100 million mines around the world threaten civilians.
Moreover, far more mines are being planted each day than are deactivated in mine-clearing operations, so the casualty toll is steadily increasing.


A Bitter Winter in Bosnia
When starvation and freezing weather threatened Bosnia a year ago, Europeans and Americans mounted a massive relief effort.
Last winter was abnormally mild, and though fighting continued, few people died of hunger or cold.
Things are bleaker this winter; the State Department now estimates that more than 2.7 million lives are at risk due to war, disease, malnutrition or inadequate shelter.
The threat is greatest in central Bosnia, where fighting impedes relief convoys.
In Sarajevo, Serbian forces have devised a devilish way to torment besieged inhabitants who rely on natural gas for heat.
Gas flowing through a buried pipeline is periodically cut off, despite Belgrade's promises that this would not happen.
When United Nations monitors protest, the tap is turned on, at least for a time.
And in last year's "mild" winter, temperatures plunged to 3 degrees.


No. 2 Pencil Fades As Graduate Exam Moves to Computer
The Educational Testing Service, creators of the examinations that give Americans the jitters -- the S.A.T., G.R.E., P.S.A.T. -- today takes a major step toward eliminating the standardized paper and pencil test with the introduction of a new computerized version of the Graduate Record Examination.
Though paper and pencil will remain an option for now, by the 1996-97 school year, all 400,000 students who take the G.R.E. each year for admission to graduate school will do it on a computer.


Topics of The Times; A Moving Experience
Alternate-side-of-the-street parking rules were in effect that morning as a moving van pulled up to the curb.
The movers began unloading the van.
The first thing down the ramp was a car.
Just then a patrol car pulled up; a traffic cop emerged and began ticketing the car.
As the officer was slipping the ticket under the windshield wiper, a man rushed out of a nearby apartment building.
"But I'm just moving in from Texas," he was overheard to protest.


Bench Press: Reserves Lead Nets
After squandering big leads in their first two home games, the Nets finally figured out how to handle a visiting team as they came up with a 132-102 blowout of Sacramento, spoiling Bobby Hurley's pro homecoming with the Kings.
Kenny Anderson and Derrick Coleman had 26 points apiece and Anderson registered his fourth double-double of the season with 16 assists while adding 6 steals.
The Nets' bench also had a strong game, outscoring Sacramento's reserves by 73-40 and outrebounding them, 36-17.


Shannon Journal; At Portal to Ireland, Fewer Heaven-Sent Tourists
Here on the western edge of Europe, Shannon International Airport -- the birthplace of both Irish coffee and the world's first duty-free shop -- has provided a good living for tens of thousands of people for 48 years.
Before the age of the huge jet transports, nearly all trans-Atlantic flights stopped here to refuel.
And the Government in Dublin required all flights from North America to stop here on the way in and out of the country.
This was vital to the tourist business in the west, but an annoyance for passengers who wanted to go directly to Dublin.
No other country in Europe had such a hurdle en route to its capital city.


Orbotech Ltd. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dr. Gregory R. Anrig, 61, Dies; Led Educational Testing Service
Dr.
Gregory Richard Anrig, head of the company that created the aptitude tests taken by millions of students, died on Sunday at the Princeton Medical Center.
He was 61 and lived in Princeton, N.J.
The company, the Educational Testing Service of Lawrenceville, N.J., said the cause was cancer.
The service is the oldest and largest creator of standardized examinations.
Dr.
Anrig had been its president since 1981.


Easing the Pain of Street Surgery; New York Aims for Better Communication in Road Projects
Road construction has slowed much of New York City to a perpetual crawl, and it is about to get worse: Columbus Avenue is going under the knife.
From 59th to 110th Streets, the Upper West Side thoroughfare will be ripped open next summer for at least two years of major surgery, receiving new sewer lines, water mains, concrete, pavement, street lights and sidewalks.


Patrick Petroleum Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


USA Classic Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CLINTON TO WIDEN LAW ON CHILD SMUT
Moving quickly to prevent a potentially serious political wound, the White House today prepared a new law that would increase prosecutions for distribution or possession of child pornography.
The measure, which was prepared under President Clinton's orders and might be considered by Congress as early as Tuesday, would broaden the definition of child pornography in current law to include some depictions of children even if they are clothed.
In the view of some civil liberties advocates, the legislation may be so broad as to be unconstitutional.


Q&amp;A
Eye Protection
Q.  Do my sunglasses protect me from ultraviolet radiation?


Review/Television; Bringing Back the 70's, The Disco Sound Intact
If you're eager to try on those old platform shoes and leisure suits in the closet (your own or your parents'), a perfect excuse can be found in tonight's "A 70's Celebration: The Beat Is Back." On NBC at 8, the two-hour review of music, fads, fashions and dances, primarily disco, has one insistent message: The 1970's are hip again.
At least this month.
Produced by Ken Ehrlich ("Aretha Franklin Duets," and many Grammy Awards shows), this show is indeed an unabashed celebration.
The first host is introduced as "a major star of any decade, Miss Olivia Newton-John." The final segment, with the Bee Gees, pulses with the kind of lighting tricks that once transported disco dancers to higher realms.
The 70's revival push is on, not only in Los Angeles, where night spots like Club 1970 are attracting young crowds, but even on the "Today" show, where Katie Couric swooned over the Bee Gees a couple of weeks ago.


Judge Orders Rollins to Answer Questions on Payoffs to Blacks
A Federal judge today directed Edward J. Rollins, the Republican political consultant, to answer questions under oath this week about whether Christine Todd Whitman's campaign paid ministers and Democratic campaign workers to hold down the black vote in the Nov. 2 election for New Jersey governor.
A lawyer for Mr.
Rollins said his client was "anxious to get the story out" and intended to deny any knowledge of efforts to discourage black voters.


Forstmann Takes Reins Of Gulfstream Buyout
Swearing he won't become another Carl Icahn, Theodore J. Forstmann will step in officially today as the chairman of Gulfstream Aerospace to salvage his leveraged buyout of the maker of the world's most luxurious corporate jets.
Mr.
Icahn's 1988 buyout of T.W.A. foundered so badly that he had to take over as the chairman, then later sell out to creditors and employees.
Mr.
Forstmann said Mr.
Icahn had sold too many junk bonds and was mired in a generic business, "pushing a metal tube through the air like everyone else."


Syndication Risk Open to Networks
The legal victory won by the big three television networks over the Hollywood studios last week offers the networks an opportunity to gain entry to the casino known as the syndication market.
ABC, NBC and CBS had fought for two decades to eliminate Federal regulations that prevented them from doing what the studios routinely do: finance new shows in the hope that the one in eight that turns out to be a hit will generate enough profits in the syndication market to make up for the losses on the other seven -- with a nice bit of change left over.


G.M. Acts to Secure Pensions Using Stock
The General Motors Corporation said this evening that it was asking Federal regulators for permission to use 185 million shares of one class of its common stock to help secure pensions for its hourly workers.
Under pressure from regulators, G.M. has been scrambling for a way to reduce its unfinanced pension liability -- the amount it has failed to set aside to pay future pensions.
That liability is now about $24 billion, larger than any other corporation's.


Tyson Foods Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Pittencrieff Communications Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ground Round Restaurants (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Dr. John D. Millett, 81; Headed Miami of Ohio
John D. Millett, president emeritus of Miami University in Oxford, Ohio, and the first chancellor of the Ohio Board of Regents, died on Sunday at his home in Cincinnati.
He was 81.
The university said Dr. Millett had been ill for a long time.


Palermo Is Facing a Risky Operation
STEVE PALERMO, the American League umpire who was shot through the spinal cord two years ago while trying to stop a mugging, faces an operation Friday so risky he could wind up confined to a wheelchair for life.
"It's very scary," Palermo told The Kansas City Star before boarding a flight Saturday to Worcester, Mass.


Miscellany
*
Publishers Information Bureau, New York, reported that magazine advertising pages in October totaled 17,177, up 4.2 percent from October 1992.
For the first 10 months of 1993, pages totaled 135,250, up 1.3 percent from the corresponding period a year ago. *
Ron Antman, a former vice president and creative director at Grey Advertising, New York, and Owen Frager, former president at Frager Creative, Oakland, Calif., opened Ron/Owen &amp; Partners, New York, an agency specializing in campaigns for mainstream advertisers aimed at gay and lesbian consumers.


CHRONICLE
The success of GABRIELLE CARTERIS has been entwined with eyeglasses, so when she was asked to be honorary chairwoman of the "Give the Gift of Sight Campaign," she did not hesitate.
The campaign, co-sponsored by Lions Clubs International and Lenscrafters, sends used glasses donated to Lenscrafters stores to people without eye care in developing countries.
This year, the donations will go to South America.
"I have worn glasses since I was a little girl," said Ms.
Carteris, who plays Andrea Zuckerman, the smartest character on the television show "Beverly Hills 90210" and its "social conscience." "Everyone thinks I should wear contacts, but I think glasses are great. They can be sexy, alluring, something you hide behind, something that enhances."


Vital Signs Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In a Remote Southern Marsh, Iraq Is Strangling the Shiites
Government forces in Iraq have stepped up a campaign to empty wide sections of the country's southern marshlands.
The campaign has included what some witnesses describe as chemical-weapons attacks against opposition Shiite Muslims.
Residents and Shiite guerrillas say Iraqi engineers have diverted water from the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, drying up more than half the vast wetlands and pushing thousands of people deeper into the marshes and into Iran.
The operation has also forced an unknown number to surrender to Iraqi troops, who have interned families in barren detention centers in Basra, Nasiriya and Amara, residents said.


Study Says Shelter Turnover Hides Scope of Homelessness
The number of New Yorkers who have been homeless in recent years is far greater than experts and advocates previously estimated, according to a new study that for the first time used city records to identify and count individuals in the city's shelter system.
On any given night, there are about 24,000 people in New York City's shelters.
But the new study, released yesterday, found that 86,000 different individuals passed through the city's shelter system in 1992 alone.


Wellsford Residential Prop. Tr.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Steelers' Latest Line for the Bills: 0-0-0-0
There were 60,407 fans here 10 months ago at Three Rivers Stadium -- the Pittsburgh Steelers' largest crowd ever -- when the Buffalo Bills smashed the Steelers by 24-3 in the playoffs.
Tonight, 60,265 showed up.
It was the Steelers' second-largest crowd ever.
There is something about the Bills that brings the Pittsburgh fans out in droves, hyped and ready for blood.
Now maybe the Pittsburgh fans can say the same thing about their team.


Officials Whistle Themselves Off the Ice
In the first major labor confrontation of the Gary Bettman administration, referees and linesmen went on strike against the National Hockey League tonight and were replaced by substitutes from minor and amateur leagues.
At Maple Leaf Gardens, the referee was Luc Lachapelle, a 39-year-old former prison guard in Quebec who still works in the correctional system as a physical education teacher.


Opening Night, First Upset
It was an upset of modest proportions but the Virginia Slims Championships at Madison Square Garden didn't even get through the first singles match last night without losing a seeded player.
Mary Joe Fernandez, seeded sixth, was ousted, 6-1, 1-6, 6-3, by South Africa's Amanda Coetzer, a 15th-ranked player making her championships debut at this invitation-only event for the world's top 16 players.


Medical Action Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about William Haggin Perry, an owner of thoroughbred horses who died on Friday at his home in Oakwood, Va., omitted a survivor.
He is Mr.
Perry's son, William Haggin Perry Jr. of Manhattan.


Deals Made on Trade Pact
In seeking to win support for the North American Free Trade Agreement, the Clinton Administration is cutting deals at the expense of people who have the least say in Congress: American consumers and foreigners.
From wheat and peanut butter to orange juice and lettuce, the Administration has been promising American farmers and the legislators who represent them that it will protect them from foreign competition.
In exchange, House members and farm groups have been supporting the trade pact.


A Jolt for the Jets: Jones Is Sidelined for Season
Marvin Jones, the No. 1 draft choice who appeared on the verge of becoming an impact player for the Jets at middle linebacker, is out for the season with a hip injury suffered against the Indianapolis Colts on Sunday.
The Jets said today that Jones had sustained a chip fracture of the socket portion of his left hip joint.
He was examined this afternoon at Lenox Hill Hospital by the Jets' medical staff.
The doctors used suction to remove fluid from the swollen area and placed Jones in traction to relieve pressure on the joint.
He will be in the hospital from three to five days, and will be on crutches for six weeks.


A COMPROMISE SEEN WITH NORTH KOREA
President Clinton's top foreign policy advisers agreed today to recommend the suspension of joint American-South Korean military exercises in exchange for a pledge from North Korea to allow inspection of its nuclear sites, a senior Administration official said tonight.
At a White House meeting today, the aides decided to recommend to Mr.
Clinton that the military maneuvers, called Team Spirit, be used to pry open the nuclear reactors and other installations that North Korea has acknowledged it possesses, making them accessible to the International Atomic Energy Agency for regular inspections.


6-0 Record Is Great, But 7-0 Center Is Pained
Patrick Ewing walked out of practice today with his neck in a thick, white brace.
As he rushed to board the team bus, the Knicks' 7-foot center, who missed Saturday night's 99-86 victory over Milwaukee with a strained neck, was asked if he thought he would be able to play Tuesday night in Dallas.
"I hope so," said Ewing, looking away from reporters, and staring somberly into a pair of large suitcases he held in his hands.
"The only thing I did today was ride the bike. I'll know more about my situation tomorrow."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.03
3.28
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.11
3.09
3.13
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.26
3.22
3.37
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.21
5.22
6.50
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.15
6.15
7.56
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.22
7.22
8.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.61
5.60
6.46
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Japanese Tax Policy Enmeshed in Foreign Policy
When Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa meets President Clinton in Seattle later this week, he will bring an array of "omiyage," or gifts, including a vague plan for deregulating Japan's coddled economy and a proposal for opening the public works business to foreign construction companies.
But it appears unlikely that he will bring the one thing the United States and some private economists have said would do the most to reduce Japan's soaring trade surplus now -- a package of tax cuts to persuade recession-battered Japanese consumers to begin spending again.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices to Rule on Felon's Right to Own Gun
The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether states may nullify the restrictions imposed by Federal law on a convicted felon's right to own a gun.
The question has divided Federal courts around the country, meaning that people with identical criminal histories can face opposite consequences from their gun ownership.
That fact almost certainly led the Court to take up the question, although the Justice Department had told the Court there was no need to do so.


Corrections
A chart yesterday illustrating an article about computerization of the Graduate Record Examination rendered a character incorrectly throughout a multiple-choice question about the area of a circle.
In each case, the "x" should have been the Greek letter pi: "What is the area of a circular region that has circumference 8? (A) 4 (B) 8 (C) 16 (D) 32 (E) 64." The answer is C.


KMART CORP. (N)
The Kmart Corporation yesterday blamed increased interest expenses, the higher Federal tax rate and losses at its warehouse club chain for lower profits in the third quarter.
Although the beleaguered retail company had already warned Wall Street to expect weaker profits, its bottom line was leaner than many analysts had expected.
The average of 19 analysts' third-quarter earnings estimates on Kmart compiled by Zacks Investment Research was 26 cents a share.


Official's Use of Racial Epithet Draws Quick Response
Shirley Zeller, the Town Clerk, had one call today about a deer license and another about a permit to burn leaves.
And several residents called asking for the mailing address of Town Hall.
Odd, Ms.
Zeller recalled thinking about the requests.
Why were people all of a sudden wanting to write to Town Hall?
Life's routines are simple and quiet here and most don't get aroused enough about the workings of government and local politicians to send in letters, she said.


Rating To Match Football Rankings
In the aftermath of Notre Dame's 31-24 victory over Florida State on Saturday, there are actually people who hope the two teams won't meet again in the Fiesta Bowl (whoops, the I.B.M. OS/2 Fiesta Bowl).
"They're Notre Dame fans," said Charlie Jones, who called NBC's telecast of the game.
"They figure they've already beaten Florida State once."


Tiffany &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Argentine President Clears Hurdle to Second Term
A few months ago it seemed almost a political impossibility.
President Carlos Saul Menem was saying he would change the Argentine Constitution to permit his immediate re-election in 1995, despite the fact that he would have to win a raft of votes in Congress from members of the opposition Radical Civic Union.
Few now doubt Mr.
Menem's political deftness.
In an agreement at the presidential residence on Sunday, Mr.
Menem, the Peronist Party leader, signed an deal with Raul Alfonsin, leader of the Radicals and former President, in which the Radicals will support Mr.
Menem in his desired constitutional changes.


Rauch Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Yeltsin Says He Won't Rule Out a June Presidential Election, Yet
Evidently acknowledging criticism questioning his commitment to democracy, President Boris N. Yeltsin has denied that he has ruled out a presidential race in June.
In an interview published in Izvestia today, Mr.
Yeltsin said he did not relish the idea of early elections because he is serving a five-year term that ends in June 1996 and already received a vote of support in an April referendum.
But he acknowledged that he promised a fresh presidential vote during his struggle with the federal Parliament, which he suspended on Sept. 21 and finally shelled into oblivion on Oct. 4.
"I hope you have not forgotten my decree calling early presidential elections on June 12, 1994," Mr.
Yeltsin said.
"It is effective unless I cancel it."


Haitians Suffer With and Without Sanctions
To the Editor:
We appreciate the prominence and timeliness of "Study Says Sanctions Kill Up to 1,000 Children a Month" (front page, Nov. 9), describing our study titled "Sanctions in Haiti: Crisis in Humanitarian Action." You correctly convey our findings, except for the following two points.


Bridge
There was considerable irony and frustration in the diagramed deal from the Ogust-Schenken memorial event played on Saturday at the Honors Club, at 42 East 74th Street in Manhattan.
Those who practice the weak no-trump, showing about 13 high-card points, live in hopes that the bid will jockey the opponents into the wrong trump suit, perhaps a 5-0 fit when a 5-4 fit is available.
But when this happened as shown, Ravindra Murthy as South breezed home in two hearts.
Since he was in a position to draw trumps, he could not be prevented from making nine tricks and in fact made 10 when West ducked an early club lead toward the dummy.


NRP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


TRANSACTIONS Baseball  American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Promoted Jeff Parker to assistant director of scouting and minor league operations.


Municipal Advisers Reject Gift Ban
The National Association of Independent Public Finance Advisers has rejected a ban on political contributions to local officeholders and candidates who could hire them.
Instead, the association adopted a policy that "discourages" its member firms and their employees from making such contributions.
In adopting this policy, the association rejected the ban on political contributions that was voluntarily accepted by 17 large Wall Street municipal bond underwriters last month.


Robert Wagner Jr., Ex-Deputy Mayor, Found Dead at 49
Robert F. Wagner Jr., the sage and gentle 49-year-old scion of a family that defined New York politics for three generations, died suddenly yesterday in a hotel room in Texas, where he was researching a book on urban America.
Friends said he complained of flulike symptoms while flying to San Antonio on Saturday and skipped a planned tour of a public-housing project there yesterday.
After he failed to respond to messages, he was found in his room at the Embassy Suites hotel at about 5:45 P.M. by Thomas Vitullo-Martin, the husband of Julia Vitullo-Martin, his collaborator on the book "The Future of Cities."


Mobile America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: Washington Talk; Meanwhile, Red Flags On Health
It is easy to overlook, because the fight over the North American Free Trade Agreement is so all-consuming at the moment, but there are ominous signs of drift in the Administration's health care campaign.
Some Democrats who are committed to overhauling the nation's health care system -- and who believe that Mr.
Clinton's Presidency could rise or fall on the issue -- long for the appointment of a health care czar (or at least a grand duke, reporting to the czarina, Hillary Rodham Clinton) to oversee the drive.
Names like that of Harold M. Ickes, a New York lawyer, political operative and Clinton campaign veteran, have been on the rumor circuit for days.


Music in Review
New York Chamber Symphony  The 92d Street Y
The New York Chamber Symphony under Gerard Schwarz made a strong case on Saturday night for Beethoven played by reduced forces.
The Second and Eighth Symphonies were robust, wholly enthusiastic and acutely, knowingly musical.
They provided some of the most satisfying playing I have ever heard from this group.
Mr.
Schwarz's thoughtful choices in tempo always seemed to find just the right point at which clarity and unforced energy work to their optimum.


Spare the Horses
To see a carriage horse marooned in New York City traffic is to see a 19th-century artifact cruelly transported into a 20th-century nightmare.
Sometimes the nightmare is fatal, or very nearly so.
During the last decade carriage horses have collapsed from heat exhaustion, stomach cramps and leg cramps, and several have bolted.
One was forced into an intersection by a speeding limousine, broke a leg and had to be destroyed.
Without very strong regulation, this industry has little to recommend it.
It provides jobs for only a handful of people, and can snarl traffic and sentence horses to years of hard labor among buses, cars, honking horns and noisome exhausts.
That's why the City Council in 1989 wisely voted to put the horses out to pasture, so to speak, by passing Local Law 89, which restricts the times and areas in which the carriages may operate.


VSE Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Life Re Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
It was Nov. 14, 1943, when Leonard Bernstein, then 25, was summoned to conduct the New York Philharmonic because Bruno Walter, the guest conductor, had fallen sick.
The response was tumultuous.
On Sunday evening, Mr.
Bernstein's children, ALEXANDER BERNSTEIN, NINA BERNSTEIN and JAMIE BERNSTEIN THOMAS, invited 48 guests to the Dakota to mark the 50th anniversary of that momentous debut at a dinner in their father's apartment, which remains exactly as it was before his death in 1990.


Victoria Creations Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Free Trade Accord: The Mood; Americans Split on Free Trade Pact, Survey Finds
Americans are evenly split over the North American Free Trade Agreement and are uncertain about whether it would create jobs or cost them, a stance that closely mirrors the predicament facing Congress as it prepares to vote on the pact this week, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News poll.
The telephone poll, conducted Nov. 11-14 among 1,334 adults nationwide, showed 41 percent opposed and 37 percent in favor of the pact, which would gradually erase trade barriers between the United States, Canada and Mexico.
The difference fell within the poll's margin of sampling error, which was plus or minus three percentage points.


Addington Resources Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


House Banking Chairman Increases Pressure on the Fed
Henry B. Gonzalez, chairman of the House Banking Committee, turned up the heat on the Federal Reserve today by demanding that it turn over unedited transcripts of central bank meetings going back to 1976.
In a sternly worded letter to Alan Greenspan, the Fed's chairman, Mr.
Gonzalez said, "I will expect to receive the materials immediately after the conclusion" of a Tuesday meeting of the central bank's main policy-making committee, the Federal Open Market Committee.


Frederick R. Wierdsma; Shipping Executive, 88
Frederick R. Wierdsma, a former general manager of the Holland-America Line whose family was associated with the steamship company since the 1800's, died on Sunday at his home in Vero Beach, Fla.
He was 88.
He had been ill for some time, his family said.


Rypien May Be Getting the Hook
MARK RYPIEN may be replaced by RICH GANNON as the starting quarterback for the Washington Redskins, Coach RICHIE PETITBON indicated yesterday.
Gannon, acquired in a trade with Minnesota on the last day of training camp in August, took all of the team's snaps at practice yesterday.
Rypien, Washington's regular starter since 1989 and the most valuable player in the Super Bowl just two years ago, watched.


Music in Review
Martina Arroyo  Soprano Kaye Playhouse Hunter College
A recital by Martina Arroyo was Friday's contribution to inaugural week at this resuscitated concert space.
Ms.
Arroyo's soprano is, if anything, a voice of experience, and it has retained many of its best virtues: a forthright declamatory strength and a respectful musicality, to name two.
The Aria and Scena from Donizetti's "Marino Falliero" was all power and muscle.
Indeed, the songs by Strauss and Duparc seemed almost bruised by Ms.
Arroyo's emphatic style.


13 Cubans Defect to U.S. in Stolen Plane


Designs Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Armistice Timing Came As Accident of History
To the Editor:
Myths have a way of overwhelming facts.
Richard C. Wald's Op-Ed remembrance (Nov. 10) of his father's version of why Armistice 1918 was timed for the 11th hour of the 11th day of the 11th month is moving, but not the way it was.
No symbolism or spite was intended.
In Berlin time, it was actually noon -- an hour later.


Demolition Lifts Hopes for Families in Jersey City


Review/Music; Friendly Works of Fearsome Serialists
Michael Tilson Thomas's concert with the New World Symphony at the Kaye Playhouse on Sunday afternoon reminded me of a time when I was in third or fourth grade, and a prankster friend tried to plant a small exploding cap on the teacher's chair.
As he was ejected from the classroom, he put the cap on the floor, touched it gingerly with his shoe and said, "Look: it's harmless."
Mr.
Thomas offered a similar demonstration in behalf of Arnold Schoenberg in a program called "Schoenberg and His American Pupils." Speaking to the audience before the performance, Mr.
Thomas asserted that "every composer today has to consciously accept or reject Schoenberg's methods." This time the rejecters had the upper hand.
And Schoenberg himself was represented by an energetic, shapely account of his Chamber Symphony No. 1, a work from his early, tonally ambiguous (but not yet atonal) Romantic (read "harmless") period.


Harsh Criticism of F.B.I. In Review of Cult Assault
A Harvard professor retained by the Justice Department to review the Government's tear gas assault on the Branch Davidian compound near Waco, Tex., said today that the Federal Bureau of Investigation had helped drive cult members to mass suicide and then misled officials in the review that followed.
Contradicting the official review of the operation published last month by the Justice Department, the professor, Dr.
Alan Stone, said the Government bore some blame for the deaths of 75 people, including 25 children, in the assault on April 19 that ended a 51-day standoff outside the cult's compound.


COMPANY BRIEFS
GANDER MOUNTAIN INC., Wilmot, Wis., a seller of hunting, fishing and camping equipment, said Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company had signed a letter of intent to acquire a 27 percent stake in the company for $20 million.
GUARDIAN ROYAL EXCHANGE P.L.C., London, agreed to buy the American Ambassador Casualty Company of Chicago for $100 million cash from Germany's Allianz Holding A.G.
SITHE ENERGIES INC., New York, an independent power producer, said it would build and operate a 150-megawatt natural gas-fired co-generation facility in Smithfield, New South Wales, Australia.


Putting All Your Pictures On a Disk
TAKE snapshots with an ordinary 35-millimeter camera, not a high-priced digital box, drop off the exposed film at the shop and get back a compact disk from which the photographs can be played on an ordinary television set with a VCR-like device.
In Rochester, it seemed like a wonderful idea.
It may eventually turn out to be a wonderful idea, but not while the photo-album generation lives.
Professionals, rather than family photographers, are embracing the Kodak Photo CD system, not to look at their snapshots on television but to get them back as collections of 1's and 0's that can be handled by computers.
I recently shot a 12-exposure roll of Kodacolor and, when I took it to the local photo shop for CD processing, there were a few moments of puzzlement.
In a busy neighborhood store in a fairly affluent community, I was the first customer to ask for it.


RESULTS PLUS
PRO BASKETBALL  Rockets Stay Unbeaten  Hakeem Olajuwon scored 21 points and Matt Bullard sparked a fourth-quarter surge as the unbeaten Houston Rockets defeated the Philadelphia 76ers, 88-84, last night for their sixth straight victory.
Otis Thorpe added 14 points and 19 rebounds for Houston, which has not allowed any opponent to score 100 points this season.
Jeff Hornacek had 25 points for Philadelphia.
Philadelphia led by 73-61 after three periods, but the Rockets went on a 22-3 burst, including three 3-pointers by Bullard. (AP)


Cascades Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Firefight in the Reeds And an Escape Into the Darkness
The virulence of the Iraqi Government campaign against Shiite rebels in the southern marshlands is starkly apparent.
As a skiff with a half a dozen Shiites and this reporter turned into a canal flanked by reeds that towered several feet above the boat, Iraqi soldiers, hidden on an elevated earthen platform, opened fire.
Bullets skimmed across the water, slashing the reeds and whizzing past the startled Shiites.


The Marriage Is Holding Up, as Are Most of the Runners
Their marriage may have been made in runners heaven and their hearts may have been pounding as one, but Tom Young and Pam Kezios, who were married Sunday at Mile 8 of the New York City Marathon, were splitsville by the time they made it to the finish line.
No, they didn't have a spat along the way.
It's just that marathon officials, who allowed both runners to begin the race together at the women's starting line on Staten Island, didn't make a similar concession at the finish line in Central Park.


Britain Said to Confer With I.R.A. Political Wing
British Government officials and officials of Sinn Fein, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army, have met to discuss ways of ending the violence in Northern Ireland, The Belfast Telegraph reported today.
The front-page article in the Telegraph, a vehement opponent of the I.R.A. and Sinn Fein, was supported by a report from an independent news service headed by Eamon Mallie, a journalist who wrote one of the standard reference books on the I.R.A.


Strange Oases In Sea Depths Offer Map To Riches
HUGE rock chimneys that spew hot water into the ocean abyss and nourish a riot of bizarre creatures are also fostering a wide range of economic spinoffs, leading some experts to call them the next great prize in the global race for natural resources.
These oases of heat and life in the frigid depths of the ocean were first discovered 15 years ago and have since been found along many of the volcanic gashes that gird the earth.
Up to 15 stories high, the chimneys form as cold waters trickle through sea-floor fractures, soak up heat, leach out minerals, percolate upward and shed the minerals in solid deposits as the now superheated fluid mixes back into icy sea water.


Rabbi Hyman Muss; Trustee of Seminary And Builder Was 82
Rabbi Hyman Muss, a trustee of a theological seminary who was a real-estate developer and philanthropist, died on Saturday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 82 and lived in Forest Hills, Queens.
The cause was cancer, said Sam Hartstein, a spokesman for Yeshiva University, which is affiliated with the seminary.


INSIDE
A New Offer to North Korea?
Washington may offer to suspend war games with Seoul if Pyongyang allows nuclear inspections.
Page A16.
Trying Words With Repairs
New York City plans to try something new to calm rage over road repairs: more communication.
Page B1.


'House of David' Inscription: Clues to a Dark Age
PHOTOGRAPHS and transcriptions of a stone fragment bearing the first known reference outside the Bible to the House of David, a ruling dynasty presumably founded by King David in the 10th century B.C., have been published in Israel.
Discovery of the inscription in the ruins of Tel Dan, in northern Israel, was reported last summer by Dr.
Avraham Biran, an archeologist at Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion in Jerusalem.
Scholars said this could be an important contribution to understanding the ninth century B.C., a dark age in biblical history, and also is strong independent evidence for the existence and influence of the House of David.


Sheik Is Prepared to Act As Lawyer, Judge Is Told
Blind, ill and speaking only Arabic, Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman is prepared to represent himself when he stands trial sometime next year on charges of leading a plot to overthrow the Government through terrorist bombings, his lawyer said yesterday.
William M. Kunstler and Ronald L. Kuby have been representing the sheik, as well as two other defendants in the case, but Judge Michael B. Mukasey ruled last week that it was a conflict of interest because some of the men's defense strategies might contradict one another.
The lawyers had until today to tell the judge whom they would defend, but they refused.


National Home Centers Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Inspector Testifies She Urged No Asylum for Blast Suspect
An immigration inspector said she recommended that a man later suspected of being a ringleader in the World Trade Center explosion be prohibited from entering the United States when he applied for political asylum at Kennedy International Airport in September 1992, but she was overruled.
The witness, Martha Morales, testifying in the trial of four men accused of setting a bomb in the World Trade Center on Feb. 26, was speaking of Ramzi Ahmed Yousef.
Investigators say they believe he was to have been deeply involved in the bombing, but he left the country hours after the trade center explosion.
His whereabouts are unknown.


World Cup Update
Argentina-Australia
Winners of the World Cup in 1978 and 1986, Argentina can secure a spot in the finals next summer in the United States with a scoreless tie tomorrow in Buenos Aires.
Argentina and Australia are the only two nations to be involved in a playoff between countries from different continents.
Argentina has the advantage because it scored a goal in Sydney on Oct. 31 in the first game of the home-and-home series, which ended in a 1-1 tie.
The tie breaker is away goals; thus, a deadlock at 2-2 or more would advance Australia.
A 1-1 tie would necessitate a half hour of overtime and, if the tie was unbroken, a shootout.


Fast-Food Justice
The sexual harassment decision that the Supreme Court unanimously handed down last week is the latest example of a distressing trend.
Short, polemical and hastily written, it reads like the worst sort of opinion journalism.
The Justices agreed that women do not have to suffer "psychological injury" to make out a sexual harassment claim in the workplace.
But they were disconcertingly vague about their reasoning, and they refused to provide any more specific guidance to lower courts.


Supreme Court Rejects Insider-Trade Challenge
The Supreme Court refused today to hear a challenge to the Securities and Exchange Commission's current approach to insider trading liability, under which someone who buys or sells stock while in possession of confidential information can be held liable even without proof that the trades were based on that information.
Without comment, the Court turned down appeals by two men who were convicted of securities fraud in connection with a series of trades they made after receiving tips about possible takeover targets from a lawyer with access to nonpublic information about his law firm's corporate clients.


James H. Boomer; Judge, 71
State Supreme Court Justice James H. Boomer drowned on Sunday while vacationing in the Arkansas wilderness.
He was 71.
According to The Associated Press, authorities in Arkansas said he was backpacking on the Ozark Highlands Trail when he tried to find a way across a rain-swollen creek.
They said he fell in and was pulled under by the current.


Portable Machines Get More and More Portable
After sprinting through crowded airport terminals and squeezing into airliners packed tightly with their fellow computer executives, it is no wonder that many of the approximately 175,000 the people arriving here for the start of the annual Comdex trade show today started searching immediately for smaller, lighter portable computers.
There are plenty to see, including new subnotebook models equipped with color screens; trim notebooks that come close to rivaling the power and storage capacities of desktop computers, and pocket-sized personal digital assistants, or P.D.A.'s.


Marketers Tally the Price Of Michael Jackson's Fame
With the stress of child molestation accusations forcing him to cancel a world tour and seek treatment for a dependency on painkillers, Michael Jackson has given corporate America another powerful argument against using high-profile celebrities to endorse its products.
As the latest entertainment icon to suffer from public fascination, Mr.
Jackson joins other stars whose recent difficulties resulted in various forms of public or corporate scorn: Magic Johnson, for his disclosure that he had contracted the virus that causes AIDS; Michael Jordan, who fought a perception that he had a gambling problem; Madonna, whose video work has outraged some for its sexual, ethnic and religious themes, and Burt Reynolds, for divorcing his wife of five years, Loni Anderson.


Sports of The Times; Working At the N.F.L. Sweat Shop
CHARLES GRANTHAM hadn't heard the sad saga of Jimmy Smith.
Smith is the young Dallas Cowboys' wide receiver who had stomach pains during the preseason and was diagnosed by the team physician as having gastroenteritis.
A couple of days later, he underwent an emergency appendectomy, from which he developed life-threatening complications, which required a second operation that finished him for the 1993 season.


Rally Against Agreement Fizzles Near a G.M. Plant
Was it a case of Nafta fatigue or simply a dose a of spring fever in November?
What had been billed as a rally of 3,000 auto workers opposed to the North American Free Trade Agreement turned out today to be a festive affair in which there was ample elbow room for everyone to wave placards.
Fewer than 100 people showed up.


On My Mind; Nafta Hits Intellectuals
No need to worry.
Nafta will not cost the job of a single American factory or agricultural worker.
No plant or farm will be put out of business.
However, because of various complicated Nafta tax and anti-subsidy provisions, some other Americans will experience inconvenience.


Jacobson Stores (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Defamation Suit Against ABC Leads to a $1 Damage Award
A Federal jury yesterday found Capital Cities/ABC guilty of defaming a Virginia electronics store in a report on consumer fraud broadcast last year on the news program "Prime Time Live."
The jury awarded the store, High Technology Electronic Services of Falls Church, $1 in damages.


Corrections
An article by Bloomberg Business News in Business Day on Nov. 10, about the International Business Machines Corporation's new mainframe computers, misstated the schedule for the first shipments.
Some new models will be ready for shipment during the first half of next year, rather than late next year or in 1995.


Business Digest
The Free Trade Pact
Supporters of the North American Free Trade Agreement said they had received commitments from enough Representatives to give them a victory when the House votes tomorrow.
Several undecided lawmakers leaned toward the pact after receiving pledges of protection from foreign farm competition.  [ Page A1. ]


Sage Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


No Headline
Our village was shelled and burned to the ground three weeks ago.
The marsh is dry.
We can no longer fish or grow rice.
Our animals are dead.
The children are sick.
To remain in the marsh is suicide.
SADRIYA ALI, -- who recently fled from southern Iraq into Iran.  [ A10:1. ]


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: Congressional Leaders; Just Waiting to Get This Vote Over With
The North American Free Trade Agreement is rarely talked about in official meetings of the Democratic leadership in the House, participants say.
Everyone's position is known by now, and the subject itself is generally considered to be too explosive.
The Democratic leaders maneuver around the pact like a sprawling family trying hard to be civilized after a painful divorce.
President Clinton, of course, is campaigning hard for the agreement, but the majority of Democrats in the House are considered likely to vote against it.
Thomas Foley, the Speaker of the House, supports the agreement and is expected to speak on its behalf before the House votes on Wednesday.
But the No. 2 Democrat in the House, majority leader Richard A. Gephardt, opposes it, as does the No. 3, David E. Bonior, the majority whip.


By Design; For a Silvery Season
Whether in satin, velvet, lame or leather, silver is taking the shine off gold.
There are silvery party clothes in the stores now, and there will be even more silvery togs around in the months to come, to judge from the recent spring collections.
Silver can look streetwise tough, as in Anna Sui's motorcycle jacket, or subtly sexy, as in Evachun's bias-cut slip.
But if you don't want to wear clothing that looks like tinfoil, you might think about silver accessories.
One of the best places to find silver jewelry is the Elsa Peretti department at Tiffany's, which has everything from tiny beans on chains to primitive-looking cuffs.
Bergdorf Goodman has silver hoop earrings with baroque pearl drops by Mia Fonssagrives Solow, double oval hoops and heavy link bracelets by Robert Lee Morris, woven silver cuffs and chunky necklaces by Angela Cummings.


What Ever Happened To Baby-Doll Dresses?
Baby-doll dresses have surfaced as one of the most prominent fashions in the collections of designers everywhere.
Given the emphasis on short hemlines and loosely fitted clothes, it was perhaps inevitable.
What is surprising are the variations designers have achieved within the baby-doll scheme.
Some styles are as light and ruffly as christening dresses -- Anna Sui showed her white eyelet dresses over clearly visible black underwear to add some sophistication.
Isaac Mizrahi offered a whole pantheon of baby-doll dresses, including some striped like T-shirts and some made demure with white collars.


Corrections
Articles on Wednesday and Thursday about the North American Free Trade Agreement referred incompletely to the evolving position of Representative Dick Zimmer, Republican of New Jersey.
The reference to him on Wednesday, in a list of those opposed to the pact, was based on information supplied by his office.
Mr.
Zimmer's office then said on Wednesday that he was actually leaning in favor of the pact.
Yesterday his office said he would vote in favor of the pact.


Giants' Defense: Flexible, Formidable
It wasn't too long ago when nose tackle Erik Howard was so deep in the doghouse, he ate Kibbles 'n Bits for lunch.
But with Coach Dan Reeves, there are no hard feelings.
If you play well, you'll see the sun again.
Howard, who was practically banished to Giants wasteland in the preseason after complaining he wasn't getting a fair chance, could return to the starting lineup on Sunday against the Eagles at Philadelphia.


Let's Start Converting Customers Into Citizens
To the Editor:
I'm sorry to see you use a marketing professor, an "expert on consumer behavior," to analyze election results in "Cranky Voters Fire Everyone in Sight" (The Week in Review, Nov. 7).
A marketer myself, I disavow the equation of voting and consumerism.


Review/Theater: The Swan; Surreal Love and a Triangle of Needs
The battle of the sexes in Elizabeth Egloff's absurdist play "The Swan" is more than a failure of communication or even a biologically determined hormonal clash.
As Dora (Frances McDormand), a part-time nurse who lives alone on the edge of a Nebraska highway imagines it, men are born on the planet Pluto, molecularly disassembled and sent directly to Earth by radar.
Their troubles arise from having to adapt to an alien ecosystem.
An inability to adapt was the reason, she believes, why one of her three former husbands shot himself to death the day after they were married.
A dark comedy of the supernatural tinged with Greek myth, "The Swan," which opened yesterday at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, is an absorbing 100-minute riff on Dora's theory.
Most of all, the play, which suggests a softer, surreal response to Sam Shepard's "Fool for Love," is notable for a tumultuously intense performance by the Swedish actor Peter Stormare.
As a man who literally falls to earth and into Dora's life, the actor, who made such a memorable Hamlet in Ingmar Bergman's touring production, gives a wrenching evocation of primal man as a lonely, wounded creature in dire need of nurturing.


Bishops Assail Press on Sex Charges
The National Conference of Catholic Bishops gave a rousing show of support for Joseph Cardinal Bernardin of Chicago today as the group's president castigated national news organizations for their reporting on the Cardinal and on the Catholic Church generally.
Speaking to Roman Catholic bishops gathered here for a semiannual meeting, the president of the group, Archbishop William H. Keeler of Baltimore, cited the reporting of accusations against Cardinal Bernardin as an example of press sensationalism.


Newspapers' Coverage of Gay March
"Front Page," a documentary exhibition in SoHo, measures the visibility of gay issues in the news by examining newspaper coverage of the gay-rights march in Washington in April.
The show puts on display the front pages of more than 150 newspapers from Monday, April 26, the day after the march, which was attended by hundreds of thousands of people.
Of the newspapers displayed, 87 percent had front-page articles on the march and 6 percent had front-page headlines or photographs referring to articles on inside pages.


Lawyer Added to List for Police Commissioner
As Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani wound up a short vacation in Puerto Rico yesterday, his aides in New York said that among the candidates he is considering for police commissioner is Benito Romano, the former Federal prosecutor whose family comes from Puerto Rico.
Mr.
Romano took over as the acting United States Attorney in Manhattan after Mr.
Giuliani stepped down to run for Mayor in 1989.
He was the first Hispanic official to hold the position, though later that year the Bush Administration named Otto G. Obermaier to replace him.
If selected, Mr.
Romano would become the city's first Hispanic police commissioner.


Georgian Fighter Wields Guns, Money and Charm
Some of them wear camouflage uniforms, but most are in mufti -- leather jackets and heavy Russian Army surplus coats, bandanas or ski masks.
They are armed with Kalashnikovs, submachine guns and in one case a meat cleaver.
They travel in buses and cars commandeered from the public, their weapons protruding from the windows.
This is the Mkhedrioni, the largest and most powerful armed force in Georgia.
Their leader is Jaba Ioseliani, who is often described as charming and charismatic -- the Errol Flynn of Georgia, in one Westerner's words.
He has also been described in less romantic terms, as a thug, a criminal, a warlord.


COMPANY NEWS: Scanning Technology; A Product Code Leaves The Straight and Narrow
The product code, that ubiquitous black-and-white tattoo, is taking on ever more intricate -- or is it artistic? -- guises.
United Parcel Service introduced a new kind of code yesterday that bears only a passing resemblance to the bar codes stamped on cereal boxes and frozen dinners and almost everything else that flows down supermarket checkout lines.


Rise in Ultraviolet Rays Seen in North America
FOR the first time, researchers have measured long-term increases in harmful ultraviolet rays in North America caused by a weakening of the earth's protective ozone shield.
Although the finding comes as no surprise to most experts, it may nevertheless plug a troublesome hole in the conventional analysis of the ozone problem.


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: Ranchers; Increased Trade in Mexican Cattle Brings a Rise in Disease to U.S. Dairies
Before dawn, bawling calves from Mexico tumbled out of trailers and turned the sandy corrals of the inspection station here into a choking storm of dust.
Hours later, the calves were examined, dunked in vats of pesticides to kill ticks and then herded into pens on the American side of the border, where they were sold to ranchers in New Mexico, Texas and other Western states.
More than 1.2 million Mexican calves passed through this and nine other smaller inspection stations along the border during the last year, four times the annual number a decade ago.
Mexican cattle producers earn roughly $500 million a year selling young animals to Americans, who fatten them for sale to slaughterhouses.


Running Scared From Nafta
Only one Democrat in the House from New York, New Jersey or Connecticut -- Nita Lowey, who represents parts of Westchester, Queens and the Bronx -- supports the North American Free Trade Agreement with Canada and Mexico.
What accounts for the near-united opposition, even from such ardent free-traders as Robert Torricelli of New Jersey and Charles Schumer of Brooklyn?
Most opponents profess anxiety about Nafta's impact on the local economy.
But in private, some admit that their opposition owes more to calculations of political survival than to judgments of economic merit.


Books of The Times; The Artist Beneath the Ideas of Him
Inventing Leonardo By A. Richard Turner Illustrated. 268 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $27.50.


Toys 'R' Us reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


U.S. Assures Damascus on Commitment to Peace
In an effort to engage Syria more actively in Middle East peacemaking, President Clinton told President Hafez al-Assad that both Washington and Jerusalem support a comprehensive Mideast peace and announced that Secretary of State Warren Christopher would visit the region in early December, senior Administration officials said today.
Mr.
Clinton sent his assurances in a letter to the Syrian leader that was delivered today by Ambassador Christopher Ross to Syria's Foreign Minister, Farouk al-Sharaa.
The letter was prompted in part by Mr.
Clinton's meeting at the White House on Friday with Israel's Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, Administration officials said.


Dibrell Bros. Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Threatens to Look Eastward for Trade Allies
The Clinton Administration threatened tonight that if the European allies did not show more flexibility in the stalemated global trade negotiations, Washington would move quickly to develop an alternative trading association with Asia.
In a briefing with reporters at the White House, a group of senior Administration diplomats and trade officials said they were treating this week's economic summit meeting in Seattle as an opportunity to lay the groundwork for a possible trading association, if the stalled negotiations with Europe over the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade are not completed.


Scitex Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Israel Zwerling, 76; Helped Alter Care For the Mentally Ill
Dr.
Israel Zwerling, an early advocate of community-based outpatient care for the mentally ill, died on Friday at Hahnemann University Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 76 and lived in Philadelphia.
The hospital said the cause was cancer.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Bank of Boston Corp. is selling $350 million 6.625 percent subordinated notes due in 2005 priced at 99.63 to yield 6.67 percent through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch.
The noncallable notes are rated Baa-2 by Moody's Investors Service and triple-B by Standard &amp; Poor's and Duff Phelps.


Almost a Novel Idea: Wearable Clothes
There were plenty of provocative spring clothes introduced by New York fashion designers earlier this month in the tents at Bryant Park.
Many were too sheer, others seemed too young and still others were simply inappropriate to almost anything.
The fact that they were using big runways caused some designers to exaggerate.
Wearable clothes seemed a rarity.
A tour of Seventh Avenue last week showed there were many collections designed for real life, not the stage.


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: Canada; Ottawa to Seek Deals With Mexico if U.S. Rejects Trade Pact
Canada will pursue trade improvement with Mexico even if the United States rejects the North American Free Trade Agreement, Canadian Government officials and senior business leaders say.
Since Mexico reversed decades of protectionism in the late 1980's, the two countries have been strengthening their commercial relationship, and Canadian officials say they want to keep up the momentum, citing the potential of a growing Mexican market and resulting jobs.


Corrections
A basketball picture caption in SportsMonday this week referred incorrectly in some editions to the players chasing a loose ball.
They were Doc Rivers of the Knicks and Eric Murdock of Milwaukee.


Cystic Fibrosis Surprise: Genetic Screening Falters
FOUR years ago, when molecular geneticists isolated the gene for cystic fibrosis, some scientists were ecstatic.
This was one of the first fruits of the avid search for the genes that cause various diseases.
Screening for the gene would provide the prototype, some thought, for national screening programs for other dread diseases and the basis for offering prenatal diagnosis to couples who carry the gene.
Now, however, the story is taking an unexpected twist.
Human genetics, at least in this case, turns out to be far more complicated than expected.
Biologists have found more than 350 points at which the gene can be mutated, and more are appearing almost weekly.
At the same time, scientists are finding that many people who inherit mutated genes from both parents do not have cystic fibrosis.


La-Z-Boy Chair reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 23


Lowe's Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Leucadia National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


International Family Entertainment Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Berkshire Hathaway Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Loblaw Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 9


Patterns
Double-Edged Barneys
Young designers were courted en masse when Barneys New York began stocking its Madison Avenue store.
The store, which opened in September, has become a showcase not only for the world's best-established designers, but also for the most promising new talents.
In preparing for its new Beverly Hills, Calif., store in March, Barneys is buying more young-designer lines and increasing orders for those it already carries.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-16  IRAQ ATTACKING MARSH AREA  Iraq has been stepping up attacks on the opposition Shiite Muslims in its southern marsh areas, residents say, wiping out villages and farms and pushing families over the border and into detention camps.
A1


Phils' Williams Is First in the Heart of Hico
Fans in MITCH WILLIAMS 's off-season home of Hico, Tex., are coping with his World Series problems far better than their counterparts in Philadelphia.
About 200 people crowded into the Hico community center Sunday for a celebration in honor of the Phillies' reliever, giving him a key to the city and a cake, three days before his 29th birthday.


Music in Review
Alban Gerhardt  Cellist Alice Tully Hall
Alban Gerhardt, a 24-year-old cellist from Berlin, won the University of Maryland International Leonard Rose Competition in July, and as part of his prize (which included $20,000), he was presented in his New York debut recital on Saturday evening.


Woolridge Signs as Free Agent With 76ers
Forward ORLANDO WOOLRIDGE has joined the Philadelphia 76ers, having signed a free-agent contract.
The team put guard SEAN GREEN on the disabled list with a sprained ankle.
Woolridge, 33, played in six preseason game with Milwaukee, averaging 4.3 points and 1.3 rebounds per game before being released. (AP)


Valley Forge Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: The Overview; SUPPORTERS ASSERT MAJORITY IN HOUSE BACKS TRADE PACT
After a day of deal-cutting, arm-twisting and speech-making, supporters of the North American Free Trade Agreement said today that they had won commitments from enough representatives to give them a victory when the House votes on Wednesday.
Although neither side had a majority publicly committed to its cause, and the balance hung with about two dozen representatives whose positions were not announced, a senior White House official said that a narrow victory was at hand because enough uncommitted legislators had agreed to support the President if their votes were essential.
Feeling More Confident
"It's just a question of who're going to be the ones to vote the hard votes," said the White House official.
"I feel more confident than I've felt in a long time."


A Protest Against New York's Clean Air Plan


Administration Is Narrowing Its List for Fed Post
With one of the Federal Reserve Board's seven seats opening up in January, Administration officials are narrowing a list of candidates, saying they want someone who is respected by the financial community and is tough on inflation, but who will also support the Administration's goals for stronger growth.
The officials say they are being careful in preparing their list -- which includes several academics and several Administration economists -- because they recognize that their first nomination for a 14-year Federal Reserve seat will send a strong signal to financial markets, at a time when the Administration continues to count on low rates as an important source of growth for the economy.
Fear of Nervous Markets
The last thing the White House wants is to push up long-term interest rates by making markets nervous that the Clinton Administration's nominees will be less tough on inflation than the current Federal Reserve Board.


Accounts
*
LVMH Moet Hennessy-Louis Vuitton, New York, to Deutsch/Dworin, New York, to handle the luxury goods group's consolidated media buying account in the United States, previously divided among various agencies.
Billings were estimated at $10 million.


Effort to Nurture Salmon in Thames Advances
SCIENTISTS are a step closer to nurturing a self-sustaining strain of salmon in the Thames River, 160 years after the indigenous species were wiped out by pollution and impassable dams.
The scientists' efforts, a mixture of engineering and breeding, passed a crucial test this year when the first group of adult salmon of Thames parentage returned, swimming upstream past Big Ben and Parliament to complete their life cycle after feeding at sea.


Consolidated Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Duncan Pirnie, 70, WQXR Announcer
Duncan Pirnie, former chief announcer of WQXR, died on Sunday at Bergen Pines Hospital in Paramus, N.J.
He was 70 and lived in Haworth, N.J.
He had had a long illness, said Warren Bodow, president and general manager of WQXR-FM.


Single-Payer Plan Provides Best Health Choice; Big Brother, Manager
To the Editor:
I am a psychiatrist practicing in New York State, and I would like to share with you a vignette from the dark side of managed care.


Industrial Production Jumps 0.8%
American industry posted its biggest gain in output in nearly a year during October, setting yet another record and further solidifying the view that the economy had picked up markedly in the last two months.
The rise in industrial production, of eight-tenths of a percent, was the fifth in a row.
It was also accompanied by upward revisions for September and July, according to the Federal Reserve's monthly report issued today.


Music in Review
Hanover Band  Alice Tully Hall
One of Britain's best period-instrument orchestras for Classical-era repertory offered splendid performances of Haydn, Mozart and the adolescent Mendelssohn on Sunday afternoon.
Led by Roy Goodman, this 35-member group plays with an ensemble sound the ear "sees through." Provided, in other words, is a translucence quite different from the often impenetrable walls of brilliance that modern instruments bring to the same repertory.
Haydn's daring, often very funny, D-major Symphony, No. 86, was as well paced and powerfully felt as the infinitely darker "Prague" Symphony by Mozart at the end.
Also receiving period-instrument treatment was Mendelssohn's astonishing B-minor Symphony for Strings, probably from the composer's 13th year.


Britain Scaling Back Nuclear Missiles Plan
Britain said today that it would substantially scale back its plans for a new generation of submarine-carried nuclear missiles.
Government officials said that under a policy to be announced on Tuesday by Defense Secretary Malcolm Rifkind, the size of the planned submarine-based nuclear force, as measured by the number of warheads carried, would be limited to that of the current force.


Pacific Sunwear of California Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Wall St. Seems to Bet On Offer From Viacom
As QVC Network and Paramount Communications prepared to take their battle to court today, Wall Street appeared to believe that Viacom would win its friendly merger bid for Paramount despite a higher offer from QVC.
Paramount's stock fell yesterday by 3.5 percent, or $2.875 a share, to close at $80.125.
"Investors think they will get the Viacom deal on the table, and that the bidding won't go higher," one trader said.


Honors
*
Carl Spielvogel, chairman and chief executive at Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide, New York, was named Man of the Year by the marketing and communications division of the U.J.A.-Federation of New York. *
Joseph M. Grimaldi, chief operating officer at Mullen Advertising, Wenham, Mass., was named president of the Advertising Club of Greater Boston.


Prime Medical Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Buttafuoco Is Sentenced to 6 Months for Rape
Ushered into a courtroom to a chorus of boos and hisses, Joseph Buttafuoco was sentenced to six months in jail today for the statutory rape of Amy Fisher.
As Miss Fisher sat at a table a few feet away, Judge Jack Mackston of Nassau County Court gave Mr.
Buttafuoco the maximum penalty allowed under an agreement reached last month, when Mr.
Buttafuoco pleaded guilty to third-degree rape.


Battle Looms Over U.S. Policy On Species
A NASTY fight is shaping up over the future of the Endangered Species Act, and it pits two cherished American values, private property rights and the preservation of nature, against each other.
Flashes of lightning from the approaching political storm have been abundant of late, even though action to reauthorize the expiring law is unlikely to come before well into next year at the earliest.
The property-rights advocates, who see efforts to conserve endangered species as a restriction on free use of land and a brake on economic development, have found allies in Congress.
Late last month, they served clear notice of the campaign they are preparing to wage.


Paris in the Springtime? Would You Believe New York in the Fall?


Jackson Being Treated Abroad For Addiction, Lawyer Says
With Michael Jackson's career in jeopardy, the superstar's lawyer announced today that Mr.
Jackson was under treatment for addiction to painkillers and "was barely able to function adequately on an intellectual level."
The lawyer, Bertram Fields, who represents numerous movie stars, said at a turbulent and circuslike news conference that the 35-year-old entertainer was in intensive treatment at an undisclosed clinic outside the United States for addiction to "very, very heavy-duty" prescribed painkillers.
Mr.
Fields said that the treatment was expected to last six to eight weeks and that Mr.
Jackson would eventually return to the United States.


Robert Black, 43, Pianist Known As Stalwart of New-Music World
Robert Black, a conductor, composer and pianist who was best known for his work with the New York New Music Ensemble, Speculum Musicae and other contemporary-music groups, died on Sunday at an apartment he was renting in Palo Alto, Calif., where he was being treated for cancer.
He was 43 and lived in Manhattan.
Sandra Elm, Mr. Black's manager, said the cause was melanoma.


After Deaths, F.D.A. Is Proposing Stiffer Rules on Drug Experiments
The discovery that five additional patients may have died in tests of a new drug for hepatitis B has prompted the Food and Drug Administration to propose a major change in the rules for reporting side effects from drug trials.
The announcement today came as the agency issued the first of two reports on the latest test of the drug, which was conducted at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.


Suddenly, Houston Is Man in the Middle
Jets linebacker Bobby Houston sat at his locker after practice today and nursed his left foot, which he had twisted in the Colts game the day before.
He seemed fine until a reporter accidentally stepped on his toe.
"Ow, man, what are you doing?" Houston yelled, grimacing as he held his foot.
It's a good thing Coach Bruce Coslet wasn't there.
It's probably not a good idea to take out another linebacker on a team that just lost its top two middle linebackers to injuries.


New Group Joins Battle Over Guns: Physicians
By training and inclination, Dr.
Robert C. Mackersie is more concerned with how to sew up an aorta than how to identify the roots of urban violence.
But the epidemic of death and injury from guns has moved the surgeon at San Francisco General Hospital to advocacy.
Doctors are approaching the technological limits of their craft, he says, and must now turn to gun control and violence prevention.


Sylvan Foods Holding Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


States and Government Lag In Meeting Clean Air Law
Three years after Congress rewrote the Clean Air Act, the Federal Government and the states are consistently behind on many of the law's demanding timetables, including a deadline for filing smog-reduction plans that was missed today by about half the states.
Although nobody is declaring the law a failure -- indeed, new data show that air quality, for whatever reason, improved somewhat in 1991 and 1992 -- its laggardly enforcement is leading environmental groups and members of Congress to question whether its ambitious goals will be met on time.
The law calls for all Americans to be breathing significantly cleaner air by 2010.


Strober Organization (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kulicke &amp; Soffa (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Red Eagle Resources Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: The President; Adamant Unions Zero In on Clinton
Lane Kirkland, the president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., angrily asserted today that President Clinton had "clearly abdicated his role as leader of the Democratic Party," for offering what the union leader called "comfort letters" to Republicans who support the North American Free Trade Agreement.
The labor leader lambasted the President for assuring Republicans that he would defend them in future elections if Democratic challengers tried to make an issue of their support for the trade agreement.
And Mr.
Kirkland heatedly disputed the White House's assessment that unions would not hold a grudge against lawmakers who voted in favor of the trade agreement.
Placards and Phone Calls
The union leader's comments were by far the most antagonistic by organized labor since Mr.
Clinton took office.
Mr.
Kirkland and many other labor leaders seemed hurt and scornful last week after the President accused them of using "musclebound" and "roughshod" tactics against the accord, even though they tempered their criticism of him.


Observer; Another Inside Peek
Memories of Jack Kennedy are once again filling the air, or at least the media.
Mine go back to his father who was busy that year trying to undermine Franklin Roosevelt.
I had been watching young Jack help a slow-witted schoolmate parse a Latin passage from Livy at the rate of 1,200 words per minute.
"Joe," said I to his father -- which was what we called the founder, though his name was Joseph -- "Joe," I said, "that boy Jack is going to be President one of these days."


Chess
The Enhance Financial Services Chess Challenge, staged Oct. 4 to 13 at the Marshall Chess Club in Manhattan, finished in a rousing triumph for Maurice Ashley, a 27-year-old Brooklyn international master and the club's current champion.
Ashley scored 7 1/2-1 1/2 in the nine-round invitational event.
The competition was arranged to give rising players the opportunity to compete for international title norms.
The format was the so-called Scheveningen system, in which the 18 players were divided into two groups and each player of the "A" group confronted only opponents of the "B" group and vice versa.
The only one to achieve a grandmaster norm was Ashley.
This was his first; he needs two more to attain grandmaster rank.


Filene's Basement (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Nets Need a Lifting Hand For Coleman and Anderson
There was a moment of true levity in the Nets' 132-102 laugher over the Sacramento Kings Sunday night when 6-foot-10-inch, 235-pound Derrick Coleman tumbled out of bounds, and his 6-1, 170-pound teammate Kenny Anderson tried to give him a hand up, to no avail.
"I just told Kenny to leave me, and let me sit there and rest for a little while," Coleman said while chuckling about the incident afterward.
"What was he going to do? Drag me all over the floor?"


Puerto Rico Chooses, for Now
The close vote in Puerto Rico favoring continued commonwealth status rather than statehood will be greeted with relief in Washington.
It spares Congress from deciding how and whether to admit a Spanish-speaking island to the Union.
Gov.
Pedro Rossello's New Progressive Party hoped that Sunday's nonbinding referendum would build momentum for Puerto Rico's admission as the 51st state.
But this course was preferred by only 46 percent of the voters, compared with 48 percent for commonwealth status and 4 percent for independence.
That effectively sidetracks the statehood campaign, at least for now.


Shooting Examined For Possible Bias
The shooting of a 19-year-old Israeli exchange student by two would-be robbers in racially tense Crown Heights is being investigated as a possible bias incident, the police said yesterday.
The student, Chaim Galinsky, was attacked by two assailants as he walked on President Street shortly before midnight Sunday.
He was shot in the back and was taken to Kings County Hospital, where he was reported in stable condition yesterday.


Nash Finch Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 9


Perella, a Merger Specialist, Is Hired by Morgan Stanley
Joseph R. Perella, one of Wall Street's prominent merger and acquisition advisers in the 1980's, has joined Morgan Stanley Group Inc. as a managing director in the firm's investment banking division and a member of its operating committee, Morgan Stanley said yesterday.
Mr.
Perella's move comes after months of negotiating with a slew of would-be employers, which included Merrill Lynch, Salomon Brothers, Bear, Stearns, Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette and Lazard Freres.


METRO DIGEST
HOMELESS UNDERCOUNTED, STUDY SHOWS The number of New Yorkers who have been homeless in recent years is far greater than experts and advocates previously estimated, according to a new study that for the first time used city records to identify and count individuals in the city's shelter system.
A1.
FORMER DEPUTY MAYOR DIES Robert F. Wagner Jr., a deputy mayor under Edward I. Koch and former president of the Board of Education, died at age 49 in San Antonio.
A1.


Books of The Times; The Artist Beneath the Ideas of Him
Inventing Leonardo By A. Richard Turner Illustrated. 268 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $27.50.


U. of Chicago Earns Its Funless Ranking
To the Editor:
Speaking (we are sure) for the faculty, students and alumni of the University of Chicago, we would like Russell Baker to know that we are not about to relinquish the proud title of the most funless university in America to his alma mater, Johns Hopkins.
We are unmoved to tears by his reminiscences in "Mostest of the Leastest" (column, Nov. 6) of watching only second-rate striptease acts in Baltimore bars or getting kicks from a parody of a mathematics professor demonstrating the solution of a calculus problem.


Review/Pop; Nirvana as Backdrop to Mosh Pit
As usual with alternative rock shows, the mosh pit dominated the event.
The concert, featuring Nirvana, along with the Breeders and Half Japanese, was at the Coliseum on Sunday night and it was packed with young people who were there to crowd up front, see some heroes and dance.
And though Kurt Cobain, Nirvana's lead singer and guitarist, has become a strange combination of teen-age idol and visionary, the dance pandemonium that ensued reduced the band to a backdrop for the intense experience of being in the pit.
Bodies were tossed above the crowd to surf up toward the stage.
Men and women bashed around in the pit, and a steady stream of unconscious or nearly unconscious women were hauled to the emergency medical station for revival.
The music had an immediate effect on the audience, dictating exactly how it should move and what it should do.


Fear of Hunger Stalks Many Elderly
On good days Lucy Gonzalez, 79, eats three meals.
Her typical menu is a breakfast of bread and coffee, a lunch of an egg and bread and a dinner of soup and bread -- meat if she is lucky.
On bad days she does not eat.
"Sometimes I am hungry," said Mrs.
Gonzalez, a widowed mother of two who suffers from high blood pressure.
She lives on a monthly income on $659, with $314 paying for rent for her apartment on the Upper West Side.
"I drink some water or juice or whatever I have in the house," Mrs.
Gonzalez said.


People
*
Alice Greenberg was named to the new position of senior vice president and director of national broadcast at Ammirati &amp; Puris, New York.
She was previously president at the Greenberg Partnership, New York. *
Kate Dobson, West coast advertising manager at Scientific American magazine, Los Angeles, was promoted to the new position of associate publisher and advertising director.
She will be based in New York.


Life Among the Palm Trees: Vanbiesbrouck in Exile
The Florida Panthers sent him to Little Havana, the Cuban enclave in Miami, and asked him to teach little kids in baseball uniforms how to hold a hockey stick.
It was street hockey, of course -- there's no ice to be found along Calle Ocho -- but the kids didn't have much of a clue, all the same.
This did not surprise John Vanbiesbrouck.
He has bananas growing in his backyard and palm trees out front and a few of those little Florida lizards, whatever they're called.
Yesterday, he picked lunch off a tree and went to work in shorts.
Nothing, it seems, could surprise him at this point. 'No Frozen Ponds'
"It's been different, like going to a whole new world," said Vanbiesbrouck, who will face his old Ranger teammates at Miami Arena Tuesday night.
"There aren't going to be any frozen ponds to go skating on New Year's. I went to teach these kids about hockey and it's a sport they don't even know how to play. They were all in these baseball get-ups.


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: Mexico; On Border, Mexicans Are Fearful Too
Just two miles from "the other side," in a dusty border slum called Hope, Maria Isabel Vazquez and Gilberto Lozano are trying to plan their future.
He works in an American-owned auto parts factory here, making dashboards for Cadillacs he never sees because they aren't sold in Mexico.
Every Monday and Friday she goes to a hiring hall to see if one of the 76 assembly plants in Matamoros has accepted her application for work.
Together, they make about $5,000 a year.


Pianist Has Stroke
Tatyana Nikolayeva, a Russian pianist, was in stable condition yesterday after suffering a cerebral hemorrhage during a recital on Saturday at the San Francisco Music Center.
W.
Hazaiah Williams, the president of Four Seasons Concerts, which presented Miss Nikolayeva's San Francisco appearances, said that the 69-year-old pianist became ill onstage and was taken to California Presbyterian Hospital in San Francisco.


Reshaping Mexico's Auto Future
Of all the Mexican businesses that would be reshaped by a North American Free Trade Agreement, none is more likely to undergo a transformation than the automotive industry.
In that sector, a trade accord may well alter the way cars are made and sold on both sides of the border.
For Mexico, the stakes are high.
Cars are its biggest export business after oil, employing 60,000 people directly and more than 300,000 indirectly in parts manufacturing and distribution.
Together, the Chrysler Corporation, the Ford Motor Company, the General Motors Corporation, Nissan and Volkswagen built more than a million cars in Mexico last year, making it one of just a few developing countries in the world to reach that mark.


New Test of Broadway Alliance Arrives With 'Any Given Day'
The advertising for "Any Given Day," the Frank D. Gilroy play that is to open on Broadway tonight, does not hesitate to trumpet that its star, Sada Thompson, has won a Tony Award, that Mr.
Gilroy won the Pulitzer Prize for his long-running hit "The Subject Was Roses" and that the production is a world premiere that, unlike most Broadway shows these days, did not originate in London or Dublin or Los Angeles.
Nowhere does the advertising mention that "Any Given Day" is being produced at the Longacre Theater under the provisions of the Broadway Alliance, the three-year-old coalition of Broadway producers, theater owners, craft guilds and unions that was created to encourage more serious plays, fill darkened theaters and lure new audiences by reducing theater costs and ticket prices.


T-Shirts Can Broadcast Civilized Messages, Too
THE T-shirts dangled from vendors' carts all over downtown, seizing the city's attention and slapping it in the face.
Among the under-21 crowd, they were all the rage, literally.
Blaring slogans full of four-letter words and racial slurs in black letters about a foot long, they were like boom boxes on full blast.


Danielson Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Albany, Control of Advisory Task Forces Holds Up a Mental Health Bill
It seemed seven weeks ago that negotiators for the Legislature and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo had all but settled their differences over a landmark mental health bill.
They had agreed on how many state psychiatric hospitals would be closed, how much money would be pumped into community mental health programs and how much would go to serve the homeless mentally ill.
All that seemed to be missing were the ceremonial pens for the bill signing.
Not so fast.
It is axiomatic in Albany that negotiations will fill the time available to negotiate.
And because both houses of the Legislature are not in session, no deadline has been imposed for resolving peripheral issues that all sides agree are minor.
Thus, the negotiations continue.


Single-Payer Plan Provides Best Health Choice; The Sunday Checkup
To the Editor:
The reason that health care does not follow the law of supply and demand is that demand is so elastic.
There is no level of supply that demand will not rise to meet, provided the price is right -- which is why President Clinton's program for managed care is doomed to failure.


PEC Israel Economic Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


T.W.A. Is Said to Be In Talks on Account
Trans World Airlines has been informally talking to agencies about its estimated $45 million to $60 million account.
The talks were first reported this week in trade publications.
The account has been handled by Backer Spielvogel Bates of New York for the last year.
Don Fleming, a T.W.A. spokesman in Mount Kisco, N.Y., denied reports of the talks yesterday.
"There is currently not a review under way," he said.


Choosing Status Quo; Puerto Rico Avoids Radical Change But Now May Be Ignored by Congress
With their ballots, Puerto Ricans on Sunday decided for the moment that they preferred just a few "enhancements" in their island's current status as an American commonwealth to the uncertainties of statehood.
But with Congress in a belt-tightening and protectionist mood, Puerto Rico's obtaining even limited changes in its relationship with Washington is likely to prove difficult.
By choosing the safe course, in fact, Puerto Rico now runs the risk of being ignored on Capitol Hill.
Although President Clinton repeatedly promised to support whatever decision the people reached in Sunday's nonbinding plebiscite, the issue of Puerto Rican status carries many of the same potential risks as the North American Free Trade Agreement, but with few of the potential gains.


Sabatini Asks Vilas To Find Lost Game
Guillermo Vilas, who is playing the hero in this tale of two Argentines, waited ten years for the phone call from Gabriela Sabatini, who portrays the story's damsel in distress.
"He always told me that if I ever needed him, just to go to him," said Sabatini, who considered Vilas an idol back when she met him in Monte Carlo in 1984.
She now considers him her coach and best hope of escaping a 25-tournament slump without a title.
That started after her victory over Monica Seles at the 1992 Italian Open; the last opportunity to end it in 1993 is the $3.5 million Virginia Slims Championships that opened last night at Madison Square Garden.
Sabatini's first match is tonight against Mary Pierce.


Stocks Retreat as Trade Vote Is Awaited
Stocks fell somewhat yesterday, as investor concern over the coming trade pact vote this week, the economy, and interest rates slammed the lid shut on any serious rally in the market.
The declining market hit both blue-chip issues and small stocks alike.
Investors anxious about the House vote on the North American Free Trade Agreement tomorrow were also taking their cue from the Treasury bond market where interest rates rose early, then recovered toward the end.


Lewis's Widow Sees No Negligence
DONNA HARRIS LEWIS, the widow of Boston Celtics captain Reggie Lewis, said yesterday she doesn't hold anyone responsible for the basketball star's sudden death from a heart ailment.
"I personally can't blame anyone," she told WBZ-TV of Boston in her first interview since Lewis collapsed and died July 27 during a light workout at Brandeis University.
"I think everyone that was involved with Reggie's care, they did the best that they could."


Single-Payer Plan Provides Best Health Choice
To the Editor:
"Conflict Is Seen Between Regions in Health Plan" (front page, Nov. 5) notes that under the Clinton health plan each state could choose from three ways to organize its health care, including a single-payer system.
You go into great detail about the other two options but do not fully explain single payer.


Hahn Automotive Warehouse Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Man Released In Killing of 2 In Brooklyn
A Brooklyn sugar-refinery worker who shot and killed two men he said were robbing him at gunpoint was allowed to walk out of a courtroom yesterday, released without bail and facing only weapons charges.
The man, Arthur Boone, 41, was arraigned in Brooklyn Criminal Court on charges of criminal possession of a weapon in the second and third degrees one day after he shot to death two men he said were trying to rob him a block from his Bedford-Stuyvesant apartment.
The gun he used was unlicensed, the police said.


U.S. Banknote reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Theater; Time and Truth's Illusion: A Pirandellian Meditation
Between scenes of the Jean Cocteau Repertory's revival of Pirandello's "Enrico IV" at the Bouwerie Lane Theater, the director, Eve Adamson, uses incidental music from Fellini films to fill in time.
It underscores the thematic kinship between the Italian playwright and the film maker: a view of a hostile outside world that makes life little more than a masquerade in which one is constantly changing masks, never quite sure of one's own true identity.
"Enrico IV" is a Pirandellian dialectic on time and illusion that comes to the conclusion that "nothing is true." On the surface it concerns a man who, while attending a fancy-dress pageant, falls from his horse and lands on his head.
When he awakens, he is convinced he is Henry IV, the German king and Holy Roman Emperor.
That was 20 years ago and his mind is still stuck somewhere in the 11th century.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about the Government's dropping of accusations of misconduct against Dr.
Robert C. Gallo, the co-discoverer of the AIDS virus, referred incorrectly in some copies to accusations made against him in a 1989 article in The Chicago Tribune.
The newspaper said that the French and American strains of the virus were virtually identical and that the only explanation was that the virus had been accidentally taken or stolen.
It did not accuse Dr.
Gallo of having stolen the French strain.


Gartner Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


ADT Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tejas Power Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Two Audibles, One of Them Angry
Losing their first nine games of the season is not enough for the Cincinnati Bengals.
Now they have to be concerned with their best running back bad-mouthing the coach.
Early in Sunday's 38-3 loss to the Houston Oilers, quarterback Jay Schroeder called an audible.
Instead of running up the middle, tailback Harold Green would take a pitchout.
But Green was in the wrong place when the ball was pitched, and it bounced off his arm.
The Oilers recovered.
Coach David Shula was so upset with Green that he took him out of the game and never sent him back.


Molten Metal Technology
Shares of Molten Metal Technology Inc. rose in active trading after the news that it and Martin Marietta Energy Systems had agreed on a plan to process and recycle hazardous and nonhazardous waste at the Department of Energy's Oak Ridge Reservation in Tennessee.


Market Place; Southern Pacific is on the move as investors climb aboard.
SUFFERING PACIFIC had a certain lilt, but the Southern Pacific Rail Corporation is moving quickly to put distance between itself and its nickname from the 1980's, when the railroad was stuck in its tracks for five years pending a merger that never occurred.
Last week, for example, Southern Pacific announced that it would turn over much of its information-processing operations to a unit of I.B.M. in a 10-year contract that the railroad said would save $10 million a year.


Clinton Signs Law Protecting Religious Practices
President Clinton today signed into law legislation requiring the Government to meet stringent standards before instituting measures that might interfere with religious practices.
The new law, the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, overturns a 1990 Supreme Court ruling that set a looser standard for laws that restrict religious practices.


Robinson, Yesawich Merges With Moss
Robinson, Yesawich &amp; Pepperdine Inc. in Orlando, Fla., said yesterday that it had merged its New York office with Moss &amp; Company Inc. in New York, to form RY&amp;P Moss.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.
The newly merged agency, with 25 employees, will be headed by five partners: Peter C. Yesawich, president and chief executive, and James Pepperdine, executive vice president and chief operating officer, both from Robinson, Yesawich in Orlando.
Also, Murray Brauman, chairman; Richard Yacenda, president and chief executive, and Stuart Gottdenker, executive vice president and creative director, all from Moss.


Support for Trade Pact Pushes Dow Over 3,700
Stocks surged late yesterday after the White House said it had lined up nearly enough votes to win approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement in today's vote in the House of Representatives.
News of the growing support for the trade pact also helped push up the dollar against most major currencies yesterday.


Dr. Robert Beekman, A Heart Specialist, 76
Dr.
Robert Struthers Beekman, an internist and heart specialist, died on Friday at Greenwich Woods Health Care Center in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 76 and lived in Manhattan and Southport, Conn.
The cause of death was heart failure, his family said.


Pro Bono Accounts
*
Madison Avenue Christmas for Children Fund, New York, to Reach Marketing, Westport, Conn., as the first agency to handle its account.


An Eagle Among Skyscrapers


Albany's Way of Financing Pensions Is Ruled Illegal
Ruling that New York State must pay a price for its past fiscal gimmickry, the state's highest court declared today that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the Legislature acted illegally in 1990 by changing the way the state's pension system is financed.
The unanimous ruling by the Court of Appeals leaves the state and many local governments with huge budgetary headaches.
Going into a year when it will face its fifth consecutive budget shortfall, New York may now owe as much as $1.5 billion to the pension fund.
The state has a $60 billion budget.


Jordan Returns to His Old High School
MICHAEL JORDAN shocked Laney High School students when he spoke at his alma mater, his first public appearance in Wilmington, N.C., in two years.
School officials tried to keep the retired basketball star's appearance a secret.
Students began buzzing when they arrived at school and were told to report to the gymnasium.
Around 9 A.M.
Monday, Jordan strolled inside.
Students screamed and cheered Jordan's appearance.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Of all the nerve! Maker of athletic shoes will run ads with no athletes.
MICHAEL JORDAN.
Andre Agassi.
Keith Brantly.
Whom would you choose to represent products around the world if you were an advertising director of a major athletic shoe company?
New Balance Athletic Shoe Inc. in Boston is using Mr.
Brantly, a distance runner who finished fifth last Sunday in the New York City Marathon.
Never heard of him?
That's the idea, and recent data suggest it might not be a bad one, with the troubles of the rich and famous (see Michael Jackson) only strengthening the argument.


Wine Talk
HERE'S a little something extra to be thankful for on Thanksgiving this year: Wine without guilt.
Much of the last decade has been an uncomfortable time for wine enthusiasts.
Their favorite drink was under attack from a vigorous and strident new anti-alcohol movement.
With support at high levels of government, these neo-prohibitionists turned what had been a moral crusade at the turn of the century into a health issue.


Poles Can't Afford Baby Food in Jars
To the Editor:
"In Poland, Gerber Learns Lessons of Tradition" (front page, Nov. 8) implies that Gerber's main obstacle to marketing baby food in Poland is tradition.


Books of The Times; Thatcher Deciphers Her Indelible Mark on Britain
The Downing Street Years
By Margaret Thatcher
Illustrated. 914 pages. HarperCollins. $30.
During her 11 1/2 years as Britain's Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher collected a lot of encomiums and a lot of obloquy.
George Bush hailed her as "the greengrocer's daughter who shaped a nation to her will," and others praised her as a successor to Churchill and the greatest peacetime Prime Minister since Gladstone.
Piet Dankert, a former President of the European Parliament, called her "the witch in the European fairy tale: always clearly recognizable and always the person liable to turn everything upside down." To many members of Britain's liberal-left intelligentsia, she was simply "that woman," the avatar of all they detested about Britain in the 1980's; in the words of the writer and director Jonathan Miller, she was a despised symbol of "odious suburban gentility and sentimental, saccharine patriotism."


The Pitching of Fits
To The Living Section:
Did Betty Friedan really "pitch a fit" about lesbians, as Barbara Presley Noble said in "At Lunch with Katie and Anne Roiphe: One Daughter's Rebellion or Her Mother's Imprint?" (Nov. 10)?
Would you say Allan Bloom "pitched a fit" about multiculturalism?
Did Al Gore "pitch a fit" about the environment?
Is this type of insulting cultural stereotype about women appropriate in the pages of The New York Times?
CHERYL KREMKOW  New York


30 Years of the Traumas of Growing Up
SHOULD I sleep with my boyfriend?
A 10-year-old girl needed to know.
A 13-year-old boy also had a pressing question: How do you ask a girl out?
A 14-year-old girl was pregnant, and her boyfriend had just dumped her.
Another 14-year-old wrote: "I have a problem and to me it's the biggest problem I have and every day I have to face it; it's my nose." How much does plastic surgery cost, anyway?
Another teen-ager wrote, "I'm afraid to tell anyone, but my father sexually abuses me."
Elizabeth C. Winship has heard it all.
Her friends and family know her as Liebe.
But to her legions of correspondents she is Beth, of "Ask Beth," her column in The Boston Globe that is syndicated in 80 newspapers across the country through the Los Angeles Times Syndicate.
For 30 years, three times a week, Mrs.
Winship, as Beth, has been doling out frank advice to confused, anxious, self-conscious, sad and lonely young people.


Political Memo; Clinton California Conundrum for '96
For President Clinton, California's beleaguered economy presents two riddles, with heavy political implications for 1996.
First, how can his Administration help pull California, with its 54 electoral votes, out of the economic abyss as Pentagon cutbacks continue to drag that state down?
And how can the Administration mount a plan to rescue California without having other states accuse it of favoritism?


German Socialists Look to 1994
Germany's Social Democrats, 11 years in opposition, began a convention today that they hope will put them on course to win national elections next October.
But first, their new leader told them, they will have to give up the decade-long habit of radical foreign and domestic policy positions that have kept them out of power in the long reign of Chancellor Helmut Kohl and his Christian Democratic alliance.


Cleric Held In Bombing Denies Tie To a Plot
Speaking in riddles and rhetorical questions, the Egyptian cleric charged with trying to overthrow the Government through bombings yesterday said he would represent himself at his trial because he did not want a Government-appointed lawyer.
In the first interview since his indictment, Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman refused to address any evidence in the case, in which he and 14 other men are charged with plotting to bomb the World Trade Center and other targets.


Lucia Popp, 54, Lyric Soprano; Specialist in Mozart and Strauss
Lucia Popp, a lyric soprano who sang with a silken clarity that made her a favorite in Mozart and Strauss roles, died yesterday in Munich, Germany.
She was 54 and lived in Zurich.
The cause was a brain tumor, said Mariedi Anders, her manager.


2 Killed at Pennsylvania Station
A porter at Pennsylvania Station shot and killed a female Amtrak employee in a passenger lounge last night and then killed himself, the police said.
The man, a red-cap porter whose job was to assist Amtrak passengers with luggage, was identified as Frank Serrano, 38, of Elizabeth, N.J., said Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman.


A Shift From Austere Wines
IS Donn Chappellet softening?
After 25 years of making austere, long-lived cabernets in the hedonistic Napa Valley, he is backing away from his preference for delayed gratification.
A tasting of 12 Chappellet Vineyard cabernet sauvignons last Thursday showed that, faithful to their Medoc model, Chateau Latour, the best of them take years of development to reveal their inner selves.


Robert B. O'Connor, Architect, Dies at 97
Robert B. O'Connor, an architect whose projects included the Harvey S. Firestone Memorial Library at Princeton University and alterations and additions to the Metropolitan Museum of Art carried out in the late 1940's, died on Monday at his home in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
He was 97.
Mr.
O'Connor was born in Manhasset, L.I.
After earning a bachelor's degree from Trinity College in Hartford in 1916, he served as a captain of field artillery in World War I. He received a master of fine arts degree from Princeton in 1920.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.23
3.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.07
3.11
3.14
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.22
3.26
3.36
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.17
5.21
6.44
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.16
6.15
7.53
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.25
7.25
8.48
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.60
5.61
6.45
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Israel and P.L.O. Negotiators Report Progress
Israeli and Palestinian negotiators reported gains today on carrying out their peace accord and said they are likely to overcome the remaining stumbling blocks before the Dec. 13 deadline for limited Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza Strip and Jericho.
"There are still some obstacles," the chief Palestinian negotiator, Nabil Shaath, said.
"But the negotiations today were quite positive and I expect to reach an agreement in time for the deadline if this progress continues."


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
The setting was a restaurant in Manhattan.
Cast of characters: a star-struck friend and I. Topic of conversation: plays and performers.
I: Did I tell you I had dinner with Kim Hunter and her husband the other night?
She, with deep sigh: Wasn't she wonderful as Blanche in "Streetcar"?
I: She wasn't Blanche. She played Stella.
She: Oh, of course. Barbara Bel Geddes did Blanche.
I: No. She was the "Cat on a Hot Tin Roof."
She: I saw it with Kim Hunter.
I: No. That was Kim Stanley who replaced her.
She: Which one is the blonde?
I: None of them.
We never did get to Kim Novak. KEITH EDWARDS
. . .
Walking on West 74th Street in early November Renee Hertz noticed a small chalkboard suspended from a first-floor window.
Written on it, in the most elegant of scripts was the following:
1.11.93  CIAO
FELLINI
. . .
PRESCRIPTION Outside the banker's door I listen to the delicious Whisper of paper money Gently accumulating Inside his office, A doctor for sick businesses Is skillfully injecting Fresh capital Into a body of failing assets.
"Remember," he warns.
"Beware of overdrafts." -- HERBERT J. WAXMAN
. . .
Overheard by Alice King of Georgetown, Conn., on a crowded Madison Avenue bus one recent morning, this dialogue between two boys, about 8 and 11, on their way to school.
8-year-old: I'm glad I'm a MAN!
11-year-old, bored but trying to be polite: Why?
8-year-old: Don't have to wear EARRINGS!!
. . .
The scene was the gift shop at the New York Public Library.
There, an unusual-looking ring with an inscription in cuneiform piqued the curiosity of Bart Holland of the Bronx.
He asked a self-assured clerk exactly what it was the writing said.
"Oh, no, sir, that isn't writing," the young woman told him. "It's just a design."
Mr.
Holland countered that the pattern was unmistakably that form of writing used millenniums ago by Babylonian and related cultures.
He added that a translation ought to be available to purchasers of the ring.
After all, he argued, very few people would be able to read the ancient language and understand the inscription on their purchase.
"O.K., so it is a form of writing," the clerk replied cheerily.
"But you can buy it without concern about what it says since the odds are that you will never meet anyone able to read it anyway. No one will dislike what the inscription says."
At last glance, the ring remained unsold. Mr. Holland's curiosity is still unsatisfied.
. . .
Dear Diary:
A recurring fantasy of mine is that New York City is totally destroyed by a giant meteorite.
A thousand or so years later, archeologists sifting through the ruins finally come up with just two artifacts: a sign reading No Radio and another reading No Menus, Please.
I can see them scratching their heads in bewilderment. LOUIS JAY HERMAN
. . .
Dear Diary:
I was asked did I know anyone who plays the accordion.
The question was posed by a friend who was giving a shower for a mutual friend.
The shower theme was to be Italian, because the couple were planning to honeymoon in Italy.
At first I said no, but then I remembered hearing someone playing the accordion outside my window in the morning, so I said I would investigate.
One evening that week I heard a guitar player in my backyard and decided to yell out from my second-floor window to inquire, "Hello, Mr. Guitar Player, hello?"
"Yes," came the answer. "What's up?"
"Are you the person who also plays the accordion, because I have a job for you."
"No, I'm not but could you use a guitar player?"
"No, but do you know anyone who does play the accordion?"
"No, I don't."
Third voice shouting from the back yard: "Hello? I'm the accordion player. Take my number and give me a call."
Went to phone. Dialed. Male voice: "Accordion player unlimited."
Footnote: He played very well at the shower.
My friends were really impressed by my backyard resource.
I am now contemplating a career change to musicians' agent.
The guitar player is still unemployed but hopeful.
PAMELA BLACK


Corrections
The View column in the Westchester Weekly on Sunday misstated admission prices for the Westchester Cat Show next Saturday and Sunday at the County Center in White Plains, N.Y.
Tickets are $7, but $5 for people 60 or older and $2 for children 11 or younger.


Environmentalists Protest as Generator Is Removed from Power Plant


Book Notes
Test of a Shield Law
Joseph Bosco's new book, "Blood Will Tell" (William Morrow &amp; Company), came out earlier this month and immediately caused a big stir in New Orleans, Mr.
Bosco's home and the scene of the curious murder he writes about.
In detail, the book describes the beating death in 1984 of Janet Myers, a young housewife, and the subsequent trials of her husband and her lover, each of whom sought to place the blame on the other and ended up with a substantial prison sentence for the killing.
Of all the people interested in the book, few had more reason to be interested than the lover, William Fontanille, who was convicted of manslaughter and is serving a 21-year sentence in a Louisiana prison.
Because of information hinted at in the book, Mr.
Fontanille's lawyer, Nick Noreia, asserts that his client deserves a new trial, and he has subpoenaed all the tapes of Mr.
Bosco's interviews with Kerry Myers, the husband, who was convicted of murder and is serving a life sentence.


Ketchum Revamps Top Management
Ketchum Communications Inc. in New York said yesterday that it had revamped its top management by promoting two executives.
Jan Hedquist, president at Ketchum Advertising in Pittsburgh and managing director of Ketchum Advertising International, and David Drobis, chairman and chief executive of Ketchum Public Relations Worldwide, were named to the new positions of vice chairmen of operations.


60-Minute Gourmet
QUICK cooking does not have to be predictable cooking.
That is especially true today with so many foreign influences threading through American cuisine.
Take, for instance, fillet of sole.
Ten or 20 years ago, chances were that a home cook would have sauteed it in a little butter and served it with lemon, or maybe capers.
The weekend cook might have tried a classic French cream-based sauce, but that is as far as it went.
Today, we are less timid about experimentation.
Fresh ginger, a spice associated with Asia, can be the foundation of a different kind of sauce.
Cumin is a complementary ingredient.
Its sharp, faintly hot flavor tames garlic and combines with it to form a third taste sensation.


Corrections
An obituary last Wednesday about Gordon Ramsey, an actor and singer, misidentified the authors of the 1979 musical "Carmelina," in which he appeared.
Alan Jay Lerner wrote it with Joseph Stein and Burton Lane, not with Frederick Loewe.


Theater Owners Battle Planned Disney Leap Into 42d Street
Crying economic foul, Broadway's theater owners have joined to oppose a plan by the Walt Disney Company to take over the landmark New Amsterdam Theater as part of the rehabilitation of West 42d Street.
Because reconstruction of the New Amsterdam might be publicly subsidized, Gerald Schoenfeld, chairman of the Shubert Organization, said Disney would gain an unfair advantage in offering "legitimate attractions that would otherwise be presented in non-subsidized theaters" -- in other words, those owned by the Shubert, Jujamcyn and Nederlander concerns, which control virtually every legitimate Broadway house.


In Italy, Qualify or Face Disgrace
Listen carefully.
The sound you do not hear is a nation holding its breath.
There are no banners, no horns, no crowds parading through the street, but there is an advanced case of communal anxiety here in Italy as its national soccer team faces Wednesday's final qualifying game for the World Cup of 1994.
From the arid boot of Italy to the damp northern cities, few people do not know the score.
If Italy beats or ties Portugal Wednesday night, Italy goes to the world's most important tournament, to be held at nine sites in the United States next June.


COMPANY BRIEFS
MAESA PETROLEUM INC., Vancouver, British Columbia, said it was negotiating to buy a 49 percent stake in a Louisiana casino company in exchange for one million shares of common stock and $1.3 million in working capital.
ROLLS-ROYCE P.L.C., London, said it had won a $104 million contract to supply Tay engines for a fleet of Fokker 70 and Fokker 100 regional airplanes for British Midland Airways.


Study Finds Boys Receive 75% Of New Science Scholarships
Three-fourths of the college scholarships in a new Federal program intended to encourage students to go into mathematics, science or engineering have been awarded to boys, according to a study released today by a research and advocacy group based in Cambridge, Mass.
A total of 352 boys and 84 girls received the scholarship money, which totaled $2.2 million, in the 1993-94 academic year, said the organization, the National Center for Fair and Open Testing.


CHRONICLE
PAULINA PORIZKOVA, the model and sometime actress, and RIC OCASEK, former lead singer for the rock group the Cars, have a newborn son.
JONATHAN RAVEN OCASEK, the couple's first child, was born on Nov. 4, at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan; he weighed 8 pounds, 3 ounces, said Jeff Albright, Mr.
Ocasek's publicity agent.
He said the couple only decided to announce the birth this week after having received many inquiries.


Senate Votes to Ban Attacks on Clinics
The Senate voted overwhelmingly for a Federal law that would prohibit bombings, arson and blockades at abortion clinics, and shootings and threats of violence against those who perform abortions.
The vote was 69 to 30.
Twenty-eight senators who voted against Federal financing of abortions six weeks ago supported the measure, portraying it as a law-and-order matter.


Nearly Half of Suits Settled, Medical Enterprises Says
National Medical Enterprises, a hospital operator accused of fraud and improper medical treatment in lawsuits by more than a hundred former patients, said yesterday that it had settled nearly half the lawsuits for $15 million.
The settlement covers 66 patients at psychiatric hospitals in Texas who said the company conspired to hold them against their will.
They also said that they were given treatments without regard to their medical needs but rather the the terms of their insurance coverage.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  SHIFT IN CHINA POLICY  News analysis: The Clinton Administration's decision to meet with China represents a shift to a friendlier policy toward Beijing, in the hope that it will work better than it did for the Bush Administration.
A1  JAPAN VOTE BACKS CHANGE  The Japanese Government won a key vote in a Parliamentary committee on a package of bills to redesign its corruption-tainted electoral system, setting the course for sweeping political change.
A1


HOME DEPOT INC. (N)
A 23 percent rise in third-quarter profits on record sales could not save Home Depot Inc., which operates the country's largest chain of home improvement stores, from Wall Street's wrath yesterday.
Home Depot shares -- an issue that has made investors jittery and short-sellers rich over the last several months -- fell 4.2 percent in heavy trading yesterday because earnings fell below analysts' expectations.
The company's third-quarter profits of 23 cents a share were 1 cent a share below an average of the estimates of 24 analysts compiled by Zacks Investment Research.


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: White House Memo; Scholars' Advice and New Campaign Help the President Hit His Old Stride
On the evening of Friday, Nov. 5, with commentators grumbling about a White House in disarray, with a crucial trade vote looming and with the overdue health care legislation still in draft form, President Clinton invited a dozen scholars to his home to pick apart his Presidency and help him set things right.
The group of political scientists, intellectuals and Presidential scholars, like Richard Neustadt of Harvard University and William Julius Wilson of the University of Chicago, gathered in the White House dining room.
According to participants, it was a no-holds-barred session, with the President taking notes on the back of his menu.


Future Is Uphill for Canada's Sport
Twenty years ago, this city still had the insular personality of a British fort in the New World.
How it has grown!
Muddy York, as some locals once called it, has become a gleaming multicultural mecca -- with a thriving theater district and a lack of grime and crime -- that attracts tourists and immigrants.
Once, the only sport that really mattered here was hockey, but that, too, has changed.
The Toronto Blue Jays, the two-time World Series champions, play under a retractable dome on the lake front.
A new National Basketball Association team will inhabit a state-of-the-art facility in the middle of the thriving downtown district.
And the Olympics are still a dream.


Giuliani and 4 County Chiefs Form a Regional Alliance
Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani and the executives of four counties around New York City announced yesterday that they would forge an alliance to work together on regional issues from economic development to transportation and, for the first time in memory, prepare a common agenda to take to Albany and Washington.
Mr.
Giuliani and the top officeholders of Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester and Rockland Counties -- all of them Republicans -- portrayed the alliance as a potential boon for the entire region's economy.
Its purpose, they said, would be to rise above the local interests that have created deep rifts and, on occasion, open hostilities between the city and its suburbs.


Pierce Extends Sabatini's Skid to 26
Mary Pierce, who plays a brand of tennis that relies on brute force as its backbone, literally bullied fifth-seeded Gabriela Sabatini off Madison Square Garden's center stage last night in their first-round match at the Virginia Slims Championships.
In her championships debut, Pierce knocked off a top-10 player for the first time in her career.
To a solid chorus of boos, she finished Sabatini off with a deep, disputed two-handed backhand to the baseline that sealed her 7-6 (10-8), 6-3 upset of the crowd favorite.


Trade Pact Thumbs Nose at Displaced Workers
To the Editor:
Labor leaders are fighting the North American Free Trade Agreement because of the lack of adequate protections for workers who will be hurt by a common market.
In the 1980's I conducted a study of Federal job training programs in the Chicago area as the region struggled to recover from massive loss of industry.


Healy Is 3d Man In As the Rangers Roll
Glenn Healy does not remember exactly what Mike Keenan said.
At that moment, he wasn't even sure he wasn't hearing things, or hallucinating, or something like that.
Mike Richter was playing a wonderful hockey game.
He had stopped 14 first-period shots and just had allowed the first Florida goal, 9 minutes and 53 seconds into the second.
Healy himself hadn't played for exactly one month, and he wasn't sure he remembered where to stand, let along what to do.


A Short, Violent Life in South Africa
The day after Dolly Mphahlele buried the charred remnants of her son, his grinning face was on the front page of The Sunday Times in Johannesburg under a headline, "Horror Necklacing of Teenage Boy."
The article described how the boy, Ernest Mphahlele, was in a car stopped by young thugs for driving too fast on the way to watch a boxing match, how Ernest was mistaken for a gang leader, tried by a "people's court," hacked with machetes and incinerated with a gasoline-filled tire slung over his neck.


An Apartment Is Searched By the F.B.I. In Brink's Case
Federal agents raided an apartment in the East Village in Manhattan yesterday, seizing documents from the brother of a suspect in the $7.4 million robbery of a Brink's armored truck in Rochester last January, the brother said.
The brother, John Moloney, said the raid at 604 East Ninth Street began about 6 P.M., when he and other family members were at the United States Attorney's office discussing how to arrange bail for his brother, the Rev.
Patrick Moloney.
Father Moloney is one of three men accused last week of involvement in the robbery -- the fifth largest in United States history.


Personal Health
AFTER nearly a decade of controversy-ridden research and deliberation, the Food and Drug Administration this month approved for commercial use the first agricultural product produced through genetic engineering.
It is a hormone called bovine somatotropin, or BST, which when injected into dairy cows can increase their milk production by 10 to 20 percent or more.
The use of BST would enable farmers to get more milk from fewer cows using less feed and producing less waste.
On the face of it, BST and its as yet unapproved counterpart, porcine somatotropin (PST), which when injected into pigs reduces the amount of fat in their meat, sound like biotechnological miracles that would give consumers more for their money at less cost to the environment.


Trade Pact Thumbs Nose at Displaced Workers; To Keep Mexican Gains
To the Editor:
I own an export marketing company and have lived or worked in Mexico for the last 15 years.
I present an argument in favor of the North American Free Trade Agreement that I have rarely seen made but that I consider sufficient to adopt the agreement: If we do not want to risk losing many of the exports and jobs we have gained through 10 years of Mexican trade liberalization, we need the trade agreement.
Some background:


Review/Film: The Saint of Fort Washington; Homeless, Helpless and Holy, in One Kind of Hell
Matthew (Matt Dillon), a gentle soul, has lived quietly until circumstances force him out on the street.
A wrecking crane appears at the start of "The Saint of Fort Washington" to smash a condemned building, and inadvertently shatter Matthew's life.
Fragile and bewildered, Matthew is ill-equipped to fend for himself, so he has no hope of finding a new place to stay.
With no address for receiving his public assistance checks, he is left homeless, indigent and alone.
Matthew is not literally alone when he is sent to the Fort Washington Armory, an enormous city-operated shelter where he must sleep on a cot alongside hundreds of other homeless men.
And "The Saint of Fort Washington," Tim Hunter's heartfelt new film about homeless characters, is most disturbing in presenting straightforward images of this hellish, impersonal place.
With a documentarian's eye for detail, Mr.
Hunter (the director of "Tex" and "River's Edge") shows how to keep shoes and valuables from being stolen overnight, and why it's best never to visit the bathroom without an escort.
This film has no trouble communicating how devastating it can be to spend time in such a place.


Chicken Shop Selling Guns, Officials Say
Roberto Pennyfeather didn't know about guns or drugs being sold at Mama's Fried Chicken in the Bronx.
But then, like most of his neighbors, he didn't want to know.
"You just knew from who was around at night that it was a dangerous place," said Mr.
Pennyfeather, who lives around the corner from Mama's, in East Tremont.
"I don't ask too many questions."


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Nov12
Nov5
Nov13
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.8
7.4
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.5
3.4
3.3
Gasoline stocks
212.4
210.1
207.8
Distillate stocks
138.1
138.0
138.4
Crude imports, daily
7.6
6.1
5.6
Product imports, daily
1.5
1.9
1.4
Crude stocks
335.4
329.5
320.0
Crude production, daily
6.9
6.9
7.0
Refinery utilization (%)
91.8
91.8
89.5
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Accounts
*
Mullen Advertising, Wenham, Mass., said yesterday that it had withdrawn from the review for The Boston Globe's account, citing pressure from new business and current clients.
The withdrawal leaves five other semifinalists vying for the newspaper's estimated $4 million account.
They are Arnold Fortuna Lawner &amp; Cabot, Doyle Advertising, Clarke Goward Fitts Matteson, Houston Effler &amp; Partners, and Ingalls, Quinn &amp; Johnson, all of Boston.
*
Jockey International Inc., Kenosha, Wis., to Advanswers Media/Programming, St.
Louis, to handle the media services portion of its $10 million to $15 million account, previously handled by Kelly, Scott &amp; Madison, Chicago.
Fairman, Schmidt &amp; Cappelli, Chicago, continues to handle the underwear and casual apparel maker's creative portion.


G.M. Sees Its Results Improving
The General Motors Corporation is ratcheting up the productivity of its workers and expects to turn a profit in its battered North American operations next year, top G.M. officials said today.
In meetings with financial analysts and reporters, John F. Smith Jr., the president and chief executive of G.M., said the company was on track to reach its 1993 financial goal of breaking even before charges for interest, taxes and retiree health care expenses.
G.M., the largest auto maker in the world, has lost $17 billion in North America since 1990.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a proposal by the Food and Drug Administration to tighten rules for reporting side effects in drug trials misstated actions by scientists and drug companies after five patients died in experiments with drugs to treat hepatitis B. They reported the deaths; they did not report that the deaths might have been associated with the drug.


Traders Await Vote on Trade Pact
Prices of Treasury bonds and notes were little changed yesterday in trading ahead of today's vote on the North American Free Trade Agreement in the House of Representatives.
The outlook for approval of the trade treaty linking the United States, Canada and Mexico is still unclear.
But some traders said yesterday that they were a little more confident that the Clinton Administration could win approval.
A vote is not expected until after trading is finished in New York today.


Fighting Over Reading; Principal and Methods Are Under Fire
The Furnace Woods Elementary School here has been torn by a bitter civil war.
It began with a genteel disagreement over how best to teach reading and writing to the 373 children.
But it has flared into a conflict so passionate and bruising that the principal of 11 years, Dr.
Joanne M. Falinski, has been banished to the district office and assigned clerical chores until a hearing panel decides whether she should be dismissed.


A Lame Duck With Soaring Ambitions
Some governors, with only a year left in office and few ambitions still unfulfilled in public life, might be eyeing the exit about now.
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr., zestful for the season of political combat he expects in Connecticut next year, seems utterly undiminished.
What target does he have in his sights?
Small, concealable handguns, and how to get them off the street.
"It'll be a good, rip-roaring fight, there's no question," Mr.
Weicker said today in an interview.


Albany Accord Supports Clinics For Mentally Ill
The New York State Legislature and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo reached agreement yesterday on a landmark mental health bill that would dedicate money saved by closing psychiatric hospitals to caring for mentally ill people living in communities throughout the state.
After months of haggling, the Governor and the chairmen of the Senate and Assembly committees that oversee mental health issues agreed to close five state mental hospitals and to reduce the number of beds in other hospitals by 2,400.


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: A Hard-Won Vote; Voting Yes on Trade Accord Is Folly in Rust Belt. Or Is It?
Representative Tom Sawyer of Akron, Ohio, a Democrat from the burliest of American factory towns now fallen on the toughest of times, swallowed hard today and pledged his vote to a North American Free Trade Agreement that factory men everywhere despise.
Political instinct and Roy Hodoh say this makes him a political short-timer.
"I'm going to tell you right now: he's out of the 14th Congressional District," Mr.
Hodoh, the president of United Auto Workers Local 856, said angrily in an interview today.
The workers of Local 856 counted on Mr.
Sawyer to oppose the agreement, Mr.
Hodoh said, adding that they would not forget his "very disrespectful, deceitful" action next November.


Time Warner Plans to Test A News on Demand Service
Time Warner Inc. yesterday announced the creation of an interactive video "news on demand" servicecombining the news gathering capabilities of Time Inc. with the cable capabilities of Time Warner.
The service, called News on Demand, will first be offered to participants in an experimental interactive system in Orlando, Fla., beginning early next year.
Four thousand Time Warner cable subscribers participating in the test will be offered an array of services on their television sets ranging from video games to interactive catalogue shopping to movies on demand.
News on demand will join those services later in the year.


CHRONICLE
JENNIFER MULLER has taken her modern dance company to larger cities than Andorra la Vella, the capital of the mountain principality of Andorra, between France and Spain.
But nowhere has she found a larger percentage of the local population in her audience.
With a combined audience of 832 at her company's two performances late last month, she figures she drew about 6 percent of the town's population of 14,000.
"Just think if you got 6 percent of everyone in New York," she said this week. (Six percent of New York's population would be about 439,350.)


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: The Overview; Scramble in the Capital for Today's Trade Pact Vote
On the eve of a crucial vote in the House of Representatives, the White House today won pledges of support for the North American Free Trade Agreement from legislators who had publicly opposed it.
For the first time, the number of representatives who have declared their support for the agreement surged ahead of its opponents.
Together with private assurances made to the White House, that appeared to leave President Clinton and his allies poised to claim the narrowest of victories.


Keeping Auto Thieves From Going Straight
Thieves beware.
A new device is designed to deter auto theft by causing the steering wheel to spin impotently when the owner removes the key.
Car thieves who hot-wired the automobile would drive away at their peril because there would be no way to steer the vehicle, according to the product's maker, Malvy Technology Inc. of Oklahoma City.
A BMW outfitted with the antitheft system was displayed recently in Manhattan by Malvy, which intends to begin selling the device early next year for between $600 and $700.
The product could be installed in vehicles by auto dealers or car-accessory shops, according to Malvy, which says it has been negotiating with several American and European auto makers to offer the system as a factory-installed option.


COMPANY NEWS;
In a victory for the Nynex Corporation, the parent of the New York Telephone Company, the United States Court of Appeals has reversed the ruling of a lower court judge who had fined the company $1 million for violating the antitrust order that broke up the Bell System.
The case involved Telco Research, a computer company Nynex bought in 1986 that had developed a system for analyzing telephone network traffic and performed services for MCI Communications.
Under the 1982 consent decree that broke up the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, the seven Bell companies were barred from owning information services.
That prohibition was lifted two years ago.


Up Tempo Teaching by Rapping Right Triangles
To say that Beverly Davidman is an unconventional math teacher would be an understatement.
She struts about in front of the chalkboard like a rap performer, dispensing both attitude and wisdom.
Call her Queen Math Teacher.
"You can pass if you listen; skipping makes you miss it," she tells her students in syncopated rhythm at Norman Thomas High School in Manhattan.
"So don't try to dis it. Just heed the word as I serve geometry on the board."


In School
Audrey Lee Jacobs, Vassar '76, had lost Faith.
Faith Robertson, that is.
"What are you doing in Brooklyn, Faith?" Ms.
Jacobs said into the phone.
Black and Hispanic high school seniors from New York City interested in visiting Vassar were meeting the chartered bus on Saturday afternoon at 1:30 at the Harlem home of Paula Walker, Vassar '74.
It was nearly 2, and no Faith.
"You were here in Harlem and you went back to Brooklyn?" Ms. Jacobs said. "Honey, why?"


Jets Trying to Bolster The Linebacking Corps
The Jets moved swiftly to shore up their sagging linebacker corps yesterday, while rookie Marvin Jones, who remains hospitalized with a season-ending hip injury, tried to remain optimistic about his future in football.
The Jets placed Jones, their first-round draft pick, on injured reserve, cut linebacker Don Jones, signed linebacker Steve DeOssie, a 10-year veteran who was cut by the Giants last week, and agreed to terms with the former Vikings linebacker Mike Merriweather.
Terms of the contracts were not disclosed.
The Jets also worked out the former Tampa Bay linebacker Ervin Randle.


AT LUNCH WITH: Roman Polanski; A Life in Exile From America, From Memory
MENTION Roman Polanski's name in Paris and you're likely to get a little shudder of recognition.
"Creepy" is a word sometimes connected with him, though not for the reason that leaps into most Americans' minds.
The French public is only dimly aware, if aware at all, that in 1978 Mr.
Polanski pleaded guilty to having sex with a 14-year-old girl and left Los Angeles before his sentencing.
If he returns to the United States he faces the possibility of prison.
Here, the shudder is one of sympathy and revulsion at what Mr.
Polanski endured when his pregnant wife, the actress Sharon Tate, and several of their friends were killed by Charles Manson and his followers.
The French assume Mr.
Polanski lives in Paris simply because he wants to, or because returning to the scene of the murders would be too horrendous -- and to some extent they are right.


INQUIRY IS DROPPED OVER SPY CHARGES
The San Francisco District Attorney has dropped a criminal investigation into allegations that the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith illegally obtained police and government records on a wide array of political groups.
In exchange, the Anti-Defamation League has agreed to pay up to $75,000 for programs to combat bigotry and hate crimes in San Francisco and said it would not obtain confidential information from California state or local employees.
But the league did not admit that it had obtained any information illegally.


Four Big Winners Take Shot at a Bonus
Greg Norman is in a perfect position to win the $1 million PGA Grand Slam of Golf, a 36-hole event featuring all four major championship winners.
He is at even-par 108 after 27 holes, with a three-stroke lead over the Professional Golf Association champion, Paul Azinger, a four-stroke lead over the Masters champion, Bernhard Langer, and a five-stroke lead over the United States Open champion, Lee Janzen.
This should come as no surprise to anyone.
After all, the PGA of America did about everything it could to make the Shark comfortable.


The Pacific Summit
O.K., APEC still isn't a household word.
But by inviting a dozen national leaders to meet with him informally outside Seattle this weekend, President Clinton has usefully focused American attention on the previously obscure Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation forum.
Despite its new visibility, the forum remains fragile and sketchily defined.
The APEC region, however, with half the world's production and almost 40 percent of its trade, is now essential to America's international economic vitality.


In an Eggplant Dish, Flavor Without Frying
EGGPLANT is like a sponge: the more oil you use to cook it, the more it soaks up.
But eggplant does not have to be fried, or even pan-fried, to have wonderful flavor.
It can be grilled or broiled with just a little oil, and the effect will be quite flavorful.


Corrections
The Pulse chart in The Metro Section on Monday, which compared recycling programs in New York and four other cities, mislabeled the column of figures comparing the percentage of waste recycled in the five cities.
The figures represented the percentage of each city's total solid waste that is recycled, not the percentage of the curbside collection.


4 Buddhist Monks in Vietnam Get Prison Terms
Four dissident Buddhist monks accused of inciting the largest public demonstration in Vietnam since the Vietnam War have been convicted and sentenced to prison sentences of three and four years, Vietnamese officials and foreign diplomats said today.
The monks, whose supporters have accused the Hanoi Government of a campaign of persecution against Buddhists, received their sentences Monday after a trial in Hue, the central Vietnamese city where the demonstration took place in May.


Judge Refuses to Close Trial in Warhol Dispute
Twenty-four hours before the trial in a long, complicated legal dispute over the value of the Andy Warhol Foundation's holdings of the artist's work, Manhattan Surrogate Eve Preminger yesterday refused the foundation's request to close parts of the trial and all records of its huge inventory of Warhols to the public.
The foundation is the defendant in a lawsuit brought by Edward Hayes, formerly the lawyer for the Warhol estate, whose fee for his legal work he has maintained should be determined by the worth of the holdings.
The foundation had argued that releasing information about its holdings would reduce their value in the marketplace and therefore diminish the foundation's ability to sell its Warhols at top price to provide the maximum funds for its grants.


6 Held in Brooklyn Rape: Two Are 13 and 3 are 15
Six teen-age boys, including two 13-year-olds, attacked and raped a woman in a vacant lot in East New York, Brooklyn, Monday evening, then went to a nearby playground and started shooting baskets, the police said.
The attack lasted about 20 minutes, and before letting the victim go, the assailants robbed her of her food stamps and cigarettes.
Apparently without much thought to a getaway, they then simply tried to blend into the neighborhood, investigators said.


Nets Fall Short Despite Anderson's Efforts
Kenny Anderson, the National Basketball Association's leader in minutes played going into tonight's game, put in a 41-minute effort and had 24 points, 12 assists and 13 rebounds for the Nets.
But it wasn't enough as New Jersey fell, 90-84, to Houston at Byrne Meadowlands Arena as the Rockets improved their record to 7-0.
Houston's Hakeem Olajuwon had to work extra hard to get his double double of 20 points and 19 rebounds, and he missed 18 of his 26 shots from the field and committed 4 turnovers.


Israel Says All Archaeologists Can Dig for Ancient Artifacts
Israeli officials opened the search for new Dead Sea scrolls to archeologists from around the world today and invited Palestinians to join the hunt.
The invitation was an attempt to blunt criticism by Palestinians that Israel was plundering artifacts shortly before it gave up the land as part of the Israeli accord with the Palestine Liberation Organization.


Baxter Plans Job Reductions Amid a Shift in Health Care
Baxter International Inc., the largest hospital supply company in the world, said today that it would shave 7 percent, or 4,500 jobs, from its work force over the next five years in response to changes in medical practices that have slowed domestic demand for many of its products and services.
The revamping will include the elimination of 25 percent of the company's administrative and corporate management positions and the sale of its diagnostics products manufacturing operations, as well as several smaller businesses the company has not identified.


Japan's New Leader Wins a Crucial Vote On Political Reform
The Government of Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa won a key vote today on a package of bills that would reshape the corruption-tainted electoral system, setting Japan squarely on course for its most sweeping political change in decades.
The 21-to-19 vote by a committee of Parliament to redraw the parliamentary districts, reapportion seats and limit corporate political donations was a major coup for the reform-minded Mr.
Hosokawa and, political experts said, a sign that Japan is finally casting off its old political order.
It also broke a five-year deadlock during which the political system sank deeper and deeper into a series of corruption scandals.


Fed Stops Bank Merger; Cites Lending Concerns
In a move showing banking regulators' increased emphasis on ending loan discrimination, the Federal Reserve Board has, for the first time, blocked a large bank merger because of concern over possible bias against minority groups in mortgage lending.
By a 3-to-3 vote, with one abstention, the Fed declined to approve the Shawmut National Corporation's acquisition of the New Dartmouth Bank of Manchester, N.H., because of concern that Shawmut, based in Hartford, may not have complied with fair-lending laws.


Troubled Gitano Seeks To Refinance Its Debt
The Gitano Group, the financially bedeviled jeans maker, said yesterday that it would not be able to meet the financial requirements of its lending agreements unless it refinanced its debt.
Although its most recent quarterly results, announced yesterday, showed that changes in the way the company does business were paying off, Gitano said it would not be able to pay down about $135 million in debt by February 1995.


Another Winter Arrives in Sarajevo, and Another Grave Marker


Cold War Over, Foreign Affairs Schools Refocus
With the end of the cold war eliminating the superpower tensions that guided two generations of diplomats, graduate schools of foreign affairs are shifting their focus to the complexities of world trade, new technologies and the environment.
"The foreign policy after the cold war is going to be more concerned with economics and technology, and it's going to be more driven by the private sector than Government," said Stephen F. Szabo, associate dean for academic affairs at Johns Hopkins University's Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies.


Baseball, Apple Pie and Politics
This is a story about a man, a baseball owner, who has decided to reach for greater heights.
No, not Bud Selig.
The head of the Milwaukee Brewers still very much denies that he is the owner who would be baseball commissioner.


Mets Name Diller to Head Business Side
Jack Diller, a onetime high school pitcher who despite 40 years of inactivity might be able to help out in the club's bullpen, will restrict his contributions to the executive offices at Shea Stadium.
The Mets announced yesterday that Diller, the former president of the Madison Square Garden Sports Group, had been named executive vice president for business operations.
The team's owners, Nelson Doubleday and Fred Wilpon, who had discussed the job with the former baseball commissioner Fay Vincent up until last week, signed Diller to a two-year contract.
Diller, who will oversee all business departments from broadcasting to marketing and who could come to play a major role in plans for construction of a new stadium and business-entertainment complex in Flushing, will operate as a colleague of General Manager Joe McIlvaine.
Diller will not have authority over any baseball personnel or budgetary decisions. 'The Plate Is Full'
"I'm looking at opening day," said Diller. "And the plate is full."


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $79 million of notes due in 1998 priced at 100 to yield 5.01 percent through Merrill Lynch.


Center for Drug Intelligence Opens, But Some Ask if It Is Really Needed
The National Drug Intelligence Center, the Government's newest agency for combating drug traffickers, opened here on Aug. 9 and is still dealing with its first puzzle: finding a mission.
At the dedication of the $50 million center in August, Attorney General Janet Reno said it would coordinate intelligence from rival Federal law-enforcement agencies.
She called it a symbol of the Clinton Administration's effort to eliminate waste and inefficiency in the fragmented $13 billion-a-year fight against drugs.


The Pop Life
Ross Recalls and Reflects
Diana Ross says that in writing her memoirs, after more than 30 years in the music business, she was sometimes reluctant to reveal her thoughts, feelings and experiences.
But her daughter Rhonda told her, "It's therapy, Mom." With "Secrets of a Sparrow" (Villard Books) now in bookstores, Ms.
Ross says her daughter was right.
"You force yourself to focus on how and why you do what you do," she said in a recent interview at the Carlyle Hotel in Manhattan.
"The early days of my career happened so fast that I didn't stop to think of the reason I did things. But I'm absolutely clear that I didn't do it for money. I did it for the love of the work, the singing. I'm still not clear about everything, but as I wrote the book I got a little more understanding of myself."


Corrections
An article last Wednesday about the North American Free Trade Agreement reversed the names of appliance makers who do and do not manufacture some products in Mexican plants.
Whirlpool does; Frigidaire does not.


Israeli Army Warns Settlers to Stop Disturbances
After weeks of frequent rampages against Palestinians to vent their anger over a burst of killings in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, Israeli settlers were warned by the army today that it would act "firmly and aggressively" to stop the disturbances.
Similar warnings came from the country's political leaders, who said that while they understood the rage over killings of Jews in the territories, they would crack down on settlers who cross the line of legitimate protest.


Defendants' Bank Activity Is Traced in Bombing Trial
Banking officials testifying in the World Trade Center bombing trial yesterday traced transactions involving several defendants in the case, drawing a picture of joint accounts opened with cash, withdrawn as cash and sometimes transferred to other accounts as cash.
The manager of a Jersey City branch of Statewide Savings Bank, Diane Lynch, said that one of the defendants, Mohammed A. Salameh, deposited $8,570 on Oct. 22, 1992, four months before the trade center explosion that killed six people and injured more than a thousand.


'What's a West Virginia?' Stay Tuned In
Adrian Murrell plans to watch college football with a few Jets teammates Saturday; when the day is done, he hopes to emerge with bragging rights.
The rookie running back played for West Virginia University, and has taken a ribbing from his teammates for playing at an "out of the way" program.


Parks Are for People, Not Planes
You and your kids have just hiked or driven to Desert View, a vantage point at the eastern end of the Grand Canyon.
To the north and west lies the Colorado River; to the east, the Painted Desert.
And right above you, not quite close enough to touch but certainly close enough to ruin the moment, hovers a sightseeing helicopter.
The Grand Canyon has become a battleground for the human senses, and the copters and airplanes are winning.
At peak season, anyone standing at Desert View might experience only a few minutes of tranquillity between flights.


Ethelbert E. Furlong, Landscape Architect, 98
Ethelbert Ely Furlong, a landscape architect whose specialty was Oriental garden design, died on Sunday at his home in Glen Ridge, N.J.
He was 98.
Mr.
Furlong executed more than 1,800 landscape design projects in the course of a 60-year career, including public works, industrial and residential designs.
He served as garden consultant to the Museum of Modern Art in New York City in the mid-1950's, and collaborated in the creation of the museum's Japanese House in 1954.
In 1965, in ceremonies at the White House, he was honored by Lady Bird Johnson with the Albert and Mary Lasker Award for a commercial site he designed in Lanham, Md., featuring Japanese gardens.


Giants' Missing Link: The Big Bomb
With their new coach, new offensive guru, new receiver and a rejuvenated quarterback, the Giants became one of the National Football League's deep passing teams earlier this year.
For Giants followers, accustomed to the ponderous (although usually successful) churn-it-out era of Bill Parcells, this appeared to be a return to the early 1960's, when an aging Y. A. Tittle found strength in his arm again throwing deep to Del Shofner.
But it stopped on Oct. 17, suddenly and sadly, the way things often do in football.
It stopped, coincidentally, on another big play that was typical of the downfield production the Giants enjoyed in the early part of the season: Phil Simms passing to Mike Sherrard, his new deep-threat receiver.


Nafta and the National Interest
He started slowly.
But over the past two months, President Clinton has pushed fellow Democrats to embrace the North American Free Trade Agreement.
He's bucked organized labor and rejected the advice of some of his closest advisers -- who cautioned that the price of victory would be too steep.
Staking his reputation on the outcome of tonight's vote in the House, he's done what a President is supposed to do when issues are tough and the public is evenly divided: Lead.
The question now is whether a Democratic Congress will vote its conscience or its fears.
A no vote wouldn't bury the Clinton Presidency.
But it would cast doubt on his and his party's ability to govern.
It would also undermine Mr.
Clinton's credibility abroad, just as the all-important Uruguay Round of international trade talks is drawing to a close.
Beyond that, it could send a devastating signal about America's appetite for global leadership after the cold war.
That is what the Nafta vote is ultimately about: whether the country is willing to move forward or retreat into economic isolation.


CHRONICLE
HARRY BELAFONTE and SIDNEY POITIER are to be awarded the first Thurgood Marshall Lifetime Achievement Award of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund tonight at a dinner for 900 in Beverly Hills, Calif.
The award is named for the Supreme Court Justice, who died in January and who founded the organization in 1940 and was its director-counsel until 1961, when he became a Federal appeals court judge.
The award will be presented to the singer and the actor in ceremonies at the Regent Beverly Wilshire Hotel by the Justice's widow, CECILIA MARSHALL.


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: Perot; On Trade, Perot Must Do What He Reviles: Lobby
Ross Perot has gotten a lot of political mileage out of bashing lobbyists, repeatedly bringing his partisans to their feet with his scathing attacks on influence peddling.
But in politics, especially Washington politics, what goes around has a way of coming around.
And so as the final hours wind down toward Wednesday's vote on the North American Free Trade Agreement, Mr.
Perot finds himself, well, lobbying.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Agreed to terms with Tony Castillo, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
National League  FLORIDA MARLINS -- Purchased the contracts of Tim Clark, infielder-outfielder, and Kurt Miller and Matt Whisenant, pitchers, from Edmonton of the Pacific Coast League.
NEW YORK METS -- Named Jack Diller executive vice president for business affairs.
Basketball National Basketball Association  LOS ANGELES CLIPPERS -- Placed Danny Manning, forward, on the injured list.
Activated Henry James, forward, from the injured list.
WASHINGTON BULLETS -- Waived Tito Horford, center.
Football National Football League  DALLAS COWBOYS -- Released Tommie Agee, fullback.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Waived Jeff Faulkner, defensive lineman.
NEW YORK JETS -- Placed Marvin Jones, linebacker, on injured reserve.
Signed Steve DeOssie and Mike Merriweather, linebackers.
Waived Don Jones, linebacker.
WASHINGTON REDSKINS -- Placed Mark Schlereth, guard, on injured reserve.
Signed Jeff Faulkner, defensive tackle.
Hockey  NHL -- Suspended, effectice immediately pending hearings, Florida right wing Mike Foligno for headbutting David Karpa of Quebec and Florida defenseman Brian Benning for slashing Mart Rucinsky of Quebec on Nov. 14.
ANAHEIM MIGHTY DUCKS -- Recalled David Williams, defenseman, from San Diego Gulls of the International Hockey League.
HARTFORD WHALERS -- Relieved general manager Paul Holmgren of his coaching duties.
Named assistant general manager Pierre McGuire coach.
PITTSBURGH PENGUINS -- Called up Pat Neaton, defenseman, from Cleveland of the International Hockey League.
Sent Ladislav Karabin, left wing, to Cleveland.
TAMPA BAY LIGHTNING -- Assigned Tim Bergland, forward, to Atlanta of the IHL.
Colonial Hockey League  UTICA BULLDOGS -- Signed Brian Fleury, defenseman.
Waived Josh Murray, defenseman.
Placed John Stringfellow, forward, on the injury list retroactive to Nov. 14.
Activated John Lean, forward.
Sold Darren Miciak, forward, to St.
Thomas of the Colonial Hockey League.
Lacrosse Major Indoor Lacrosse League  PHILADELPHIA WINGS -- Announced David Morrow, forward, has become a territorial free agent.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Free Trade Pact
The White House won pledges of support for the North American Free Trade Agreement from legislators who had opposed it.
For the first time, the number of Representatives who support the pact surged ahead of its opponents, leaving the President poised to claim a narrow victory in today's vote.  [ Page A1. ]


Pity the Part-Time Eaters Of Pumpkin
LEAVE it to the holidays to remind people of seasonal foods.
How else is it possible to explain pumpkin and pumpkin pie?
Nothing suggests autumn and the harvest like the annual piles of pumpkins glowing at roadside stands and in produce markets.
Turning pumpkin into pie is an American harvest tradition of long standing, documented, some say, as far back as the second Thanksgiving in 1623.


Europe's Bad Example
To the Editor:
William Proxmire believes (letter, Nov. 5) that in coming years, "as unemployment zooms," the United States should follow Europe's lead and shorten the workweek.
Yet, from the four European countries the former Senator holds as a model -- Germany, Norway, France and Denmark -- it's clear that a shorter workweek is no solution to unemployment.
He reports the average workweek in these four countries is 30 hours, compared with 37 hours in the United States.
But the unemployment rates in these countries are 8.3, 7, 11.7 and 11 percent, respectively, compared with 6.8 percent for the United States!
Let's not copy Europe's bad economic policies.
We don't want to import their lower wages and arthritic labor markets.
CHRIS R. EDWARDS  Washington, Nov. 8, 1993 The writer is an economist with the Tax Foundation.


Eating Well
THIS is a guaranteed, money-back offer from the Eating Well column.
It promises that you can eat almost as much as everyone else on Thanksgiving and not go over your fat allowance.
All you have to do is cook Thanksgiving dinner according to the following suggestions.


Parents of Victim Implore President on Gun Issue


One for the World Court
To the Editor:
Yutaka Yoshizawa, Japan's deputy consul general, is very certain of Japan's treaty rights on the disputed northern islands (letter, Nov. 11).
Given this confidence, and the unlikelihood that we shall soon see any Russian leader so little afraid of a backlash from nationalist sentiment that he is willing to trade the islands for however great a quid pro quo and that this smouldering dispute snarls Russian-Japanese relations in many ways to Japan's disadvantage, why does Japan not refer the dispute to the International Court of Justice.
It is a dispute about the interpretation of treaties, which the World Court is good at.
RONALD DORE  Cambridge, Mass., Nov. 12, 1993


Review/Television; Turmoil in '38 That Nature Wrought
In September 1938, before hurricanes had names, before television anchors were available to certify natural disasters and bring them into living rooms, before weather forecasters had taken to telling jokes, New York and New England were struck by winds and waves that killed hundreds of people, destroyed thousands of homes and did hundreds of millions of dollars in damage to communities already beaten down by the Depression.
"The Hurricane of '38," the final program in this season of "American Experience," brings it all back.
With an adroit blend of vivid memories and early home movies, some in washed-out color, and an uncommonly well-written narrative, the hourlong documentary tracks the hurricane through its impact on hard-working fishermen in Montauk, L.I., seaside revelers on Westhampton Beach, and Rhode Islanders of all sorts.


Eat-In Kitchens
To The Living Section:
Regarding the article about New York restaurants serving patrons in the kitchen  [ "The Chef's Table: Someone's in the Kitchen With the Cooks," Oct. 27 ] , I must point out as a proud ex-Chicagoan that the so-called Second City was far ahead -- at least 20 years ahead -- in this.


Review/Pop; Irish Smiles and Scowls
On a first impression, the Cranberries seem utterly sweet.
The Irish band's songs chime along with placidly strummed chords, lyrics about devoted love and lilting melodies.
Many of the songs are stately and ethereal, floating along on minor keys; a few work up to the tempo of folk-rock.
But on Thursday night at the Manhattan Center Ballroom, there was a touch of fierceness amid the delicacy.
Even more onstage than on the group's album, "Everybody Else Is Doing It, So Why Can't We?" (Island/ Polygram), Delores O'Riordan laces her phrases with the edgy quavers and penetrating tone of Irish folk singing.
It's as if Sinead O'Connor were singing with 10,000 Maniacs or with the Sundays.
Songs that could simper take on some ambivalence, and then some anger; gentle pop tunes turn into something more troubled, though no less catchy.


SHELL DELIVERING GASOLINE IN HAITI
Four weeks after the United Nations imposed an oil embargo in an attempt to force Haiti's military rulers to return the nation to democracy, the Shell Oil Company resumed gasoline deliveries today.
Diplomats said the move could prolong the country's political crisis by up to six weeks.
After hearing an announcement Monday night on radio that Shell would resume sales of its gasoline reserves in Haiti, some drivers spent the night parked in front of stations to guarantee they would be among the first served when the pumps opened.


Davis Phinney Calls It Quits as a Racer
DAVIS PHINNEY , whose powerful sprinting abilities propelled him into one of the most prolific careers in cycling history, retired as a competitor yesterday.
"I am not retiring because of age or lack of abilities," said the 34-year-old Phinney.
"But I don't have the singular focus you need to compete in professional cycling anymore."


Robert F. Wagner Jr., Former Deputy Mayor and School Board Chief, Dies at 49
Robert F. Wagner Jr., the gentle 49-year-old scion of a family that defined New York politics for three generations, died suddenly on Monday in a hotel room in Texas, where he was researching a book on urban America.
An autopsy performed yesterday morning was inconclusive, and it may take several weeks before tissue samples can be used to determine the cause of the former New York City deputy mayor's sudden death in San Antonio, the chief medical investigator there said.


John A. Avant, Librarian, 48
John Alfred Avant, former fiction librarian and lecturer at the Main Brooklyn Library on Grand Army Plaza, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 48.
The cause was AIDS-related illness, said his companion, David Allen.


Idea of Curbing Welfare Gets a Tour, and an Earful
The President's emissaries have been out meeting the poor in places that include a New Jersey welfare office, a Chicago public housing project and a decrepit Tennessee shack.
The President's representatives have toured ghettos and have held 40 hours of public hearings on the welfare system, and several pictures are coming into focus.
One is of great human need.
Another is of a potential political revolt.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS; QVC Says a Better Bid by Viacom Was Rejected
Unbeknown to shareholders, Paramount Communications Inc. turned down a bid in early July from Viacom Inc. that was in some ways better than the one it accepted in September, a lawyer for a competing bidder said today.
The disclosure was made by Herbert Wachtell of the Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen &amp; Katz law firm, which is representing QVC Network Inc. in its case against Paramount in Delaware Chancery Court here.
QVC Network is arguing that Paramount illegally spurned its $10.6 billion bid in favor of a less attractive offer from Viacom Inc.
QVC's lawyer used the July offer to strengthen its case that Paramount had put itself up for sale after learning that QVC might make a hostile bid.
QVC Seeks to Prove a Sale
Proving a sale is crucial to QVC's efforts to get the court to eliminate anti-takeover provisions and the consolation prizes that Paramount has promised to pay Viacom if it loses.
QVC says that such payments, which would net Viacom some $600 million, make the deal's price prohibitive.


Holmgren Steps Down as Whalers' Coach
PAUL HOLMGREN was replaced yesterday as coach of the struggling Hartford Whalers, with the job going to Assistant General Manager PIERRE McGUIRE .
Holmgren will concentrate on his duties as the National Hockey League team's general manager.
Holmgren has been the acting general manager since the summer when BRIAN BURKE left to become assistant to Commissioner GARY BETTMAN.


Tornado Touches Down Near Downtown Houston


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: Dealing; Clinton's Shopping List for Votes Has Ring of Grocery Buyer's List
To pass the trade deal that would eliminate taxes on imports from Mexico and Canada, the Clinton Administration has been forced to go this far: it has agreed to impose taxes on imports from Mexico and Canada.
The deal-making on the eve of the House vote Wednesday sounds a lot like a shopping list: beef, peanut butter, bread, sugar, orange juice, cucumbers, lettuce and celery.


Whitman Agrees to Answer U.S. Inquiry on Campaign
Even as she tried to get back to the business of building a new administration, Gov.-elect Christine Todd Whitman said today that she had agreed to meet with the United States Attorney investigating allegations that Republicans tried to suppress the black urban vote in the Nov. 2 election.
She said today that Michael Chertoff, the Federal Attorney in Newark, had asked her to voluntarily answer questions about statements made last week by Edward J. Rollins Jr., her chief political strategist and campaign manager, that set off a wildfire of controversy as well as a string of investigations and legal actions.


End of Communism Worsens Anti-Gypsy Racism
The millions of Gypsies of Eastern Europe have emerged as great losers from the overthrow of Communism and the end of the rigid controls that it imposed on daily life.
Many of the economic and social protections that Gypsies enjoyed in Hungary, Romania and Czechoslovakia collapsed, permitting a revival of the open prejudice and persecution that have marked the history of the Roma, as Gypsies prefer to call themselves, since they first reached Europe in the 11th century after a long migration from the Indian subcontinent.


A Power Lunch to Feed the Hungry
IT was enough to make a grown man tremble.
There in the Rainbow Room atop Rockefeller Center were 250 powerful women luxuriating in and celebrating their power in the fifth annual by-invitation-only Power Lunch.
What we are talking about here is household word women, talented women, smart women, rich women, who had been chosen to eat lunch and contribute money to Citymeals-on-Wheels.


Court Rejects Pension Change
In a ruling that creates fiscal problems for Albany and many local governments, New York's highest court rejected changes in the financing of the state's pension system.
Page B4.


History Is Made: Knicks Reach 7-0
The Knicks could have settled for winning tonight. Instead, they dominated.
Displaying its superiority over the young, rebuilding Dallas Mavericks, New York rolled to its seventh consecutive victory, 103-90, at Reunion Arena.
The Knicks have never before been 7-0, but their best start in history has not made them complacent.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  No Official Problems  The San Jose Sharks beat the Washington Capitals for the first time last night, a 2-1 victory in Landover, Md.
As the National Hockey League officials' strike entered its second day, the replacement crew was led by the referee Drew Taylor, a 36-year-old resident of Watertown, N.Y., who has 13 years of officiating experience at the college level.
Taylor maintained order throughout.
The crew was quick to separate the players during the only scuffle of the game, a minor skirmish behind the Sharks' net in the first period.


Sports of The Times; Completely Wrong? No, Incompletely
HOW'S this for a brainstorm: Let's have a World Series without the American League.
Think the networks will buy that one?
How about a Super Bowl without the American Conference?
No, wait -- let's organize a college football playoff, leave out the Big Ten and Pacific-10 conferences, and call it a national championship.
Get the networks on the phone.
They'll be lining up for this one.
Don't laugh. They're trying.


In America; Pretty Words on Nafta
Back in October 1992, when the campaign was going great and the promises flowed as easily as water from a tap, Bill Clinton indicated that he had understood.
In a speech at North Carolina State University in support of the North American Free Trade agreement, Mr.
Clinton said:


Poll Says People Expect Delay on the Health Plan
The American public doubts that Congress can pass health care legislation, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.
But, at least for now, the public blames the issue's complexities, not the lawmakers.
The poll showed that 57 percent of the public expected Congress to fail to pass a health care plan by the end of next year as President Clinton hopes, while 36 percent said they thought it would succeed.


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Boston College
The problem for Tom Coughlin's coaching staff this week is how to convince the Eagles that they can beat Notre Dame on Saturday at South Bend.
It was there a year ago that undefeated B.C. was routed by the Irish, 54-7.
The Eagles' quarterback, Glenn Foley, was upset early by three sacks and Notre Dame's halftime lead was 37-0.


Mr. Clinton's Promising Speech
Their citizens pinned down by gunfire in the streets, their coffers emptied by the burden of caring for the poor, their schools ineffectual or on the verge of collapse -- America's cities are crying out for an urban policy from Washington.
Presidents Reagan and Bush responded to that cry with racial code words and scorn, often demonizing cities for political gain.
But in his speech last weekend in Memphis, Bill Clinton confronted urban issues in a way that inspired people instead of dividing them.
Mr.
Clinton's speech offers hope that Washington may yet turn its attention to the cities, America's most pressing domestic problem.


Food Notes
Talking Turkey
A reminder for Thanksgiving: if you are planning to roast a fresh turkey, be sure to order it no later than Friday; cooks who prefer a frozen turkey should buy it by Sunday to allow time for thawing in the refrigerator in the original wrapping.
Next week: directions for roasting.
Information about cooking and handling the turkey is available from the Meat and Poultry help line operated by the Department of Agriculture, at (800) 535-4555.
This line, which takes calls Monday through Friday, from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Eastern standard time, will also operate this Saturday and Sunday during those hours and from 8 A.M. to 2 P.M.
Thanksgiving Day.
Turkey-cooking tips are also available around the clock from Reynolds Metals, the aluminum-foil makers, through Nov. 30, by calling (800) 745-4000.


Corrections
An obituary on Saturday about H. R. Haldeman, President Nixon's chief of staff, who spent 18 months in prison for his involvement in the Watergate scandal, misidentified a political committee and the number of people working for it who were arrested in the break-in at the Democratic National Committee's headquarters in the Watergate complex on June 17, 1972.
It was the Committee for the Re-election of the President.
Five men were arrested, but only one, James W. McCord, was an employee.


Savings Vastly Overestimated in Streamlining Plan, Agency Reports
The Congressional Budget Office estimated today that the first phase of Vice President Al Gore's plan to streamline the Government would save only 5 percent of the $6 billion that the Clinton Administration has predicted in savings over five years.
That estimate by the budget office, Congress's official scorekeeper on fiscal affairs, concerns only the first of a series of legislative packages to be submitted to Congress under the Gore plan.
But its implications as a disheartening piece of news for the White House are broader, because it suggests that the Administration's savings estimate for the much larger overall plan may be far too high.


Plan Includes Modernization by Nostalgia
Can George Steinbrenner be persuaded to keep the Yankees in the Bronx if the city and state make Yankee Stadium look like it did 70 years ago?
No one knows because Steinbrenner will not comment, but modernizing the Stadium to make it look old again is one element of a plan now being discussed in advance of being presented to Steinbrenner before the end of the year.


U.S. Concern Wins Data Job In Britain
The Computer Sciences Corporation yesterday was chosen to supply British Aerospace with computer services under a 10-year, $1.34 billion contract that is the largest ever awarded in Europe to a single data processing supplier.
Computer Sciences will take over the management of a substantial portion of British Aerospace's information technology functions, running data centers, networks and computing across more than a dozen British Aerospace units.


Curbs Approved For Custodians In Public Schools
The State Assembly gave final approval today to a bill aimed at ending years of fraud and misconduct by New York City's school custodians by giving principals and the city's Board of Education a degree of control over their work for the first time.
The bill, which was passed by the State Senate in July on the last night of the legislative session, would enable the Board of Education to set performance standards for the cleanliness and maintenance of the schools and allow principals to evaluate custodians by those standards.
Those evaluations could then be used by the board to help determine promotions, demotions and transfers.


INSIDE
Optimism on Wall Street
Stocks surged after the White House said it had the votes to pass the trade pact.
The Dow Jones industrial average topped 3,700, a record.
Page D1.
Religious Freedom Widened
The President signed a bill requiring the Government to meet strict standards before taking actions that might impede religious practices.
Page A18.
Whitman to Meet Prosecutor
New Jersey's governor-elect agreed to meet with prosecutors investigating allegations that Republicans tried to suppress the black vote.
Page B1.


L. Damon Gadd, 67, Founder of Ski Resort
L.
Damon Gadd, founder of the Sugarbush ski resort in Vermont, died on Nov. 7 at his home in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 67.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Pitt Punished By N.C.A.A. Over Its Recruiting
An illicit recruitment scheme has led to sanctions against the Pittsburgh athletic program, and a similar scheme to provide free and reduced air fare to a basketball player at the State University of New York at Buffalo has led to sanctions against its program.
The two actions were announced yesterday by the National Collegiate Athletic Association's committee on infractions, which imposed a two-year probation on Pitt's athletic program and one-year probation on Buffalo's program.


MILITARY REBUFFED BY APPEALS COURT OVER HOMOSEXUALS
Casting doubt on the constitutionality of the Clinton Administration's new policy on homosexuals in the armed services, a Federal appeals panel today unanimously struck down the old Pentagon rules under which a midshipman had been removed from the Naval Academy in Annapolis.
Although the court said it was not considering the constitutionality of new regulations being prepared by the Defense Department, the three judges said the equal protection guarantee of the Fifth Amendment did not permit the Government to remove members of the armed services merely because they say they are homosexuals.


MORGAN STANLEY GROUP INC. (N)
Unlike many Wall Street firms, which are largely reliant on strong domestic financial markets, the Morgan Stanley Group makes money everywhere.
Yesterday the firm reported a 64 percent increase in net income for the quarter ended Oct. 31, on revenues of more than $1 billion.


An Apartment Complex Is Easy, if You Know How


Clinton Takes Political Risk in Talking to Chinese
In meeting China's President in Seattle on Friday, President Clinton is gambling that the strategy of tentatively embracing Beijing's leaders rather than castigating them will work better for him than it did for President George Bush.
The one-hour meeting, the highest-level contact since China suppressed pro-democracy demonstrations in Tiananmen Square in 1989, comes after a formal policy review in September that led to a decision to shift away from threats and finger-pointing and substitute what a top Administration specialist called "enhanced engagement."


Intel's Push to Be King of the Hill
Even as most of the personal computer industry is massed in Las Vegas, Nev., this week for its annual fall trade show, the industry's future may be taking shape in a secluded Intel Corporation laboratory tucked among the farm fields of Oregon.
Or so Intel hopes.
The company is trying to do what has proved impossible for other manufacturers, including I.B.M., the world's largest computer maker: wrestle today's increasingly anarchic desktop computer industry into line and persuade companies to adopt a new generation of technical standards.


Dr. Arthur H. Burr, Cornell Professor, 85
Dr.
Arthur Houghton Burr, Sibley Professor emeritus of Mechanical Engineering at Cornell University, died on Nov. 5 at his home in Austin, Tex.
He was 85.
The cause was congestive heart failure, Cornell reported.


No Headline
"Even if the government does not itself act out of prejudice, it cannot discriminate in an effort to avoid the effects of others' prejudice. Such discrimination plays directly into the hands of the bigots; it ratifies and encourages their prejudice." -- JUDGE ABNER J. MIKVA, in a decision on homosexuals in the military.  [ A1:2. ]


A Job Fair for Supercollider Workers


Standing in the Shadows of Fall


Witness Recants on Brothers Who Killed Parents
A woman whose information led to the arrests of two brothers in the killing of their parents four years ago testified today that she was 'brainwashed' when she went to the police in 1990 and told them that she had overheard their confession to a therapist.
The woman, Judalon Smyth, once a key figure in the prosecution's casewho is now testifying for the defense, has been on the stand since Friday, the day the jurors heard an audiotape of a therapy session in which the brothers, Lyle and Erik Menendez, discussed the killings.
The defense has been using her to cast doubt on the tape and discredit the therapist who made it, Dr.
L.
Jerome Oziel, who had been her lover.


U.S. Survey Underestimated The Jobless Rate for Women
The Government has been substantially underestimating unemployment for at least a decade or more, particularly among women, the Labor Department reported today.
As part of the biggest revamping in the 53-year history of the Government survey that determines the nation's official jobless rate, researchers at the Labor Department have discovered a bias in the survey under which many women who were seeking jobs were erroneously described as homemakers, and therefore not counted as being in the work force.


SEARCH FOR AIDID OFFICIALLY ENDED
The United Nations today formally ended its ill-fated hunt for Mohammed Farah Aidid, the Somali clan leader whose arrest had been the goal of United States forces in Mogadishu.
Instead the Security Council asked a special commission to determine who was responsible for armed attacks on peacekeeping soldiers.


Finger Injury Puts Manning on Injury List
The All-Star forward DANNY MANNING , the Los Angeles Clippers' leading scorer, has been placed on the injured list because of a cracked left ring finger.
Manning, who averaged 25.5 points in the Clippers' first four games, must sit out a minimum of five games.
He will be eligible to return Nov. 27.


Morgan Awarded $796,000 in Suit
The Los Angeles City Council agreed yesterday to pay more than $796,000 to settle a police brutality lawsuit brought by the Hall of Famer JOE MORGAN stemming from an incident in March 1988.
Morgan said he was waiting for a flight at Los Angeles International Airport when a Los Angeles Police Department detective accused him of being a drug courier and threw him to the floor.


London Journal; At the Tower, a Call to Arms (And There's a Lot)
For more than 900 years the Tower of London has been at the center of British history.
It has been a royal residence, an arsenal, a fortress, a prison, a public records office, a mint, even a royal menagerie.
Ever since 1483, when a German knight named Wilwolt von Schaumburg was invited by to have a look at some of the King's artillery, its spears and suits of armor have captivated visitors.
Now, almost two and a half million people visit every year, more than the entire population of England in 1066 when the Tower was started by William the Conqueror.


Bridge
Constructing bridge hands to illustrate a point, whether for a class, a book or a par contest, is a tricky business and it is easy to overlook some delicate flaw.
Study the diagram, assuming you are sitting East and defending three no-trump.
West leads a heart, and South wins and leads the diamond jack.
The finesse loses to the queen, and you have to find a way to defeat the contract.
This deal was created for an English par contest more than half a century ago, and East was supposed to find a clever defense: Lead the club five at the third trick.
This does indeed defeat the contract, because West will regain the lead with the diamond ace and lead his last club, giving East three tricks in the suit.


More on Pomegranates
To The Living Section:
Regarding "Little Garnets of Flavor, Pomegranates Are the Jewels of Autumn" (Oct. 27): In this day of modern cooking machines, the juice extractor expands opportunities for eating the exotic pomegranate as far as a cook's imagination can go.


Berlin Rocks as Musical Walls Come Down
As a symbol of change in the German capital, it could hardly be bettered.
Before the fall of the Berlin wall in 1989, one of the most fearful and depressing buildings in East Berlin squatted next to the Friedrichstrasse railroad station.
The building was the screening area for anyone, from tourists with day-visas to East Germans with exit permits, who wanted to leave that police state.
Not infrequently, East Germans showed up with suitcases and nervous optimism and fell afoul of the People's Police.
Scenes of sobbing and screaming, of desperate people being escorted away in custody, all in full sight of horrified Western visitors, were not uncommon.
Now this entire building, which was constructed in anonymous Soviet-modernist style, has been turned into a nightclub called the Palace of Tears.
The club is festooned with the original grim signage of the building's previous incarnation ("Foreigners With Visas Enter Here").
You can buy Palace of Tears T-shirts at the coat check.


Senate Passes Abortion-Clinic Crime Bill
The Senate voted overwhelmingly today for a Federal law to prohibit bombings, arson and blockades at abortion clinics, and shootings and threats of violence against doctors and nurses who perform abortions..
The vote was 69 to 30.
Twenty-eight senators who voted against Federal financing of abortions six weeks ago supported the measure, seeing it as a law-and-order matter rather than as an abortion issue.
Senator David Durenberger, Republican of Minnesota, called the bill an effort to restore "civility in our national debates."


Panel Seeks Stronger Role in Future of Ellis Island
Ellis Island was designated a historic district yesterday by the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission.
The designation comes at a time when the island is the center of two unrelated disputes between New York and New Jersey over which state has jurisdiction over the island, and whether a $15 million bridge, authorized by Congress to connect it to Liberty Park in New Jersey, should be built.


And Now, 'Deng Xiaoping,' the Movie
To the Editor:
The issuing of the third and, most likely, final volume of Deng Xiaoping's private speeches (news article, Nov. 4) is but one measure China's top Communist Party officials have taken in preparing for the death of their 89-year-old paramount leader.


'Red Shoes' Replaces Lead Actor
The producer of "The Red Shoes," Broadway's most expensive and extravagant fall production, announced yesterday that he had dismissed the show's lead actor, Roger Rees, and replaced him with his understudy, Steve Barton.
Mr.
Barton was to go on for the preview performance at the Gershwin Theater last night; the show's scheduled opening night is Dec. 2.
Mr.
Rees is the latest casualty in the $8 million musical, which is based on the 1947 movie about a ballet dancer torn between love and performing.
The current director, Stanley Donen, was brought on board in late August after the producer, Martin Starger, dismissed Susan H. Schulman, who had directed a workshop production of the show over the summer.
And last month, two featured actors, Rene Ceballos and Tim Jerome, were replaced by Leslie Browne and Tad Ingram.
Broadway wags have begun to refer to the show as "The Pink Slips."


METRO DIGEST
AGREEMENT ON MENTAL HEALTH MONEY
The New York State Legislature and Gov.
Cuomo reached agreement on a landmark mental health bill that would dedicate money saved by closing state psychiatric hospitals to caring for mentally ill people in communities.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY OBLIQUE ANSWERS FROM CLERIC
Speaking in riddles and rhetorical questions, the Egyptian cleric charged with trying to overthrow the Government through bombings said he would represent himself at his trial because he did not want a Government-appointed lawyer.
B2.
BANKERS TESTIFY AT BOMBING TRIAL
Banking officials testifying in the World Trade Center bombing trial traced transactions involving several defendants in the case.
B2.
MICKEY HOUSE DRAWS OPPOSITION
Crying economic foul, Broadway's theater owners have joined to oppose a plan by the Walt Disney Company to take over the landmark New Amsterdam Theater as part of the rehabilitation of West 42d Street.
B2.
WOMAN IS RAPED BY 6 TEEN-AGERS
Six teen-age boys attacked and raped a woman in a vacant lot in East New York, Brooklyn, then went to a playground and started shooting baskets, the police said.
B3.
THE TAKE-OUT WASN'T CHICKEN
Roberto Pennyfeather didn't know about guns or drugs being sold at Mama's Fried Chicken in East Tremont, the Bronx.
But then, like most of his neighbors, he didn't want to know.
B3.
One Amtrak employee killed a second employee and then himself in a lounge in Pennsylvania Station.
B3.
Mayor-elect Giuliani and the executives of four counties around New York City announced that they would forge an alliance.
B3.
Ellis Island was designated a historic district by the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission, at a time when the island is the center of two disputes between New York and New Jersey.
B4.
Can George Steinbrenner be persuaded to keep the Yankees in the Bronx if the city and state make Yankee Stadium look the way it did 70 years ago?
B14.
REGION PENSIONS PLAN IS STRUCK DOWN
Ruling that New York State must pay a price for its past fiscal gimmickry, the state's highest court declared that Gov.
Cuomo and the Legislature acted illegally in 1990 by changing the way the state's pension system is financed.
B4.
The home of a suspect in the Brink's robbery in Rochester was raided by the F.B.I. B4.
Gov.-elect Christine Todd Whitman said she had agreed to meet with the United States Attorney investigating allegations that Republicans tried to suppress the black urban vote in the New Jersey gubernatorial election.
B6.
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr., zestful for the season of political combat he expects in Connecticut next year, seems utterly undiminished.
What target does he have in his sights?
Small, concealable handguns.
B6.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman B3
Chronicle B4


Review/Film; A Naif on the Highway Gets Driven to the Edge
Alex Cox's "Highway Patrolman" comes as a brash rebuke to the hundreds of movies that have glamorized law enforcement as an occupational springboard into a real-life action-adventure film.
Filled with heat, dust and corruption, Mr.
Cox's film traces the erosion of body and spirit of Pedro Rojas (Roberto Sosa), an idealistic young graduate from the National Highway Patrol Academy in Mexico City.
In their first assignment, Pedro and his best friend, Anibal Guerrero (Bruno Bichir), are sent to patrol a desolate highway in Durango.
Pedro quickly discovers that his job is not at all the equivalent of being a modern-day road warrior.
Most of the people he stops for petty violations are too poor to afford the licenses required to transport their goods legally.
One woman he stops, Griselda (Zaide Silvia Gutierrez), invites him home for breakfast and makes a heated play for him.
Weeks later they are married.


Preserve Chief Judge Kaye's Original Lawyer-Client Rules
To the Editor:
With many women's rights advocates, I cheered last August, when New York's Chief Judge, Judith Kaye, proposed regulations on the conduct of lawyers in matrimonial cases in response to the report of the Milonas Commission.
They amounted to the toughest rules in the country.


Review/Theater: Any Given Day; A Family Prequel By Frank D. Gilroy
The fact that Mother knows best in "Any Given Day," Frank D. Gilroy's bitterly nostalgic drama of family warfare, is by no means a source of comfort.
Mother, who is played with monumental stoicism by the great Sada Thompson, knows everything, actually, since she is cursed with the power of clairvoyance.
And judging by the pained, steely mask in which Ms.
Thompson sets her face for much of her performance, her character has seen in her family's future, to borrow from a Gershwin song, "more clouds of gray than any Russian play could guarantee."
"Any Given Day," which is set in an oppressively formal, down-at-the-heels middle-class Bronx apartment in the early 1940's, most immediately evokes the corrosive family portraits that dominated American drama in the middle of this century.
The play, at the Longacre Theater, also seems to be Mr.
Gilroy's bid to write something like a Chekhovian tragicomedy of withering expectations.
In it, he has created a host of regretful characters with puny hopes of escaping from a suffocating, ambition-thwarting domestic world.


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: Mexico; U.S. Vote Crucial for Mexico's Chief and His Party
After nearly five years of an administration that has changed Mexico more deeply than any other in the last half-century, the success of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari's presidency and the fortunes of his party may hang on the outcome of a United States Congressional vote on the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Contrary to the claims of many who support the accord, few economists here believe the future of free-market economic policies in Mexico will be at stake when the House of Representatives takes up the pact on Wednesday.
But a vote against the agreement might well bring a chill to relations between Mexico and the United States, officials of the two countries say.
Mexican officials have also warned that it could bring a backlash of anti-American sentiment here.


A.M.A. Heralds a Genetics Revolution
CONVINCED that advances in molecular biology and molecular genetics are transforming the theory and practice of medicine, the American Medical Association is virtually shouting at the nation's doctors to pay attention.
It is publishing more than 150 articles on advances in molecular genetics in 11 medical journals today, devoting its resources to pointing out that the genetics revolution is well under way.


Yale's Favorite Bulldog Plans a Final Trick for Harvard
Handsome Dan, a.k.a.
Dan XIII, the white-and-brown-spotted English bulldog that has made a career of working Yale athletes and their fans into a combative frenzy, and inspiring jitters in their adversaries, will retire as mascot next June.
Dan is 10 years old, and if a shade less spry than when in his prime, his mind is sharp, said Christopher Getman, the dog's owner and handler.
Healthy but 70 years old by the common reckoning of a dog's age, Dan will demonstrate his acuity at some point during this Saturday's game against Harvard, Mr.
Getman said.
When asked if he prefers death to matriculating at Harvard, Dan staggers, collapses, rolls over and plays dead.


Comic Relief for the Kitchen
IN the 1980's, kitchens entered the realm of haute couture, with designer objects like Alessi teapots costing as much as a visit to the doctor.
In the frugal but style-heady 90's, kitchens remain a place for showing off, but it's now done with more humor and less pretension.
Take the David and Venus magnets, above, based on the classic Michelangelo and Bouguereau figures.
The pair can be dressed down or up (David looks good topless with blue jeans) and shake up a desultory kitchen with their air of mischief and lasciviousness.
The magnets, by Caryco Magnets of Seattle, cost $19.95 each and come with 12 pieces of clothing.
They are available at the Rizzoli Bookstore of SoHo, 454 West Broadway (near Prince Street), (212) 388-9000, and through the Rizzoli Bookstores catalogue, (800) 522-6657.


Corrections
An article and a caption yesterday about Ross Perot's lobbying for votes against the North American Free Trade Agreement misstated the political affiliation of a member of Congress from Toledo, Ohio, in some editions.
The Representative, Marcy Kaptur, is a Democrat.


Market Place; Some see bargains among the stocks of close-out stores.
DURING the recession, penny-pinching shoppers learned to hunt for discounted brand-name goods at close-out stores.
Although the economy now appears to be recovering, such stores continue to thrive, making up a $5 billion segment of the general retailing industry.
Some retail analysts say investors too can find a bargain among stocks of close-out retailers, which buy distressed goods when manufacturers produce too much or make mistakes with a product.
Close-out stores sell the goods at steep markdowns compared with traditional retailers.
The Consolidated Stores Corporation, Mac Frugal's Bargains Close-Outs Inc., Value City Department Stores Inc., Tuesday Morning Inc. and Value Merchants Inc. are retailing's scavengers.
Their bare-bones stores are stocked with goods in last year's colors, items labeled for test markets, unsold factory inventory, orders canceled by cash-short department stores, products in old wrappers and food whose shelf life is near its end.


South African Parties Endorse Constitution Granting Rights to All
South Africa's main political antagonists this morning concluded their grand bargain to end white dominion, endorsing a new constitution that tries to balance majority rule with safeguards to reassure whites and other minorities.
In the cavern of a suburban convention center, black and white leaders renounced the racist past and embraced a bill of rights promising South Africans freedoms of speech, movement and political activity and other liberties that in the past were reserved mainly for whites.


Corrections
The Music column in the Westchester Weekly on Sunday misstated the date of a piano recital by Andrew Armstrong at Grace Episcopal Church in White Plains.
It is at 8 P.M. tomorrow, Nov. 19not Saturday.


Joe B. Frantz, 76, Texas Historian And Author With Ties to Johnson
Joe B. Frantz, a historian of the American West who was close to President Lyndon B. Johnson, died on Saturday at Hermann Hospital in Houston.
He was 76 and lived in Houston.
The cause was complications from diabetes, his family said.


Review/Television; Solving Crimes in Warm Places
There's Agatha Christie of England.
And there's Joseph Wambaugh of America.
Both are celebrated for their crime fiction but, rooted in their own cultures and periods, each would be out of place in the other's world.
As their avid readers can attest, detective stories provide more than puzzles to be solved.
As do the presumably loftier forms of fiction, they reflect with uncanny accuracy the spirit and structure of their times.
Returning tonight for a fifth season on public television's "Mystery" series, "Poirot," set in the 1920's and 30's, takes place in an England where class distinctions were not only accepted but were carefully preserved, as well.
Miss Christie is always partial to the upper classes and their stately homes.
Their privileges are taken for granted.
Outsiders, especially Americans, always tend to be suspect.
The author's detective, Hercule Poirot, a Belgian, is accepted in the highest social circles not just because he is so infernally clever but also because he is even more finicky and snobbish than the British aristocrats.


Military College Is Ordered to Admit Woman
A woman must be permitted to attend classes with the cadets at The Citadel, a South Carolina military college, while her lawsuit challenging its policy of admitting only men is heard, a Federal appeals court ruled today.
A panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, in Richmond, said in a 2-to-1 ruling that Shannon R. Faulkner, who had sued to enroll at The Citadel, could attend as a day student.
A lower court will be asked to decide next year whether she can become a full-fledged member of the college's corps of cadets.


Corrections
A television review yesterday about "The Hurricane of '38," a television program in the PBS series "The American Experience," misstated the future of the series.
It will resume in January; this was not its last installment of the season.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Purchased the contracts of Tyrone Hill, Scott Taylor, Charlie Rogers and Byron Browne, pitchers; Mike Matheny and Mike Stefanski, catchers; Derek Wachter and Duane Singleton, outfielders; and Jeff Cirillo, infielder, from New Orleans of the American Association.
National League
CHICAGO CUBS -- Purchased the contract of Doug Glanville and Ozzie Timmons, outfielders, from Orlando of the Southern League.


Man Charged In Bribes Tied To Drug Deals
Narcotics detectives arrested a Queens delicatessen owner Tuesday night on charges he paid bribes to a detective and his supervisors to protect a $20,000-a-week marijuana business that operated out of his store.
The arrest came after the detectives reported the bribery offer to the Police Department's Internal Affairs Bureau.
The detectives then pretended to accept more than $20,000 in bribes -- paid in part to shut down a competitor -- before arresting the marijuana dealers in both operations, the police said.


Soccer: Ins and Outs of '94 World Cup: Italy (In), England (Out); France Beaten; Argentina and Ireland Qualify
It was soccer's version of the N.C.A.A. basketball tournament, a throng of games played simultaneously, eight European vacancies available in the 24-team World Cup field, at least one shocker guaranteed.
In the end, Italy and Ireland erupted in sweeping celebration, while France and England sank into national heartache.
Italy qualified for its ninth consecutive World Cup by defeating Portugal, 1-0, on a late goal by Dino Baggio in Milan, and delighting American organizers, who are paying attention to ethnic enclaves in the United States for next summer's tournament and are almost certain to place the Italians in the New York-New Jersey area at Giants Stadium.


Paying Homage to a Former Deputy


CHRONICLE
BARBRA STREISAND has donated a $15 million estate in Malibu, Calif., to the Santa Monica Mountain Conservancy, a state agency devoted to parkland acquisition.
"It is the most valuable land ever donated to the Santa Monica Mountain recreation area," said JOSEPH T. EDMISTON, the executive director of the conservancy, who made the announcement yesterday.


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: The Overview; HOUSE BACKS FREE TRADE PACT IN MAJOR VICTORY FOR CLINTON AFTER A LONG HUNT FOR VOTES
President Clinton scored one of the biggest triumphs of his Presidency tonight when the House of Representatives voted to expand trade with Mexico and turn North America into the world's largest free trade zone.
Legislation to put the North American Free Trade Agreement into effect starting Jan. 1 and to gradually abolish nearly all trade barriers between the United States, Mexico and Canada was adopted by a vote of 234 to 200, with three-fifths of the Democrats voting against the President and most Republicans supporting him.


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: Dealings; New York Region 'Nays' Translate Into 'No Deals'
So while the deals were being struck on sugar and orange juice and peanut butter to round up last-minute Democratic votes for the free trade pact, how did the New York region do?
To begin with, most Democrats from the metropolitan area were out of the running.
All but two Democrats from New York, New Jersey and Connecticut -- Nita M. Lowey and Floyd H. Flake -- opposed the pact, according to preliminary vote counts.


CHRONICLE
Talk about Dutch treat!
A benefit dinner to be held on Sunday at the Pierre Hotel for the Reconstructionist Rabbinical College in Wyncote, Pa., gives new meaning to the concept of each dinner guest's paying for his or her own meal.
Most guests will pay $750 a plate.
But the guest of honor, SIDNEY B. BECKER, former chief operating officer of Willcox &amp; Gibbs, a manufacturing firm based in Manhattan, is chipping in $1 million.
And Rabbi ALEXIS ROBERT of Los Angeles is throwing in $1,700 that she won on the television game show "Family Feud."


What Data Really Show About Voting by Color
To the Editor:
Robert Elliott's "Voting by Color" (letter, Nov. 9) is an egregious example of the misuse of data.


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: The Partners' Reaction Mexico Seems Jubilant but the Government in Canada Has Many Questions; A 'Real Revolution Stirs Celebration
After the long Congressional debate ended and the final vote was taken on Mexico's economic union with the United States, many Mexicans celebrated the approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
"It's a major step for Mexico, absolutely enormous," said Juan de la Cruz, a 39-year-old banker who watched the vote on television at the Yuppies Sports Bar in downtown Mexico City.
"It's like there were two walls between the countries and now they're gone."


Same Old Seesaw As Nets Lose To Celtics
After mixed performances the previous night against the Rockets, Derrick Coleman and Kenny Anderson went up and down on offense like opposite ends of a seesaw tonight, and the Nets lost again, this time by 105-100 to the Celtics in Boston Garden.
On Tuesday night it was Anderson, who turned in his first triple-double of the season in the loss to Houston at the Meadowlands, who was soaring while Coleman sank to a season-low 8 points.


Scott Sommer, 42, A Novelist Known For Odd Characters
Scott Sommer, a novelist and screenwriter known for his quirky, tragicomic characters, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 42.
The cause was a heart attack, said his father, Stanley Sommer.


In Mexico City, A State-of-the-Art Children's Museum
As one of the biggest, unruliest, most dangerously contaminated places on earth, this is one tough city to live in, especially for children.
Some children in Mexico City are trained to tell the toxicity of the air by the red or black flags that fly over their schools.
They are drilled on how to handle an earthquake.
They can't avoid the thousands of street children who sell gum or beg for handouts at car windows they aren't even tall enough to see into.


Magnet Schools Approved
The New York City Board of Education last night approved a proposal to create four "magnet" schools at Andrew Jackson High School in Cambria Heights, Queens.
The vote was 4 to 0, with three members absent.
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said last week that he planned to replace two troubled high schools with networks of smaller magnet schools, with specialized themes.
Educators identified the schools as Jackson and James Monroe High School in the Bronx.
The plan to create magnet schools at Jackson -- in the arts and humanities, math and science, business and entrepreneurship and law and government -- was developed over two years.
Officials said last night that no similar plan had yet been developed for Monroe.


Morgan Stanley Buying Red Roof
The Morgan Stanley Real Estate Fund said yesterday that it would buy Red Roof Inns, a private chain of 210 economy motels, for about $600 million.
Red Roof motels, all company owned and operated, are spread across 30 states but heavily concentrated in the Middle West.
All but one are limited-service properties, offering only rooms, not restaurants, swimming pools or similar amenities, and they are aimed at the business traveler.


After the Layoffs, Checks in the Mail
More than a year after the last red Chevrolet Camaro rolled off the assembly line at the General Motors plant northwest of downtown, about 1,200 workers laid off from the plant spend their days sleeping late, watching soap operas, taking classes, planting gardens, working out at the gym and, in one instance, learning to surf.
Yet every week they continue to receive paychecks from G.M.
Under an unusual provision of the labor agreement between the company and the United Automobile Workers union, the plant's workers will continue to get those checks for up to three more years unless they agree to take a temporary job, move to another G.M. plant hundreds of miles away or opt to retire.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Counting Crows  Irving Plaza
In "Mr. Jones," the current single by Counting Crows, Adam Duritz comes clean: "I want to be Bob Dylan," he sings.
At Irving Plaza on Friday night, when Counting Crows opened for Cracker, he also sounded at times as if he wanted to be Van Morrison, Bruce Springsteen, Michael Stipe of R.E.M. and the late Richard Manuel of the Band.
Except for his haircut (dreadlocks above close-cropped sides), Mr.
Duritz is a proud throwback to the days of earnest, poetic, enigma-slinging songwriters, and he leads a band that harks back to the Band.


Vatican Sees Gain on Israeli Ties
The Vatican and Israel have come close to an agreement that could lead to the establishment of full diplomatic relations, but "the method, timing and form" for signing an accord have yet to be worked out, a Vatican statement said today.
The brief announcement seemed to indicate that, with September's signing in Washington of an agreement between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, the slow-moving process of establishing full relations had been accelerated, diplomats said.


Jackson Resigns as Connecticut's Coach
Connecticut Coach TOM JACKSON, whose contract expires at the end of this year, resigned yesterday after 11 seasons with the Huskies.
"Tom and I have had ongoing discussion and this is Tom's decision," said LEW PERKINS, UConn's director of athletics.
"He told me today he would be resigning and I have accepted his resignation."


Chemical Planning to Test An 'Intelligent' Debit Card
The Chemical Banking Corporation said yesterday that it planned to test "intelligent" debit cards with its employees next year and expected to offer the cards to customers by 1995 for use in its 900 automated teller machines in New York City and its suburbs within the state.
So-called smart cards, which look like conventional bank cards, contain microprocessor and memory chips imbedded within the plastic that can hold the equivalent of three typewritten pages of information.
The tiny computer allows users to transfer funds from a bank's mainframe computer onto the microchip in the card.
Merchants accepting the cards deduct from those funds, eliminating the need for credit to be verified electronically.


Public &amp; Private; Authentic Catholics
If it is possible to excommunicate an organization instead of an individual, the American Catholic bishops excommunicated Catholics for a Free Choice last week.
But good.
In an unusual, almost unparalleled attack, a committee of the National Conference of Catholic Bishops released a statement saying that the reproductive-rights group was not "an authentic Catholic organization." The statement added, "It attracts public attention by its denunciations of basic principles of Catholic morality and teaching -- denunciations given enhanced visibility by media outlets that portray CFFC as a reputable voice of Catholic dissent."


Wife in Spy Case Wasn't Accomplice
To the Editor:
"Clinton Is Asked by Rabin to Cut Spy's Jail Term" (front page, Nov. 11) once again falsely characterizes Anne Pollard, my daughter, as an "accomplice" to Jonathan Pollard's spying for Israel.


Excerpts From Appeals Panel Ruling In Demjanjuk's Case Against the U.S.
Following are excerpts from today's opinion by the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, in Cincinnati, in the case of in Demjanjuk v.
Petrovsky.
The opinion was written by Senior Judge Pierce Lively, who was joined by Chief Judge Gilbert S. Merritt and Damon J. Keith.
Reference to the report of the special master is to an earlier review of the case by Judge Thomas A. Wiseman Jr. of Federal District Court in Nashville.
The question before the court is whether attorneys in the Office of Special Investigations (O.S.I.), a unit within the Criminal Division of the Department of Justice, engaged in prosecutorial misconduct by failing to disclose to the courts and to the petitioner exculpatory information in their possession during litigation culminating in extradition proceedings, which led to the petitioner's forced departure from the United States and trial on capital charges in the State of Israel.
. . .


Flood Fund Aids Working-Class Homeowners; Putting Things Right
To the Editor:
While I agree in part with Peter Lavigne in "Subsidizing Coastal Mansions" (Op-Ed, Nov. 5), that there should be responsible construction along this country's coastlines, I also believe that he mounts his attack unfairly by using the all-too-common practice of rich-bashing.
The policies Mr.
Lavigne advocates will have the effect of becoming self-fulfilling prophesies as only the very rich will be able to reside along the coasts.


From Old Speak-Easy To Modern Tearoom
HERE'S a cafe for this decade's sensitive sensibility: tea will be the beverage of choice, no smoking will be allowed, the women's and the men's restrooms will have diaper-changing tables, and braille menus will be available.
At T (yes, that's its name) in SoHo, tea sippers will be able to choose from among 140 teas and hundreds of teapots (all on sale) while browsing through an on-site retail shop.


Philip Carlson; Executive, 34
Philip Carlson, a New York advertising executive, died yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 34.
The cause was complications from AIDS, his family said.


In Defeat, Courier Turns a Page
The open book in Jim Courier's lap was "Maybe the Moon" by Armistead Maupin.
The open question was why was Courier reading in the middle of a tennis match?
"Just felt like doing it," said Courier, who thumbed his way through Maupin's novel on changeovers during tonight's match against Andrei Medvedev in the ATP Tour World Championship, the season-ending, eight-man round-robin tournament.
"It is an interesting book."


Olajuwon's Fanciful Vision Is No Longer Merely a Texas-Size Dream
Hakeem Olajuwon, most valuable player.
That's our hunch, not Hakeem's dream.
"I'm not fighting for exposure," he claimed Tuesday night after his Houston Rockets beat the Nets, 100-94, at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
"That's insecurity, immaturity. Exposure is good when it comes the right way. I just do my job for the people who appreciate the game."


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: Reaction; After Vote, Labor Is Bitter But Big Business Is Elated
The House approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement drew a bitter reaction tonight from the labor unions that as recently as last weekend had seen victory within their grasp, and elation from the agreement's supporters in business and academia.
Members filed out of the House of Representatives angry or relieved depending on where they stood.
Representative Cleo Fields, Democrat of Louisiana, seethed as he left the chamber a few minutes after he voted against the pact.
"I hope the same folks who voted here and talked about job retraining will come back and vote for job retraining for the people dislocated by this agreement," he said, echoing the criticism of labor unions that believe the pact will cost hundreds of thousands of jobs.


A Grand Opening for the 'Grand Louvre'
The grandest of all the Grands Travaux, the gigantic new building projects of Paris, will be inaugurated on Thursday with the dedication of a vastly expanded version of the most famous art museum in the world, the Louvre.
At noon, Francois Mitterrand, whose dream this has been since he became President of France in 1981, is to cut a ribbon signaling the opening of the Grand Louvre.
At long last, on the 200th anniversary of the Louvre Museum, all of this vast palace will be devoted to museum purposes.
Underground Mall
What will be inaugurated on Thursday is essentially an entire new wing for the museum, along with a fancy underground shopping mall and garage.
The Richelieu wing will house the museum's imposing northern European and French paintings collections, decorative arts and the salons of Napoleon III, French sculpture and oriental antiquities, including a rich collection of Islamic art previously spread about Paris or hidden away in storage.
In conjunction with the underground entrance hall unveiled in 1989, the Richelieu wing will for the first time permit the Louvre's unrivaled collections to be organized in a systematic manner, logical both for the casual visitor and the serious student.


QVC Says It Can Get Bank Financing
Responding to criticism that its offer for Paramount Communications was not as financially solid as that of Viacom Inc., the rival bidder, executives close to QVC Network Inc. said yesterday that it could get the necessary bank commitments any time it needed.
QVC has taken its case to acquire Paramount to Delaware Chancery Court, where arguments began Tuesday, contendingthat it was not competing on a level playing field because the giant entertainment company had put up barriers to a fair bidding war in order to favor a deal with its handpicked partner, Viacom.


Sports of The Times; Palermo's Toughest Call
FOR an umpire, tough calls are what life is all about.
On July 4, 1983, Dave Righetti was walking to the mound for the top of the ninth inning when plate umpire Steve Palermo suddenly noticed all the Red Sox zeros on the Yankee Stadium scoreboard.
"He's got a no-hitter going," Palermo said to catcher Butch Wynegar.
"Why didn't you tell me?"


Child's Play, Or Nightmare On the Field?
JUST as children are putting away their shin guards and soccer socks, it's time to lace up the basketball shoes and hockey skates.
American children are being herded into teams, dressed in fancy uniforms and gently prodded onto playing fields at an increasingly rapid pace.
But despite their initial enthusiasm, many children end up hating the sports they used to love.
And it's often because their coaches and parents turn their children's playing fields into battlefields.


Charles Brooks; Manufacturer, 82
Charles Brooks, a manufacturer of parts for the auto industry, died on Monday in his Manhattan apartment.
He was 82.
The cause was a heart attack, said Rabbi Arthur Schneier, senior rabbi of the Park East Synagogue, where Mr.
Brooks was a trustee.


F.C.C. Begins Investigation Of Cable Operators' Pricing
The Federal Communications Commission began an informal investigation today into the price-setting practices of 16 cable television companies, including the nation's biggest cable operator, Tele-Communications Inc. of Englewood, Colo.
In letters of inquiry mailed out today, the commission said it had received complaints that the companies had violated new rate regulations adopted in April.
Some of the practices under investigation, the F.C.C. said, include shuffling services to different packages or raising prices for things like installation and television set-top converter boxes.


AT HOME WITH: Bernadine Dohrn; Same Passion, New Tactics
IT'S tempting to seize upon the seeming contradictions in Bernadine Dohrn's life, to look at snapshots frozen in time, frozen in place.
Here she is in 1969, a leader of the Weathermen who set off four "Days of Rage" in Chicago, smashing downtown store windows to strike at capitalist oppressors.
Flash to the pearls-and-pin-stripe-suited legal advocate for children and families in 1993, the concerned mother fixing stewed cherries and instant noodles for a teen-age son with a scratchy throat.
Yet, talking with her in her Hyde Park living room, it didn't take long to discover that these images are caricatures, ones that disguise her long and complex journey but also force her to adopt a defensive wariness.


INSIDE
Law Inspired by Watergate Heads for Re-enactment
Senate Republicans abandoned efforts to block a bill reauthorizing independent prosecutors to investigate Administration officials, paving the way for passage.
A Republican said, "Not only must justice be done, but it must appear to be done." Page A16.


Russia Opens Up Market, but Few Have the Money
As light snow began to fall from a frozen gray sky on Tishinsky Square, Nadezhda S. Timoshenko pulled her woolen scarf tight and spread out three things on the ground before her: a glass lampshade, a crystal goblet and the lid of a plain porcelain sugar bowl.
"I have to sell my things to survive," she said.
Her monthly retirement pension is the equivalent of $25, not enough to live on with prices soaring.


North Korea Hears Nuclear Sabers Rattle
To the Editor:
"North Korea and the Bomb," your Nov. 8 Op-Ed "Dialogue" about the nuclear potential of North Korea, hides how the Koreans may view the risk of a nuclear attack.


METRO DIGEST
ACCORD ON HEALTH-INSURANCE BILL Three months after Gov.
Cuomo vetoed a virtually identical bill, negotiators for the Legislature and the Governor said they had agreed on legislation that would require most health insurance policies to cover immunizations and preventive checkups for young people through age 19.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  IN BLAST TRIAL, VISITS ARE RECALLED A former roommate of Mohammed A. Salameh, the lead defendant in the World Trade Center trial, said in court that two other men accused of helping to build and place a bomb in the complex visited Mr.
Salameh in Jersey City just before the explosion.
B3.


Spencer Henderson 3d, Dancer, Is Dead at 44
Spencer Henderson 3d, a dancer and choreographer, died on Sunday at his family's home in Fort Worth.
He was 44.
The cause was AIDS, said Harold Fairbanks, a friend.


'Jurassic Park' Work Is Honored by Group
Marketing and merchandising campaigns for the summer blockbuster film "Jurassic Park" took top honors at the fifth annual Entertainment Marketing Conference in Los Angeles, winning the EPM Entertainment Marketer of the Year award.
The award, sponsored by EPM Communications in Brooklyn in conjunction with Entertainment Weekly in New York, went to Sid Kaufman, president at MCA/Universal Merchandising in Los Angeles, and Brad Globe, vice president of marketing at the Steven Spielberg company Amblin Entertainment in Los Angeles.


Long Live the Office
To The Home Section:
Let's call the "virtual office" what it is: more depersonalizing of the workplace  [ "The Virtual Office Becomes Reality," Oct. 28 ] .
Companies can save money on less square footage to lease and fewer pieces of equipment, and they can make it easier to lay off (i.e., fire) employees who aren't seen much and who haven't had a chance to develop relationshipsat the place of business.
On the downside -- for companies -- this sort of hotel/PC rental arrangement fosters no loyalty, since there is no perceived "company" in the first place -- just a paycheck and a day's job assignment.


U.S. Bishops Urge Men to Share in Work at Home
The nation's Roman Catholic bishops today unanimously voted to urge husbands and wives to treat one another as equals and men to share fully in child rearing and household duties.
The bishops also voted to ask the Vatican to make it easier to dismiss priests who sexually molest minors and passed a lengthy document on the moral responsibilities of the United States in the post-cold-war world.


Last School in Asbestos Cleanup Is to Reopen Today in Brooklyn
The last New York City school closed for asbestos cleanup is to reopen today, school officials said, marking the beginning of the end of a crisis that at one point shut down 115 schools and disrupted hundreds more and has so far cost $119 million.
At the last school to reopen, Public School 164 in Borough Park, Brooklyn, teachers were dusting desks and hanging bulletin boards yesterday, preparing for classes today.
But in a reminder of the disruptions that students across the city have endured throughout the asbestos cleanup, the school's 400 children stood through a chilly drizzle, waiting for buses to ferry them one final day to the alternate schools they have attended since September.


Not So Fast, Says Eagles Owner: Don't Mark Team Out of Playoffs
The Philadelphia Eagles' owner, Norman Braman, doesn't say or do things without thinking them through carefully.
The way he sees it, his 4-5 Eagles, who are probably the most injury-ridden team in professional football, can make the playoffs.
There is no question in his mind.
"I have a good feeling about this team," said Braman.
"I am not ready to write this team off yet for this year. I'm confident we'll make a playoff run, and I haven't been smoking anything funny recently, either."


Transition Time: Unease at Agencies; After Giuliani's Election, Careers Hang in the Balance
Lucy Mueller is hoping she will be able to resurrect her career during Rudolph W. Giuliani's administration.
After Mayor David N. Dinkins took office four years ago, Ms.
Mueller, 54, was demoted from a management position to a low-level Civil Service job in the city's social-service agency.
She took a $23,000 cut in pay.
She sent her resume to Mr.
Giuliani before the election.
"I have my fingers crossed," she said recently.


Events: Good Design, Indoors or Out
Decorative Pursuits  Seventh Regiment Armory, 643 Park Avenue (66th Street); (212) 472-1180.
"Modernism: A Century of Style and Design," a show and sale featuring furniture, jewelry, decorative objects, textiles, prints, lamps and clocks in styles including Arts and Crafts, Prairie School, Art Moderne, Art Deco, Bauhaus and Gothic Revival, runs today through Sunday.
Hours: today, 11 A.M. to 9 P.M.; tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 9 P.M.; Saturday, 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.; Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission is $10; children under 16, no charge.


Comfort for Some Might Be Uncomfortable for Others


A Clinton Call for Giuliani
More than two weeks after Election Day, President Clinton called Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday to congratulate him on his victory and to invite him to Washington for a meeting between Thanksgiving and Christmas.
Mr.
Clinton, who came to New York City twice to campaign for Mr.
Giuliani's Democratic opponent, Mayor David N. Dinkins, spoke with the Republican-Liberal Mayor-elect for a few minutes after calling yesterday evening, said Cristyne Lategano, a spokeswoman for Mr.
Giuliani's transition team.


Corrections
A brief report in Business Day yesterday about Home Depot Inc.'s third-quarter earnings misstated the company's expansion plans for the Chicago area.
By 1997, Home Depot expects to have 25 stores in that area, not 2.


Excerpts From New Charter On Rights of South Africans
Following are excerpts from the new draft of South Africa's Constitution, which is to serve as the country's supreme law until an elected assembly can write a permanent version, spelling out "fundamental rights" of the citizens:
Every person shall have the right to life.


Judges Assail U.S. Handling Of Demjanjuk
A Federal appeals panel today excoriated the Justice Department's Nazi-hunting unit, saying it had fraudulently withheld evidence that would have helped John Demjanjuk defend himself against charges that he was one of the most barbaric figures of the Holocaust.
The unanimous opinion by a three-judge panel in Cincinnati said prosecutors had withheld evidence in part to curry favor with Jewish organizations, which had put pressure on them to prove that Mr.
Demjanjuk was the notorious "Ivan the Terrible" at the Treblinka death camp in Poland.
And it contrasted the Government's behavior with that of the Israeli authorities, who the court said acted honorably under even greater domestic pressure.


Corrections
Articles on Saturday and Tuesday about an official in Deer Park, N.Y., who used a racial epithet to deride H. Carl McCall, the State Comptroller, misstated the history of blacks in statewide office.
Mr.
McCall is the first black official in a statewide elective post; Basil Paterson held the appointive office of Secretary of State.


Philip A. Fleger, 90; Led Pittsburgh Utility
Philip A. Fleger, former president and board chairman of the Duquesne Light Company of Pittsburgh, died on Monday at the Bethlen Home in Ligonier, Pa.
He was 90 and had lived in Ligonier since retiring in 1968.
The cause was pneumonia after a lengthy illness, his family said.


Review/Theater: A Grand Night for Singing; New Image for Rodgers And Hammerstein: Hip
Among the songwriters who created standards for the American musical theater, the team of Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein 2d outdid even Irving Berlin in writing songs that assumed the status of secular hymns.
With their semioperatic melodies and chiseled-in-stone lyrics that give advice, preach optimism and impart adult wisdom, songs like "Some Enchanted Evening," "Oh What a Beautiful Mornin' " and "You'll Never Walk Alone" have become part of the bedrock of American middle-class culture.
But their power-of-positive-thinking sentiments have also made them synonymous in some people's minds with a drippy "Father Knows Best" squareness.
"A Grand Night for Singing," the new revue of Rodgers and Hammerstein songs at the Roundabout Theater, is a studious attempt to revise that goody-goody image by minimizing it.
Conspicuously absent are inspirational warhorses like "The Sound of Music," "Climb Ev'ry Mountain" and "You'll Never Walk Alone." Missing too are the declamatory love ballads "People Will Say We're In Love," "No Other Love" and "Younger Than Springtime." Lesson songs like "My Favorite Things," "Getting to Know You" and "I Whistle a Happy Tune" are excluded.
And when "Some Enchanted Evening," that most formal of Rodgers and Hammerstein ballads, rings down the first act, it is performed in a light, breezy arrangement for five intertwining voices.


Fed Proposes a Compromise On Access to Its Transcripts
Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, offered a compromise today to Henry B. Gonzalez, chairman of the House Banking committee, saying the central bank would grant public access to detailed transcripts of meetings it held between 1976 and 1988.
Mr.
Gonzalez, a Texas Democrat, had sought transcripts through 1990.
He said in a news release tonight that he was disappointed with the Fed's decision and that the Fed's members were "greatly mistaken" if they thought the Banking Committee would be satisfied with the release of only "certain transcripts."


The Molding Is the Message
WHO would think that crown molding could say so much?
On the Upper East Side, at least, it is being installed in expensive apartments at a brisk pace.
Contractors involved in renovations in the area said that having crown molding (the sample above is from a contractor-supply catalogue) is about looking as if your money had been around since the 1880's, even if it came from last week's paycheck.
And the simpler the style, the better.
The best, many contractors say, is custom-ordered from Blumer &amp; Stanton in West Palm Beach, Fla. (Elaborate crown molding can be espied in Mrs. Manson Mingott's mansion in the movie "The Age of Innocence.")


PBS Executives Say Public TV Must Be Rethought
Public television must make major changes in the next decade to respond to the expected expansion and reconfiguration of the television industry, public television executives said yesterday.
"The world of how people use telecommunications is changing rapidly," said Robert Ottenhoff, the acting president of the Public Broadcasting Service.
"It's not reasonable for public broadcasters to keep doing things the same way."


Q.&amp; A.
Moving On
Q.
We will be moving to a new home in March, and I have some peonies and irises I want to take.
Should I dig them now and hold them, or dig them when we move? -- Robert Sansosti, Jackson Heights, Queens.


Bridge
Four thousand tournament players headed for the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals in Seattle beginning tomorrow face two sets of problems.
Some will have room difficulties, because of the demands of the Asia-Pacific Conference and a major football game, and some will have transportation problems if the threat of a strike by United Airlines and American Airlines becomes a reality.
Perhaps those with no room will benefit from those with no transport.
Among those fearing a strike are Dan and Natalie Hertz of White Plains, one of the top-ranked senior pairs in the country.
At the Summer Nationals in Washington in July they won the Senior Knockout Teams, teamed with Charles and Jeanne Stenger of Bethesda, Md., and Gail Rust of Daytona Beach, Fla.
They won the final by exactly 1 imp after trailing at the midpoint by 28, and were aided by the diagramed deal.


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: Perot; Perot Looks at Loss on Pact and Says the Battle Has Just Begun
Ross Perot said tonight that even though he was on the losing side in the trade agreement struggle and was also slumping in the polls, he was nevertheless just beginning to fight.
Starting Thursday morning, he announced, his political organization, United We Stand America, will step up its efforts to recruit new members nationwide, with the central goal of influencing the 1994 Congressional and 1996 Presidential elections.


Dinkins Rejects Giuliani Plea To Avoid Major Agreements
Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani urged David N. Dinkins yesterday not to complete major agreements before he leaves office, but the Mayor said he would push to close several deals, including the expansion of the tennis center in Queens where the United States Open is held.
In recent days, Mr.
Giuliani has repeatedly warned against making agreements with unions, developers or others that would tie the hands of the new administration.
His pointed remarks and the Mayor's stubborn response were a clear sign that the decorum and friendliness that initially marked the transition were wearing thin.


Review/Dance; Garth Fagan Makes Poetry of Poetry
Like good poetry, Garth Fagan's new dance work, "Draft of Shadows," has an ineffable rightness about it.
His inspiration, incidentally, comes from "On the Pulse of Morning," the poem that Maya Angelou wrote and read at President Clinton's Inauguration last winter.
The premiere opened a two-week season by the Garth Fagan Dance troupe at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea) on Tuesday night and has a program note that quotes a fragment from the poem: ". . . arriving on a nightmare/praying for a dream."


Dow Closes 6.42 Lower; Volume Is Higher


Soccer: Ins and Outs of '94 World Cup: Italy (In), England (Out); Relieved Italy Keeps Cup Torch Burning
MILAN, Italy, Nov. 17
For months and months, the Statue of Liberty has been depicted in Italy as the symbol of the 1994 World Cup.
The lamp on the statue is now blazing bright for Italy.
The hopes of both nations were gratified this tense evening as Italy eked out a 1-0 victory over Portugal that guaranteed passage to the world's most popular tournament.
Italy needed only a tie to qualify, but had nothing more than that until Dino Baggio plopped in a shot in front of the goal in the 83d minute.
Flags were waved and flares were set off -- and not only by Italians.


Losers, Gripers and Blamers: These Are the '93 (0-9) Bengals
Since Bruce Coslet left Cincinnati in 1990, the transformation of the Bengals has been so swift and thorough that he only knows six players on the team.
The problem for Cincinnati is that it has gone from bad to worse, compiling a 17-40 record.
Bengals center Bruce Kozerski, a 10-year veteran and one of four players left from the 1989 Super Bowl team, can't even recall the good times.


Terreri Leaves Sabres With No Rebounds and No Goals
The aim for the Devils is to be efficient and reliable, to dedicate themselves to defense and to surrender ego.
It isn't an equation for electricity, but it isn't a bad formula for success.
The Devils won again tonight, their 4-0 shutout of the Buffalo Sabres at Byrne Meadowlands Arena a model of focus and control.


Executive Changes
EDO CORP., College Point, Queens, named Gerald Albert, its chief executive, to succeed William Ryan as chairman.
The company also appointed Frank Fariello, 58, to succeed Mr.
Albert as president and chief operating officer.


Late Goal Puts Ireland in Finals
With British soldiers patrolling outside Windsor Park and a tense crowd watching inside, the Irish Republic qualified for the World Cup finals tonight by scoring in the last 12 minutes for a 1-1 tie against Northern Ireland.
But not before the Republic's desperate players had been knocked to the seats of their bright green gaskins by a Northern Ireland goal five minutes earlier that had threatened to knock the Republic out of the finals.
As they came off the field, neither the players nor the 10,000 fans and 2,000 security police were sure whether the Republic's tie was good enough to qualify for the World Cup.


Nonproliferation Nonsense
The Clinton Administration's new nonproliferation policy reopens the Pandora's box of proliferation around the world at a time when it is slowly being closed.
The policy, unveiled in September, states that the U.S. will "not oppose" programs by Japan and Western Europe to keep producing plutonium, a weapons-grade material, for civilian use, while it will seek to discourage such activity in "regions of instability and high prospective risk."


House Starts Surged 2.7% Last Month
Responding to a revived housing market, builders broke ground on new homes in October at the fastest rate in more than three and a half years, causing analysts to raise projections for the economy at large.
The 2.7 percent rise in starts was the latest in what has become an almost unbroken streak of upbeat economic reports during the last two months, and it showed that housing, which showed little sign of life during the first half of the year despite tumbling interest rates, had resumed its traditional role as an economic pacesetter.
New Homeowners
"Finally, we're getting pretty happy with these numbers," David Lereah, chief economist for the Mortgage Bankers Association, said.
He and others said that many apartment dwellers, inspired by the most favorable combination of financing costs and home prices in decades, had decided to become homeowners.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Aimee  Bottom Line
British Invasion rock didn't get too personal.
The early Beatles and their contemporaries knocked out songs of general teen-age longing and exuberance; individual confessions and reflections came later.
Aimee Mann, who performed on Monday night at the Bottom Line, writes British Invasion-style tunes with individual details, setting tales of heartbreak and and resentment in well-turned tunes.


How Sexual Stereotypes Enter the Workplace
To the Editor:
The investigation into Senator Bob Packwood's conduct promises to keep sexual harassment in the workplace in the public eye.
But other gender-related issues have a debilitating impact on the ability of American business to compete in the global environment.


U.S. PLANS POLICY ON PEACEKEEPING
The Clinton Administration has told some allies it hopes to approve new guidelines before the end of the year setting out the conditions by which the United States will take part in new United Nations military peacekeeping operations, American and allied officials said today.
The Administration says the new guidelines, which are still being discussed with Congressional leaders, lay down a two-tiered approach to peacekeeping missions.
The first defines America's terms for voting in the Security Council for new military operations that the United States would help finance but not take part in.
The second sets out other conditions if American troops take part.


Mansell Is Named Driver of the Year
NIGEL MANSELL, who took United States racing by storm by winning five races and the Indy-Car PPG Cup championship one year after taking the Formula One crown, is the winner of the 1993 Driver of the Year award.


Britain Warns of Flight Bans If U.S. Retains Equity Limit
In anticipation of the next round of negotiations with the United States over aviation policy, the British Government warned yesterday that it might ban some flights by American carriers into Heathrow Airport.
The move would occur if the United States did not change its decision of last week to limit British Airways' right to coordinate and market some flights with USAir, in which British Airways holds a 25 percent stake.


Boeing Gets Order for 63 737-X Jets
The Boeing Company said today that it had received an order from Southwest Airlines for 63 of its 737-X family of jetliners, the next generation of its best-selling Boeing 737.
The order, for delivery in 1997 through 2001, means the Seattle-based Boeing can now proceed with the introduction of the new aircraft.
No price has been established for the 737-X, but the average $40 million price of current 737's would make the Southwest order worth about $2.5 billion.
While the order will not have any near-term impact on earnings, it indicates that Boeing will remain competitive with Airbus Industrie in the crucial market for smaller jetliners, analysts said.


MCI Joins Wireless Telephone Venture
The MCI Communications Corporation said today that it had joined four wireless communications suppliers and a leading research laboratory in the development of what are known as "personal communications services" using new kinds of wireless phone devices.
The companies said they plan to establish specifications for systems in the United States that would be compatible with the so-called global system for mobile communications platform.
This wireless communications standard, or G.S.M., was developed in Europe and is expected to be in use by more than 60 communications carriers around the world.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Antonio Hart  Sweet Basil
Song forms can barely contain a band when it's really improvising.
At Sweet Basil on Monday night, the young saxophonist Antonio Hart led a bruising group that seemed on the verge of tossing out form entirely.
The drummer, Nasheet Waits, broke out of swinging 4/4 time, sculpturing new, brazen rhythmic patterns, and forcing the other musicians to fall in line, or fight back.
The main soloists, Darren Barrett on trumpet and Mr.
Hart, improvised with the chords of a tune for a minute, then supercharged the harmony by adding dissonant and ambiguous lines that darkened the atmosphere of the performance.
And the band, moving from roiling, loud interplay to eddies of tranquillity, showed the beginnings of a group sound.


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: The Partner's Reaction Mexico Seems Jubilant but the Government in Canada Has Many Questions; In Ontario, a Focus on Jobs
Canada officially welcomed the vote tonight in favor of the North American Free Trade Agreement but officials cautioned that Canada still needed to clear the air of trade threats from the United States.
Roy MacLaren, Minister of International Trade, summed up the attitude of the new Liberal Government, saying, "I welcome the affirmation in the U.S. House of Representatives of an outward-looking attitude and rejection of protectionist tendencies."


Saying It With Flowers That You Haven't Seen
OUR unscientific survey began when a friend at the office discovered that the extravagant $100 bouquet she had ordered for a friend as a thank-you for an exceptionally large favor turned out to be a half-dozen droopy flowers stuck in a vase with a few leaves.
Ordering flowers by telephone is a gamble; unless you make it a point to drop in on the object of your thoughtfulness, you usually never see what is delivered to the door.
Few friends or associates will call you to say, "Thanks for thinking of me with such an ugly arrangement."


Executive Is Suing Prudential
A senior executive with the Prudential Insurance Company of America has filed court papers accusing the company of systematically defrauding institutional investors in one of the real estate funds it manages.
The executive, Mark Jorgensen, who in 1992 began managing three Prudential real estate funds, contends in a lawsuit that company executives improperly inflated values of certain properties over a period of years in the Prudential Property Investment Separate Account, or Prisa.


Elmwood Park's Loss
On Tuesday, Elmwood Park High School's athletic director received mail from the New Jersey State Interscholastic Athletic Association officially inviting his school's 6-2 football team to the Section 1, Group 2 playoffs that begin on Saturday.
Nearly 24 hours later that invitation was rescinded because Paterson Catholic, a team that Elmwood Park defeated, had played against it with an ineligible player, costing the Crusaders precious power points that dropped them out of the playoffs.


After the Layoffs, Checks in the Mail
More than a year after the last red Chevrolet Camaro rolled off the assembly line at the General Motors plant northwest of downtown, about 1,200 workers laid off from the plant spend their days sleeping late, watching soap operas, taking classes, planting gardens, working out at the gym and, in one instance, learning to surf.
Yet every week they continue to receive paychecks from G.M.
Under an unusual provision of the labor agreement between the company and the United Automobile Workers union, the plant's workers will continue to get those checks for up to three more years unless they agree to take a temporary job, move to another G.M. plant hundreds of miles away or opt to retire.


Israel Agrees to Limit Troops in Gaza, P.L.O. Says
Israeli and P.L.O. negotiators appear to have overcome some points of contention in their drive to meet a Dec. 13 deadline for carrying out limited Palestinian self-rule in Jericho and the Gaza Strip, Palestinian officials said today.
Israel has agreed to limit its troop presence to Jewish settlements, the officials said, an apparent concession to long-standing Palestinian demands.


More in Marathon Went to Hospitals
The number of runners who sought hospital treatment after the sweltering New York City Marathon on Sunday was significantly higher than the 45 transported by the city's Emergency Medical Service, a spot check of hospitals along the 26.2-mile route showed yesterday.
As many as 150 runners may have been treated in hospital emergency rooms, most for comparatively minor muscle cramps, dehydration and nausea, but in at least a few cases for far more serious ailments.


Calendar: Fairs for Holiday Gifts
Christmas Fair  Park Avenue Methodist Church, 106 East 86th Street; (212) 289-6997.
A sale of jewelry, clothing, books, toys, collectibles, handmade ornaments and plants will be held on Saturday, from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Proceeds will benefit several New York City charities.
No charge.
An early buying session will take place from 9 to 10 A.M.; admission is $5.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Free Trade Pact
The House approved the North American Free Trade Agreement, which will gradually remove nearly all trade barriers among the United States, Mexico and Canada.  [ Page A1. ]  The passage gave President Clinton one of his biggest triumphs.  [ A1. ]
The pact is likely to produce net benefits for the economies of New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.  [ A22. ]


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LAURENCE STEINBERG was so excited when his driving learner's permit arrived in the mail that he insisted his mother immediately let him get behind the wheel of the family car.
She reluctantly agreed, and after climbing into the passenger seat began instructing him on what to do.
"I said, 'Mom, I know how to drive!' -- and immediately floored the accelerator with the car in reverse, backing onto a busy street," said Dr.
Steinberg, who is now a professor of psychology specializing in adolescent development and behavior at Temple University in Philadelphia.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Advanta Corp. is selling $150 million of 5.125 percent notes due 1996 at a price of 99.897 to yield 5.162 percent through underwriters led by CS First Boston.
The noncallable notes are rated Baa-3 by Moody's Investors Service and BBB- by Standard &amp; Poor's. *
Black &amp; Decker Corp., Towson, Md., is selling $250 million of notes due 2000 priced 100 to yield 6.625 percent through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The nonredeemable seven-year issues are rated Ba-1 by Moody's and BBB- by S.&amp; P. and Duff &amp; Phelps.


Coddling China, Constructively
As a candidate, Bill Clinton condemned George Bush's muted requests to China to clean up its act on human rights, arms proliferation and trade as "coddling" dictators in Beijing.
After 10 months as President Mr.
Clinton, who meets tomorrow with China's President, Jiang Zemin, seems to have embraced much of the Bush approach.
That's not necessarily bad.
The U.S. has a compelling interest in a stable, non-hostile and reform-oriented China.
As Beijing emerges from the Deng Xiaoping era, U.S. bullying is unlikely to produce any constructive policy changes.


Behind Their Self-Deliverance From Suffering
To the Editor:
The study by Peter M. Marzuk, with the New York City Medical Examiner's office, on the number of suicides by plastic bag following publication of my book (news article, Nov. 6), while well intentioned, has little value statistically.


A hungry young agency in Boston decides not to give up on a rejected campaign.
WHEN the State of Massachusetts invited advertising agencies in June to bid on the right to promote an educational campaign against smoking, a two-month-old agency in Boston formed by Bill Heater and Don Easdon joined the competition.
They regarded the $15 million account as an ideal vehicle to gain instant visibility and credibility.
While their instincts might have been right, their presentation wasn't.
The state awarded the account to another Boston agency, Houston Effler.
But in an effort to prove they could still win for losing, Mr.
Heater and Mr.
Easdon developed their concepts anyway, repackaging the themes they would have used for Massachusetts into 30-second anti-smoking commercials that could be adapted to any sponsor.


Mets Sign Dascenzo and Cangelosi
The Mets signed a pair of switch-hitting outfielders with major league experience to minor league contracts yesterday and invited both players, DOUG DASCENZO and JOHN CANGELOSI, to spring training as nonroster members.
Dascenzo, 29 years old, batted .199 with the Texas Rangers in 76 games last season and .248 in 38 games with Class AAA Oklahoma City.
A good-fielding outfielder, Dascenzo played with the Chicago Cubs from 1988 to 1992, with a .240 average.


U.S., in Stern Terms, Warns North Koreans on A-Arms
Secretary of State Warren Christopher warned North Korea today to open its nuclear installations to international inspection or face punishment, probably in the form of economic sanctions.
Mr.
Christopher made his remarks before meeting with Chinese officials to enlist their aid to get North Korea to comply with the treaty to halt the spread of nuclear weapons.


Pop and Jazz in Review
George Thorogood  Beacon Theater
George Thorogood's show at the Beacon Theater on Monday night refuted the idea of popular music as fashion.
There's a good chance that Mr.
Thorogood and his band, the Destroyers, which Mr.
Thorogood said had been playing for "1,500 years," will be performing the same repertory to the same packed audience 20 years from now.
And if it can, the audience will stand and cheer for the whole show.


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: News Analysis; A High-Stakes Gamble That Paid Off
In July, Speaker Thomas S. Foley of Washington confided to a diplomat that he thought the North American Free Trade Agreement was dead and that there was nothing he or President Clinton "or anyone on the planet" could do to revive it.
In August, a top Clinton aide said, the private judgment of most senior members of the White House staff was that the President should abandon the trade accord, doing the best he could "to cover his tracks."


Demery Says He Didn't Kill James Jordan
One of the two men charged with killing MICHAEL JORDAN's father, JAMES JORDAN, said he helped throw the body in a South Carolina creek, but did not participate in the slaying.
In the first interview he has given since his Aug. 15 arrest, LARRY DEMERY told a North Carolina newspaper, The High Point Enterprise, that he is guilty of being an accessory to James Jordan's July 23 death, but should not face the death penalty for his role in the crime.


Nynex Plans Cable System In Japan
The Nynex Corporation is planning to enter the relatively undeveloped cable television business in Japan with the Tomen Corporation as its partner, a Tomen official said today.
Nynex and Tomen have filed a proposal with Japan's telecommunications ministry to build an advanced cable system that would offer interactive programming and telephone service in addition to the usual television programs.


A Gift Pays Tribute to a Father's Artistic Legacy
Until he designed his second house in 1966, Charles Gwathmey, the architect, was known, if at all, as the son of Robert Gwathmey, a New York artist who specialized in socially conscious paintings of sharecroppers and migrant laborers.
As it happened, the house, in Amagansett, L.I., was commissioned by his parents, and it led to a series of celebrated projects on eastern Long Island that established Mr.
Gwathmey as one of the brightest stars in American architecture.
"After the Amagansett house, my father became known as Charles Gwathmey's father,' said the architect in an interview at his offices on the West Side of Manhattan. "That was an interesting transition that we both laughed about."


Beijing May Seek a U.S. Trade Deal
President Jiang Zemin of China left for the United States today, having begun what Chinese and Western officials say is the boldest set of economic changes since China's opening to market forces began 15 years ago.
And some Chinese officials say they believe that Mr.
Jiang, emerging from a highly successful meeting of the Communist Party Central Committee last weekend, may try to capitalize on his political momentum by asking the United States to separate China's trade status from its human rights record.
He will meet with President Clinton in Seattle on Friday at a summit meeting of Pacific rim countries.


Fires of the Rich and Unrich
To The Home Section:
It wasn't only the rich and famous who were burned out in Malibu, Calif., in the recent wildfires  [ "Confronting Fires of the Heart and Mind," Nov. 11 ] .
Malibu is full of homes constructed, often over a period of years, often by hand, by sculptors, artists, engineers, teachers, civil servants, writers and retirees.
Not everyone could afford insurance, and many have no way to rebuild except with gumption, hard work and time.
And they are starting to rebuild already with amazing energy and resilience.


The Ordeal of Mr. Halperin
Few Clinton Administration nominees have more eminent character witnesses than Morton Halperin.
They include four former Secretaries of Defense, two former Directors of Central Intelligence and two former Secretaries of State.
Yet even Mr.
Halperin's patriotism has been assailed in a campaign, reeking of innuendo, that has put in doubt his confirmation to the new post of Assistant Secretary of Defense for Democracy and Peacekeeping.
Finally, Mr.
Halperin will have a chance tomorrow to defend himself in hearings of the Senate Armed Services Committee.
This begins to mitigate the enforced silence of a public interest advocate who has worked to reconcile claims of liberty and security.
His record is not obscure; he has served Republican and Democratic Administrations in security posts; he has written scores of articles and books, and served for eight years as Washington director of the American Civil Liberties Union.


Proulx and Vidal Win American Book Awards
E.
Annie Proulx's novel about a down-on-his-luck newspaper reporter in Newfoundland, "The Shipping News" (Charles Scribner's Sons), beat out four other finalists to win the National Book Award for fiction, publishing's version of an Oscar, at a gala dinner at the Plaza Hotel last night.
In nonfiction, Gore Vidal won the award for "United States: Essays 1952-1992" (Random House), his collection of essays published over the last four decades.


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: The New York Region; Businesses Say Most Jobs Now Exist In Industries Trade Accord Will Help
Though labor unions and many small manufacturers are braced for the worst, economists and business people generally predict that New York, New Jersey and Connecticut will benefit far more from the North American Free Trade Agreement than the region will be hurt by losing jobs to low-wage Mexican workers.
Seldom has a region of America undergone a more profound economic transformation than these three states.
Over a generation or so, they have moved from an economy fueled by factory production to one dominated by banking and finance, law and accounting, publishing and entertainment, telecommunications and advanced research in fields like pharmaceuticals and biotechnology.


Cortines Moves to Devise New Multicultural Curriculum
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines has asked his staff and an advisory board to devise a new curriculum that bolsters multicultural education throughout the school system to fight discrimination based on race, ethnic origin or sexual orientation.
"New York City is far behind other cities as it relates to multicultural education," Mr.
Cortines said last Thursday during a meeting with editors and reporters at The New York Times.
"We need to do something about that."


Theater in Review
Presented by Radio City Music Hall and Chemical Banking Corporation.
WITH: Michael Berglund, Joey Cee, Charles Edward Hall, Genevieve La Bean, Arte Phillips, the New Yorkers and the Rockettes.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about a meeting of the National Conference of Catholic Bishops in Washington referred incorrectly to the Vatican radio reports about an accusation of sexual abuse denied by Joseph Cardinal Bernardin of Chicago.
The Vatican radio quoted comments by an American archbishop denouncing a lawsuit against the Cardinal; it did not broadcast any commentary of its own.


You Had to Be There to See It: Islanders Win in a Romp
It's typical Islander luck.
Tonight's game with the Senators was one of few not televised back home all season.
It was also one of their best, an 8-1 pounding of the second-year team in Canada's capital city.
Pierre Turgeon scored three times and added one assist.


New York Opposes Green Point Bid
The Republic New York Corporation attempted to raise the stakes late yesterday in its battle to acquire the Green Point Savings Bank, but its latest offer immediately ran into sharp opposition from the New York State Banking Department.
Republic said it would pay Green Point's depositors a total of $250 million in special interest if it acquired the savings bank, up from the $100 million it had originally offered.
But Derrick D. Cephas, the state banking superintendent, said in a statement last night that the new offer was "illegal and improper and should be withdrawn immediately."


Boat People Say U.S. Mail Put Lives in Danger
More than three dozen Vietnamese boat people have asked the authorities to grant them refugee status, insisting that because of a mistake by the United States Postal Service, their lives are in danger if they return to Vietnam.
The case began two years ago, after the men, along with thousands of other boat people who came to Hong Kong seeking asylum, had been placed in a detention camp, awaiting decisions on whether they would be deported or granted refugee status and resettled.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BRITISH PETROLEUM CO., London, is in talks with Dalgety P.L.C. about the sale of BP Nutrition's European pet food business.


GENENTECH GROWTH HORMONE GETS F.D.A. APPROVAL
Genentech Inc. said yesterday that it had received approval from the Food and Drug Administration to market Nutropin, its new recombinant human growth hormone, for the treatment of growth failure in children because of chronic renal insufficiency before kidney transplantation.


Testimony on Meetings Of Explosion Defendants
A former roommate of Mohammed A. Salameh, the lead defendant in the World Trade Center trial, said in court yesterday that two other men accused by the Government of helping to build and place a bomb in the giant towers visited Mr.
Salameh in his apartment in Jersey City several times in the months just before the explosion.
The witness, Ashraf Moneeb, said that starting in September or October last year, he shared apartments on Virginia Avenue in Jersey City with Mr.
Salameh and a man he said he knew simply as Rashed.
Mr.
Salameh is accused of having helped to make the bomb and having rented the van that brought it to the trade center.


Cigarette Vendors Go to Court to Oppose Municipal Laws Banning Machines
Cigarette vending machines have long been considered as much a part of bars and restaurants as coat racks and pay phones.
And with New Jersey courts being asked to decide whether the machines may be banned, vending companies are poised to mount a town-by-town fight to keep them plugged in.
Ordinances prohibiting the machines have been passed in East Brunswick, Princeton, Cherry Hill and Montgomery Township, with others being drafted in Sayreville and Summit.
Proponents of the bans say the health of young people is at stake because it is easy for minors to use the devices illegally to obtain cigarettes.


Books of The Times; Thrills and Chills in Cybernetics' Dark Alleyways
Machine  By Rene Belletto  Translated by Lanie Goodman. 359 pages.
Grove Press. $21.
Virtual Light  By William Gibson 325 pages.
Bantam Books. $21.95.
Gimmicks.
The plots of both of these absorbing thrillers are driven by fascinating computer gimmicks.
In Rene Belletto's "Machine," Dr.
Marc Lacroix, a psychotherapist, invents what he calls a psycho-computer, which enables two people to exchange bodies.
Marc has a psychopathic patient, Michel Zyto, who may be a serial murderer of women.
To determine whether he is, Marc decides to "take a little stroll inside Michel Zyto's head" by putting himself and Zyto inside the machine and performing a partial exchange.


Accounts
*
Demaine, Vickers, Alexandria, Va., was awarded two accounts with combined billings estimated at $2 million: Telesec Temporary Services, Kensington, Md., previously at Abramson Ehrlich Maines Inc., Washington, and Heartland Chevrolet Dealers Association, La Crosse, Wis., previously at J. W. Messner Inc., Grand Rapids, Mich. *
Kaplan Educational Center, New York, to Frierson Mee &amp; Herman, New York, to handle advertising for its preparation programs for the Scholastic Assessment Tests.
Billings for the work, previously handled in-house, were not disclosed.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  NEW SOUTH AFRICAN CONSTITUTION  South Africa's main political antagonists concluded their grand bargain to end white dominion, endorsing a new constitution that attempts to balance majority rule with safeguards to reassure whites and other minorities.
A1


Jury Awards $6.3 Million In Fumes Suit
Two former Transit Authority workers have been awarded $6.3 million for injuries they said they received eight years ago as a result of exposure to toxic fumes from a solution they used to clean graffiti from subway cars.
A Manhattan Civil Court jury found for Paul Perrone, 38, who lives in the Albany area, and Richard Glassman, 42, of Queens.
Both men suffered permanent heart and lung injuries and emotional trauma, said their lawyer, Leslie D. Kelmachter.
They sued the Transit Authority and the company that manufactured the cleaning solution, Alfred Chemical Corporation of Brooklyn.


Home Depot
Shares of Home Depot rose yesterday after Merrill Lynch raised its recommendation to "intermediate" buy from "above average," based on rising sales.
Merrill expects earnings per share to grow 32 percent next year.
On Tuesday, Home Depot reported a 23 percent rise in third-quarter earnings -- below analysts' expectations -- and its stock fell more than 4 percent.


No Headline
"Whereas apartheid deprived millions of our people of their citizenship, we are restoring that citizenship." -- NELSON MANDELA.  [ A1:2. ]


Donna Karan Cancels Stock Offering
The Donna Karan Company, the high-flying designer apparel business, said yesterday that it had canceled plans to sell shares to the public, confirming speculation on Wall Street and in the garment center that the much ballyhooed offering would not take place this year.
"Our decision was based on the fact that at the present time, we don't believe that our offering would receive a valuation that truly reflects the company's long-term potential for growth and profitability," said Stephan Weiss, who shares the title of chief executive with Donna Karan, his wife and the star designer for whom the company is named.


Vision-Impaired Children Guide Toy Shoppers
FLASHBULBS were popping, television cameras were rolling and grown-ups were making speeches.
But Jesse Navarro, Milton Sanchez and Tamesha Tate were unfazed by all the commotion.
After all, they were at F. A. O. Schwarz, and they had serious work to do: playing with toys.
Jesse, Milton and Tamesha were in the Fifth Avenue store on Tuesday morning to demonstrate toys they had helped to select for a new guide for children who are blind or visually impaired -- children like themselves.


Scandal Casts Shadow Over Atlanta Mayoral Race
A spreading scandal at Hartsfield International Airport that has hung like a pall over City Hall for more than a year is now hovering over Atlanta's mayoral election as well.
Six days before the mayoral runoff election, the front-runner, City Councilman Bill Campbell, today released the results of a polygraph test that support his denial of accusations that he took bribes from a businessman who has pleaded guilty to an airport kickback scheme.


British Adventurer Receives Supplies
PETER BIRD, a British adventurer who is attempting to row a 28-foot boat from Russia to the United States, had expected to run out of food this week.
But Bird's shore crew in England succeeded on Nov. 10 in having a Philippine commercial vessel pass 30 days worth of supplies to the 46-year-old rower.
He was about 1,000 miles east of Japan at the time.


Economic Scene; Evidence contradicts common sense in the trade tug-of-war.
WHERE you stand on the free trade agreement, Bill Clinton told the country, is all about hope and fear -- hope that American industry can compete in world markets, fear that it can't.
That struck many as good political oratory, good enough, perhaps, to tip the balance on the vote.
What red-blooded member of Congress, after all, would suggest that Americans couldn't play in the big leagues?
But the idea of trade as the moral equivalent of football makes almost all economists uncomfortable.
And it is downright dismaying to Paul Krugman of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, whose own research, he readily acknowledges, has provided an intellectual rationale for those who portray international commerce as a competition in which their gain is our loss.
"People who really know economics have lost control of the educated discourse," he glumly concludes.


Hewlett Net Jumps but Stock Falls
The Hewlett-Packard Company today reported a fourfold increase in earnings for its fourth fiscal quarter, but the company's stock price fell because the results were below Wall Street analysts' estimates.
Hewlett-Packard management also sounded a cautionary note about future prospects, noting pricing pressures and a shift in product mix toward lower profit items like printers.


Collins Named Manager of Astros
TERRY COLLINS, a successful minor league manager for more than 11 years and Pittsburgh's bullpen coach the last two seasons, was named manager of the Houston Astros yesterday, replacing the fired ART HOWE.
Collins, 44 years old, promised to make the Astros a championship team through sheer doggedness.
"How long it took me to get here is a part of what I'm made of," Collins said.
"I'll do everything it takes to bring us a championship."


Executive Is Suing Prudential
A senior executive with the Prudential Insurance Company of America has filed court papers accusing the company of systematically defrauding institutional investors in one of the real estate funds it manages.
The executive, Mark Jorgensen, who in 1992 began managing three Prudential real estate funds, contends in a lawsuit that company executives improperly inflated values of certain properties over a period of years in the Prudential Property Investment Separate Account, or Prisa.


Capriati Extends Her Leave
Jennifer Capriati, the 17-year-old tennis phenomenon whose career has taken a less than phenomenal turn in the last year, has decided that her hiatus from competition will extend into 1994.
She will not play in the Australian Open and is not expected to return to the women's tour until the end of January.
Capriati, bothered by bone chips in her right elbow since last April, hasn't played a match since her first-round loss to Leila Meskhi at the United States Open.
Capriati won her first tournament of 1993 in Sydney, Australia, but failed to capture a title for the rest of the year.
Her ranking has dropped to ninth in the world after climbing as high as sixth in 1991.


Flood Fund Aids Working-Class Homeowners
To the Editor:
The headline and analysis in Peter Lavigne's "Subsidizing Coastal Mansions" (Op-Ed, Nov. 5) leave false impressions.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.97
3.02
2.89
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.07
3.07
3.12
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.21
3.22
3.33
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.18
5.17
6.37
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.18
6.16
7.50
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.27
7.25
8.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.60
5.60
6.41
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Essay; Two Former Generals
At a kosher-style breakfast for media biggies at Blair House, the Prime Minister of Israel made a little diplomatic history.
Yitzhak Rabin was asked if he was putting talks with Syria on a back burner while his public at home digested the heaping plateful of P.L.O. recognition.
His reply: "There has not been an agreement in our area without direct, secret contacts. We have none going on now with Syria."


Two Japanese Party Rebels Declare Defiance Is in Order
Takashi Sasagawa, a cordial, impeccably dressed member of Japan's Liberal Democratic Party, sat perched comfortably on the edge of a chair in his tiny office and offered a guest some apple juice.
"Ask me anything you want," he said.
"I'll talk about the things the others won't in this party. Please, ask what you like."


Saving Trees by Making Wood Furniture
SILAS KOPF, a custom-furniture designer specializing in marquetry, is being kind to trees by using wood from dead trees and new technology that tricks the eye.
The veneer of a desk he has designed, right, has black details that are made with a chemically treated walnut meant to look like ebony.
The walnut "oysters" on the desk's borders were sliced from a tree felled in Holyoke, Mass., during a hurricane.
The black desktop is of ancient dead bog oak, a highly prized wood, said Mr.
Kopf, who lives in Northampton, Mass.
"The water reacts to the wood's tannic acid to produce a charcoal color," he added.


St. John's to Give First Clue
What are the chances that St.
John's will lose its season opener for the first time in 23 years?
Not likely.
The Redmen play host to Towson State in the first round of the preseason National Invitation Tournament at 8 P.M. in Alumni Hall, where they also have a winning streak of 23 games.
But since St.
John's doesn't have any exhibition games this season, Coach Brian Mahoney is taking nothing for granted.
"Every year is different," Mahoney said.
"We're still in the early stages of building this team. I'm not even sure what we have to work on, it's way too early to tell."


Dinkins Spells Out Hopes for Lasting Legacy
With just six weeks left in his term, David N. Dinkins came to the more tranquil grounds of Yale University and, reflecting on his years as New York City's Mayor, offered a somewhat wistful perspective of what he wishes his legacy to be.
In a 45-minute speech tonight at the Yale Law School before about 300 students and faculty members, Mr.
Dinkins spoke of the "hard choices" he faced as mayor and said he would like to be remembered for offering compassionate government at a time of severe fiscal stress.


Argentina Squeaks Into World Cup Finals
A veil of gloom was lifted from Argentina tonight as its national soccer team beat Australia, 1-0, and qualified -- just barely -- for the World Cup finals next summer in the United States.
In a match that was noteworthy more for tripping, roughing and pushing than for crisp passes and lightning breakaways, it was an Australian player who, in the end, helped put Argentina into the finals.


Don Mitchell, Executive Who Led Electronics Companies, Dies at 88
Don G. Mitchell, a former executive of the Sylvania Electric Products, General Telephone and General Time Corporations, died on Monday at his home in New Vernon, N.J.
He was 88.
The cause of death was a heart condition, his family said.


Fossil Family: Big Guys Join Delicate Lucy
The discovery of more fossils related to the famous skeleton nicknamed Lucy has provided strong evidence that these earliest known hominids varied strikingly in body size between males and females and lived over a wide geographic range but were all members of a single species.
Scientists say the 3.4-million-year-old fossils from Ethiopia could settle a lingering debate over whether many of the specimens identified as Australopithecus afarensis were correctly categorized as a single species or perhaps represented two species of different sizes, ranges and behavior.


Illegal Immigrants Sue
Lawyers for the illegal Chinese immigrants who arrived aboard the Golden Venture filed a class action suit yesterday in Federal Court in Harrisburg, Pa., charging that they have been denied a fair hearing on their requests for political asylum.
The lawsuit, which names Attorney General Janet Reno and the Immigration and Naturalization Service, contends that the immigrants' pleas for asylum were denied unfairly because immigration judges refused to consider China's one-child policy as a criteria for persecution.
Virtually all the 250 Golden Venture passengers still detained have been denied asylum.
The suit, filed in Pennsylvania because most of the immigrants are detained there, could cover thousands of other illegal Chinese immigrants.


Senate Approves Ban on Manufacture of Military-Style Weapons
In a modest victory for gun control advocates, the Senate voted today to ban the manufacture of 19 types of military-style assault weapons but permit sellers to distribute guns that have already been made.
The gun control measure is so far short of an outright ban that it has an outside chance of passing in the House, which has repeatedly killed stronger bans on assault weapons.
The 56-to-43 margin of victory in the Senate was another sign that Congress is trying to show the voters that it is doing something to fight crime and gang violence.


Graf Wins 58 Carats For 64 Minutes of Work
It was just another rarefied evening on the tennis court for the world's No. 1 player, Steffi Graf, who had a 58-carat diamond trophy waiting on the other end of her first-round match at the Virginia Slims championships in Madison Square Garden last night.
Working at close to a carat-a-minute pace, Graf disposed of Natalya Zvereva of Belarus in only 64 minutes and used her 6-2, 6-4 victory to improve an already flawless record against Zvereva to 13-0.


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: News Analysis; A High-Stakes Gamble That Paid Off
In July, Speaker Thomas S. Foley of Washington confided to a diplomat that he thought the North American Free Trade Agreement was dead and that there was nothing he or President Clinton "or anyone on the planet" could do to revive it.
In August, a top Clinton aide said, the private judgment of most senior members of the White House staff was that the President should abandon the trade accord, doing the best he could "to cover his tracks."


Republicans in About-Face On Special Prosecutor Law
With a Democrat now in the White House, Senate Republicans today abandoned efforts to block re-enactment of legislation authorizing independent prosecutors to investigate Administration officials.
"I think it will pass," said Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican leader who spearheaded the Republican effort that killed the Watergate-era law last December.


Manama Journal; The Old Men and the Sea, Still Lusting for Pearls
Salman Bin Adwan, stripped down to a white pair of cotton shorts, slipped over the side of his small skiff and descended into the aqua waters of the Persian Gulf.
Waves lapped rhythmically against the fiberglass hull.
The sun, its heat fierce and unrelenting, beat down from a cloudless, pale blue sky.
On the horizon a wooden fishing boat inched southward.


Victims Kill 2 Teen-Agers As Robbers
Two off-duty police officers shot and killed armed teen-agers who were trying to rob them in separate incidents in Brooklyn on Tuesday night, the police said.
Investigators said each youth surrounded his victim with the help of accomplices and held him up at gunpoint.
In a similar incident last Sunday, a Brooklyn sugar refinery worker shot two young attackers to death when they tried to rob him outside a grocery store, the police said.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Unrest and Stereolab  The Grand
If Eskimos have dozens of words for snow, rockers ought to have at least as many descriptions of a drone.
There are drones that soothe, drones that attack, drones that grind, drones that shimmer, drones that snarl, drones that drift.
Unrest and Stereolab, two rock bands whose shared tour brought them to the Grand on Tuesday night, are connoisseurs and virtuosos of the drone, but only rarely do they sound similar.


Football Team Puts Poet (And Artists) in Motion
Eastside High School's football squad had just finished practice and was heading for the showers when Rahman Brown broke away from the pack and trotted over to a visitor.
The 6-foot-2-inch, 215-pound linebacker pulled a slip of paper from his waistband and, sweating in the late afternoon sun, began to read a love poem he had written.


Theater in Review
Talk About Love!
Ubu Repertory Theater 15 West 28th Street Chelsea Through Sunday By Paul Emond; translated by Richard Miller; directed by Shirley Kaplan; set by Watoku Ueno; lighting by Greg MacPherson; costumes by Carol Ann Pelletier; sound by Ephraim Kehlmann; production stage manager, Charlotte Volage.
Presented by Ubu Repertory Theater, Francoise Kourilsky, artistic director.
WITH: Jerry Ball, Laurie Graff and Christopher Murney.


THE FREE TRADE ACORD: Reporter's Notebook; After Marathon of a Debate, A 6-Minute Dash to Settle It
WASHINGTON, Nov. 17 --
By the 11th hour of debate, with lawmakers growing ever more emotional, with the vote described in ever more apocalyptic terms and with longtime allies and enemies strangely scrambled, the people's house seemed exhausted with the North American Free Trade Agreement.
They were ready to vote and they did it fast: The agreement went over the top in just 6 minutes and 11 seconds, a sharp contrast to the long cliffhanger of the President's budget vote in August.
Throngs in the Capitol
Throughout the day and into the night the halls of the Capitol were filled with men and women for and against the pact, waiting in long, hot and often contentious lines for a chance to see and hear the debate.
They heard Representative David Bonior, the Democratic whip from Macomb County, Mich., plead for a "no" vote on behalf of working people, while Representative Marcy Kaptur, a staunch opponent of the agreement from Ohio, quietly wept.


150 Windmills to Test Elusive Power Source
Although the potential for using the wind to produce electricity has largely been untapped, a new initiative combining local and Federal resources could show that as much as 20 percent of the country's electrical power could be derived from this source by the year 2020, a leading proponent of wind power says.
The assessment was made by Dr.
Edward DeMeo, who is in charge of wind and power energy at the Electric Power Research Institute, a national consortium of 700 utilities that is based in Palo Alto, Calif.


Norman, for Better or for Worse, Is First
Greg Norman wasn't very impressed with his performance, but substance defeats style every time on the golf course.
Norman's 37 on the back nine of the Jack Nicklaus Resort Course at PGA West today gave him a round of 74 and a two-stroke victory over Paul Azinger in the PGA Grand Slam of Golf.
It also gave him $400,000, the largest check of his career, but Norman gave himself mixed reviews for his rounds of 71-74, one over par.


Albany Set to Force Insurers to Broaden Children's Coverage
Three months after Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo vetoed a virtually identical bill, negotiators for the Legislature and the Governor said today that they had agreed on legislation that would require most health insurance policies to cover immunizations and preventive checkups for young people through age 19.
If passed by the Legislature next month and signed by Mr.
Cuomo, the bill would make New York the 12th state to require such coverage, children's health advocates said.


The House Vote: A Closer Look
ALABAMA
Democrats -- Bevill, N; Browder, N; Cramer, N; Hilliard, N.
Republicans -- Bachus, Y; Callahan, Y; Everett, N. ALASKA
Republican -- Young, N. ARIZONA
Democrats -- Coppersmith, Y; English, Y; Pastor, Y.
Republicans -- Kolbe, Y; Kyl, Y; Stump, Y. ARKANSAS Democrats -- Lambert, Y; Thornton, Y.
Republicans -- Dickey, Y; Hutchinson, Y. CALIFORNIA Democrats -- Becerra, Y; Beilenson, Y; Berman, Y; Brown, Y; Condit, N; Dellums, N; Dixon, N; Dooley, Y; Edwards, N; Eshoo, Y; Farr, Y; Fazio, Y; Filner, N; Hamburg, N; Harman, N; Lantos, N; Lehman, Y; Martinez, N; Matsui, Y; Miller, N; Mineta, Y; Pelosi, Y; Roybal-Allard, Y; Schenk, N; Stark, N; Torres, Y; Tucker, N; Waters, N; Waxman, N; Woolsey, N.
Republicans -- Baker, Y; Calvert, Y; Cox, Y; Cunningham, Y; Doolittle, N; Dornan, Y; Dreier, Y; Gallegly, N; Herger, Y; Horn, Y; Huffington, Y; Hunter, N; Kim, Y; Lewis, Y; McCandless, Y; McKeon, Y; Moorhead, Y; Packard, Y; Pombo, N; Rohrabacher, Y; Royce, N; Thomas, Y. COLORADO
Democrats -- Schroeder, Y; Skaggs, Y.
Republicans -- Allard, Y; Hefley, Y; McInnis, Y; Schaefer, Y. CONNECTICUT
Democrats -- DeLauro, N; Gejdenson, N; Kennelly, N.
Republicans -- Franks, Y; Johnson, Y; Shays, Y. DELAWARE
Republican -- Castle, Y. FLORIDA
Democrats -- Bacchus, Y; Brown, N; Deutsch, N; Gibbons, Y; Hastings, Y; Hutto, Y; Johnston, Y; Meek, Y; Peterson, N; Thurman, N.
Republicans -- Bilirakis, N; Canady, N; Diaz-Balart, N; Fowler, Y; Goss, Y; Lewis, Y; McCollum, Y; Mica, N; Miller, Y; Ros-Lehtinen, N; Shaw, Y; Stearns, N; Young, Y. GEORGIA
Democrats -- Bishop, N; Darden, Y; Deal, Y; Johnson, Y; Lewis, N; McKinney, N; Rowland, Y.
Republicans -- Collins, N; Gingrich, Y; Kingston, N; Linder, Y. HAWAII
Democrats -- Abercrombie, N; Mink, N. IDAHO
Democrat -- LaRocco, N.
Republican -- Crapo, N. ILLINOIS
Democrats -- Collins, N; Costello, N; Durbin, Y; Evans, N; Gutierrez, N; Lipinski, N; Poshard, N; Reynolds, Y; Rostenkowski, Y; Rush, N; Sangmeister, N; Yates, N.
Republicans -- Crane, Y; Ewing, Y; Fawell, Y; Hastert, Y; Hyde, Y; Manzullo, Y; Michel, Y; Porter, Y. INDIANA
Democrats -- Hamilton, Y; Jacobs, N; Long, N; McCloskey, N; Roemer, N; Sharp, N; Visclosky, N.
Republicans -- Burton, N; Buyer, Y; Myers, N. IOWA
Democrat -- Smith, Y.
Republicans -- Grandy, Y; Leach, Y; Lightfoot, Y; Nussle, Y KANSAS
Democrats -- Glickman, Y; Slattery, N.
Republicans -- Meyers, Y; Roberts, Y. KENTUCKY
Democrats -- Baesler, Y; Barlow, N; Mazzoli, Y; Natcher, N.
Republicans -- Bunning, N; Rogers, N. LOUISIANA
Democrats -- Fields, N; Hayes, Y; Jefferson, Y; Tauzin, N.
Republicans -- Baker, Y; Livingston, Y; McCrery, Y. MAINE
Democrat -- Andrews, N.
Republican -- Snowe, N. MARYLAND
Democrats -- Cardin, Y; Hoyer, Y; Mfume, N; Wynn, N.
Republicans -- Bartlett, N; Bentley, N; Gilchrest, Y; Morella, Y. MASSACHUSETTS
Democrats -- Frank, N; Kennedy, Y; Markey, Y; Meehan, Y; Moakley, N; Neal, N; Olver, N; Studds, Y.
Republicans -- Blute, N; Torkildsen, Y. MICHIGAN
Democrats -- Barcia, N; Bonior, N; Carr, N; Collins, N; Conyers, N; Dingell, N; Ford, N; Kildee, N; Levin, N; Stupak, N.
Republicans -- Camp, Y; Hoekstra, Y; Knollenberg, Y; Smith, Y; Upton, Y. MINNESOTA
Democrats -- Minge, N; Oberstar, N; Penny, Y; Peterson, N; Sabo, N; Vento, N.
Republicans -- Grams, Y; Ramstad, Y. MISSISSIPPI
Democrats -- Montgomery, Y; Parker, Y; Taylor, N; Thompson, N; Whitten, Y. MISSOURI
Democrats -- Clay, N; Danner, N; Gephardt, N; Skelton, Y; Volkmer, N; Wheat, N.
Republicans -- Emerson, Y; Hancock, Y; Talent, N. MONTANA
Democrat -- Williams, N. NEBRASKA
Democrat -- Hoagland, Y.
Republicans -- Barrett, Y; Bereuter, Y. NEVADA
Democrat -- Bilbray, N.
Republican -- Vucanovich, N. NEW HAMPSHIRE
Democrat -- Swett, N.
Republican -- Zeliff, Y. NEW JERSEY
Democrats -- Andrews, N; Hughes, N; Klein, N; Menendez, N; Pallone, N; Payne, N; Torricelli, N.
Republicans -- Franks, Y; Gallo, Y; Roukema, Y; Saxton, N; Smith, N; Zimmer, Y. NEW MEXICO
Democrat -- Richardson, Y.
Republicans -- Schiff, Y; Skeen, Y. NEW YORK
Democrats -- Ackerman, N; Engel, N; Flake, Y; Hinchey, N; Hochbrueckner, N; LaFalce, N; Lowey, Y; Maloney, N; Manton, N; McNulty, N; Nadler, N; Owens, N; Rangel, N; Schumer, N; Serrano, N; Slaughter, N; Towns, N; Velazquez, N.
Republicans -- Boehlert, Y; Fish, Y; Gilman, N; Houghton, Y; King, Y; Lazio, Y; Levy, Y; McHugh, N; Molinari, Y; Paxon, Y; Quinn, N; Solomon, N; Walsh, N. NORTH CAROLINA
Democrats -- Clayton, N; Hefner, Y; Lancaster, N; Neal, Y; Price, Y; Rose, Y; Valentine, Y; Watt, N.
Republicans -- Ballenger, Y; Coble, Y; McMillan, Y; Taylor, N. NORTH DAKOTA
Democrat -- Pomeroy, N. OHIO
Democrats -- Applegate, N; Brown, N; Fingerhut, N; Hall, N; Kaptur, N; Mann, Y; Sawyer, Y; Stokes, N; Strickland, N; Traficant, N.
Republicans -- Boehner, Y; Gillmor, Y; Hobson, Y; Hoke, N; Kasich, Y; Oxley, Y; Portman, Y; Pryce, Y; Regula, N. OKLAHOMA
Democrats -- Brewster, Y; English, Y; McCurdy, Y; Synar, Y.
Republicans -- Inhofe, N; Istook, Y. OREGON
Democrats -- DeFazio, N; Furse, N; Kopetski, Y; Wyden, Y.
Republican -- Smith, Y. PENNSYLVANIA
Democrats -- Blackwell, N; Borski, N; Coyne, N; Foglietta, N; Holden, N; Kanjorski, N; Klink, N; Margolies-Mezvinsky, N; McHale, N; Murphy, N; Murtha, N.
Republicans -- Clinger, Y; Gekas, Y; Goodling, Y; Greenwood, Y; McDade, Y; Ridge, Y; Santorum, N; Shuster, N; Walker, Y; Weldon, N. RHODE ISLAND
Democrat -- Reed, N.
Republican -- Machtley, Y. SOUTH CAROLINA
Democrats -- Clyburn, N; Derrick, N; Spratt, Y.
Republicans -- Inglis, N; Ravenel, N; Spence, N. SOUTH DAKOTA
Democrat -- Johnson, N. TENNESSEE
Democrats -- Clement, Y; Cooper, Y; Ford, Y; Gordon, Y; Lloyd, Y; Tanner, Y.
Republicans -- Duncan, Y; Quillen, Y; Sundquist, Y. TEXAS
Democrats -- Andrews, Y; Brooks, N; Bryant, Y; Chapman, Y; Coleman, Y; de la Garza, Y; Edwards, Y; Frost, Y; Geren, Y; Gonzalez, N; Green, N; Hall, N; Johnson, E. B., Y; Laughlin, Y; Ortiz, Y; Pickle, Y; Sarpalius, Y; Stenholm, Y; Tejeda, Y; Washington, N; Wilson, N.
Republicans -- Archer, Y; Armey, Y; Barton, Y; Bonilla, Y; Combest, Y; DeLay, Y; Fields, Y; Johnson, Sam, Y; Smith, Y. UTAH
Democrats -- Orton, N; Shepherd, Y.
Republican -- Hansen, Y. VERMONT
Independent -- Sanders, N. VIRGINIA
Democrats -- Boucher, N; Byrne, N; Moran, Y; Payne, Y; Pickett, Y; Scott, N; Sisisky, N.
Republicans -- Bateman, Y; Bliley, Y; Goodlatte, Y; Wolf, Y. WASHINGTON
Democrats -- Cantwell, Y; Dicks, Y; Foley, Y; Inslee, Y; Kreidler, Y; McDermott, Y; Swift, Y; Unsoeld, N.
Republican -- Dunn, Y. WEST VIRGINIA
Democrats -- Mollohan, N; Rahall, N; Wise, N. WISCONSIN
Democrats -- Barca, N; Barrett, N; Kleczka, N; Obey, N.
Republicans -- Gunderson, Y; Klug, Y; Petri, Y; Roth, Y; Sensenbrenner, Y. WYOMING
Republican -- Thomas, Y.


When Crime Was Bit of All Right in East End
Ricky Precord and his friends were children when Reg and Ron Kray, London's most notorious gangsters, were sentenced in 1969 to prison terms of at least 30 years for the murders of two fellow thugs.
But like other residents of the East End, where the Kray twins ran protection rackets and fought ruthlessly to defend their turf, Mr.
Precord and his mates share a communal nostalgia for the men who are arguably the best-known criminals to operate in their neighborhood since Jack the Ripper.


Corrections
A sports picture on Tuesday with an article about John Vanbiesbrouck, the Florida Panthers' goalie, was published in error.
The picture showed another Panther goalie, Mark Fitzpatrick.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the San Francisco District Attorney's decision to drop an investigation of the Anti-Defamation League referred incorrectly in some copies to a former police officer who was accused of handing over confidential documents to an A.D.L. investigator.
The officer, Thomas Gerard, retired from the police this year; he was not dismissed.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Roy's 32 Saves Bolster Canadien Victory  Donald Brashear and Jean-Jacques Daigneault each scored their first goals of the season last night, leading the Canadiens to a 3-1 victory over the Edmonton Oilers at Montreal.
Patrick Roy made 32 saves for Montreal.
Vladimir Vujtek scored his second of the season for Edmonton.
Stephan Lebeau had an empty-net goal for Montreal with 16 seconds left to play. (AP) Neely Helps Spoil Whaler Coach's Debut: Cam Neely scored two goals and the Boston Bruins beat the Whalers, 4-2, last night in Hartford in Pierre McGuire's first game as coach of the Whalers.
McGuire was put in charge Tuesday when Paul Holmgren stepped aside to become full-time general manager.
Hartford's 4-12-2 record is tied for second-worst in the N.H.L. (AP)


Controlling School Custodians
The custodians in New York City schools have long operated independent fiefs immune from strict management control and from any pretense of making them work hard.
Now the State Legislature has taken important steps to rein them in.
The 900 custodians are both city employees and independent contractors.
Each administers an annual allowance, based on school size, for supplies, equipment and salaries for the custodial staff.
They are required to clean classrooms only every other day and to mop cafeterias once a week.


End Congressional Freebies Now
With just a few days left before lawmakers go home, a quiet battle rages for the integrity of Congress.
At issue are the free meals, resort vacations and tickets to sporting and theater events that special interests now lavish on members.
There's a good chance the House will act on new gift rules before the Thanksgiving holiday break.
But the exact details of the proposal being negotiated by House Speaker Thomas Foley and Representative John Bryant, the Texas Democrat who heads the relevant House Judiciary subcommittee, remain unknown.
The bottom-line question is whether House members are ready to forgo their seductive perks and live within their $133,600-a-year salaries.


Hornets Continue Their Hold On First in Central Division
Hornets 130, Kings 113
Larry Johnson scored 11 of his 23 points in the third quarter, and five other Hornets scored in double figures as Charlotte kept Sacramento without a victory on the road with a 130-113 victory last night in Charlotte, N.C.
Alonzo Mourning had 22 points as the Hornets won their fourth consecutive game to remain in first place in the National Basketball Association's Central Division.
Dell Curry also scored 22 points, including three of Charlotte's club-record nine 3-pointers.


In Mexico City, A State-of-the-Art Children's Museum
As one of the biggest, unruliest, most dangerously contaminated places on earth, this is one tough city to live in, especially for children.
Some children in Mexico City are trained to tell the toxicity of the air by the red or black flags that fly over their schools.
They are drilled on how to handle an earthquake.
They can't avoid the thousands of street children who sell gum or beg for handouts at car windows they aren't even tall enough to see into.


Hard Words for China in Seattle
Insisting that China has yet to make enough progress on human rights to insure the renewal of preferential trade tariffs, Administration officials said today that they had told China time is running out.
Senior State Department officials said that during four hours of talks today, John Shattuck, the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights, told Chinese officials that Congress would be looking for significant progress from the Chinese early in 1994, and that if there is none, sentiment will harden against extending China's trade status for a year.


A Gift Pays Tribute to a Father's Artistic Legacy
Until he designed his second house in 1966, Charles Gwathmey, the architect, was known, if at all, as the son of Robert Gwathmey, a New York artist who specialized in socially conscious paintings of sharecroppers and migrant laborers.
As it happened, the house, in Amagansett, L.I., was commissioned by his parents, and it led to a series of celebrated projects on eastern Long Island that established Mr.
Gwathmey as one of the brightest stars in American architecture.
"After the Amagansett house, my father became known as Charles Gwathmey's father,' said the architect in an interview at his offices on the West Side of Manhattan. "That was an interesting transition that we both laughed about."


Baby Found in Bag Outside Queens Library
A newborn baby was found on a sidewalk in Queens yesterday, abandoned and unclothed and in a paper bag, the police said.
Responding to an anonymous telephone call, the police said, officers found the baby, about two days old, near the steps of the Briarwood Branch of the Queens Borough Public Library, said Detective Kim Royster, a spokeswoman for the Police Department.


Knick Streak Is Gone and Ailing Ewing Is Gloomy
Patrick Ewing said he made a mistake by playing tonight and that he would not play again until his strained neck improves.
That was the most disturbing development for the Knicks after their first loss of the season, a 95-90 setback to the San Antonio Spurs before 18,726 at the Alamodome.
The defeat snapped New York's seven-game winning streak, ending its longest winning streak ever to start a season.


After Bombay's Violence, Fear and Finger-Pointing
Amina Bi Abdul Latif carefully adjusted her brown and gold sari over her hair, scrutinized her almost-finished tiny brick and cement house -- the illegal second story still wreathed in rough bamboo scaffolding -- and called to the young man on the roof connecting her to one of the television cable systems in Dharavi, Bombay's largest slum.
"Can't you go any quicker?" she pleaded, a bit of dismay as well as irritation mingling in her voice.
Then she turned away.


A Risky Victory
The House's passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement was no triumph for enlightenment.
Nafta is likely to create modest economic growth in Mexico, the United States and Canada, even while creating near-term dislocations.
But the victory could induce the Administration to make misjudgments that could sink the far more important global negotiations in the 116-nation General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, which face a Dec. 15 deadline for completion.


Merck Completes $6 Billion Deal for Medco
Merck &amp; Company, the world's largest drug maker, said yesterday that it had completed the $6 billion purchase of Medco Containment Services Inc., one of the largest mail-order pharmacy and managed-care drug companies.
The deal was closed after Medco shareholders overwhelmingly approved the sale, which was announced on July 28.
Seventy-three percent of the voting shares approved.


O.E.C.D. Says Fed May Raise Rates
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development predicted today that the Federal Reserve would soon push up short-term interest rates because of concerns that the inflation rate had stopped falling.
The Paris-based organization, which promotes economic cooperation among its 24 member nations, said in a new study that "there is good reason to expect inflation to remain below 3 percent," but added that with short-term rates so low, unemployment edging down and factory utilization rising, monetary tightening could be justified to head off a resurgence of inflation.


Sounds Around Town
'Miro and New York  1930-1950'
Washburn Gallery  20 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through Nov. 27
"Miro and New York 1930-1950," a small, deftly chosen group show, is a valuable complement to the Museum of Modern Art's vast Miro exhibition.
It demonstrates the profound influence this Catalan artist's biomorphism had on two generations of New York modernists, both as an alternative to Cubism and as the source of a witty, occasionally audacious psychological content.


Thief Caught Glove-Handed
Marquis Grissom, the Montreal Expos outfielder who won his first Gold Glove award this year, had good and bad to say about Rawlings, which sponsors the voting for fielding excellence and honored the 1993 recipients at a news conference in Manhattan yesterday.
When Grissom's regular glove, and the rest of his equipment, was stolen from his airline luggage during the All-Star break, Rawlings supplied an emergency replacement.
Grissom, who made seven errors all year, said he made four of them in the two months he used the new glove.
"It wasn't the glove," he said.
"It's just that it wasn't broken in."


A Rarity by Balfe
A concert performance of "The Bohemian Girl," Michael William Balfe's rarely performed opera, is to take place tonight at 8 P.M. at the Kaye Playhouse, Hunter College, 68th Street, between Lexington and Park Avenues.
The opera, primarily known for the principal soprano aria, "I Dreamt I Dwelt in Marble Halls," was given its premiere in November 1843; tonight's performance honors its 150th anniversary.
The soprano Lauren Flanigan is to sing the title role; supporting roles are to be sung by Marianne Cornetti, a mezzo-soprano; Richard Slade and Ronald Naiditch, tenors; Richard Holmes, baritone, and Joseph Corteggiano, bass.
Cal Stewart Kellogg is to conduct the Dessoff Choirs and the Mannes Orchestra.
Tickets are $24 and $32.
Information: (212) 772-4448.


Editors' Note
An article yesterday about the architect Charles Gwathmey described his relationship with his father, the artist Robert Gwathmey.
It quoted the younger Mr.
Gwathmey about an encounter that he said he and his father had with the writer Howard Fast in the 1950's, when many writers were being asked to divulge the names of Communists or former Communists before the House Committee on Un-American Activities.
Mr.
Gwathmey said, "We ran into Howard Fast, who had just named some names." He said his father had snubbed Mr.
Fast, and compared him to the film "The Informer."


Redskins Wanted Simms But Not as Much as Giants
How close did Phil Simms come to becoming a Washington Redskin in the off season?
Probably not that close, but the Redskins were definitely interested in the Giants' quarterback.
One day, the Washington general manager, Charley Casserly, called General Manager George Young of the Giants to see if he could steal Simms away somehow.
As the conversation between the two friends progressed and it became clear that Young wasn't biting, Casserly made a half-serious, half-joking proposition: If you give him to us, Casserly said, we won't play him against you.
How's that?


South Africa Pact: Born of Mutual Need
Near sunup this morning in the bar of the World Trade Center, Roelf Meyer presented Cyril Ramaphosa with a cake to celebrate both his 41st birthday and the country's new non-racist constitution.
"This is not only Cyril's birthday, but South Africa's birthday as well," Mr.
Meyer announced.
And then the two men twirled giddily onto the dance floor and bopped to "In the Mood."


COLLEGE FOOTBALL REPORT
Yale
Harvard has won three games, Yale only two.
So it will be the social tradition of the event that will attract about 35,000 fans to the Yale Bowl tomorrow for the 110th contest of a series that began in 1875.
The crowd will be the smallest in Yale Bowl for The Game since 1945.


Banks Chief Thwarts Bid By Republic
New York State's Superintendent of Banking, Derrick D. Cephas, sharply rebuked the Republic New York Corporation yesterday and said its hostile bid to acquire the Green Point Savings Bank was illegal.
The move appears to all but destroy Republic's bid for Green Point, which is based in Flushing, Queens.
On Wednesday night Republic had sweetened its bid, offering depositors a special interest payment of $250 million, up from its initial offer of $100 million.


Review/Film; The Addams Family's New Addition
"These Addams men; where do you find them?" coos the family's voluptuous new nanny (Joan Cusack), trying to make a good impression.
"It has to be damp," explains Morticia (Anjelica Huston), the Addamses' reigning mistress of witchy delivery and sly, sugar-coated malice.
"He has my father's eyes," coos Gomez (Raul Julia), admiring little mustachioed Pubert, the baby who arrives at the start of "Addams Family Values." "Gomez," Morticia says evenly, "take those out of his mouth."


For Children
Fencing Classes
Various public and private locations  Recommended ages: 7 and up
"Aim at the heart," said Josie Fusco, the fencing teacher at the Carmine Street Recreation Center in Manhattan.
"Who has the burden of responsibility?" she then asked her three students, who ranged in age from 10 to 15.
"The person attacked."
With fencing, it's easy to forget that you're actually dueling, especially when the children, dressed in white canvas vests, heavy masks and gloves, are working with blunted swords that flex as easily as rubber bands.
The sport uses elegant words you don't hear too often, like "parry" and "riposte" and "en garde." But what's primary is moving quickly back and forth, the lunge and the stress on hand-eye-and-foot coordination.


Rollins Talks To U.S. Jury On Election
In a whirlwind visit to the United States Attorney here, Edward J. Rollins Jr., the besieged political strategist, flew into Newark this morning, ran a gantlet of reporters and camera crews, testified before a Federal grand jury and slipped undetected out the back door of the courthouse on his way home to Washington.
The scene is likely to be repeated on Friday, when Mr.
Rollins is deposed in Washington in a civil suit brought by the New Jersey State Democratic Committee over the conduct of the Republican gubernatorial campaign he led and the possible need for a new election.


Where the Mexico Gold Rush Begins
From the red-tiled roofs of this fabled American gateway to Mexico to the executive suite of the nation's largest corporations, business began its race today to take advantage of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Some companies here plan to parlay their proximity into expanded markets, while those more distant were talking as if the border had just shifted 1,000 miles or so northward.
Banks, insurers and brokerages will be among the first to exploit new opportunities under the trade agreement, but so will manufacturers like the General Motors Corporation.
While many tariff reductions will be phased in over several years, Mexico's virtual ban on foreign financial institutions will be eased on Jan. 1.


Critic's Notebook; The Halls Of Rock: For Fans With Grit
NEW YORK CITY rock fans are a tough, dedicated bunch.
They have figured out how to snap up tickets for concerts that sell out the day they're announced.
They adapt to great variations between announced and actual showtimes (dedicated bunch. They have figured out how to snap up tickets for concerts that sell out the day they're announced. They adapt to great variations between announced and actual showtimes they brave frisking); they brave frisking, metal detectors, overcrowded halls, belligerent bouncers and exorbitant drink prices.
Just about every band in the known universe looks forward to a showcase in New York, where audiences are both discerning and diverse.
But where will they play?
Often, at places that would be outshone by the dives back home.


Packwood Rightly Argued for Privacy
To the Editor:
In "The Packwood Disgrace" (editorial, Nov. 5), you breezily dismiss as "concocted" Senator Bob Packwood's civil liberties argument for resisting the open-ended subpoena of his personal diaries from the Senate Ethics Committee.


'I Never Named Names'
To the Editor:
An interview with the architect Charles Gwathmey, on the occasion of a gift to honor his father, the artist Robert Gwathmey (Arts pages, Nov. 18), quotes the younger Mr.
Gwathmey stating that I had named names, inferentially before one of the Congressional committees.


At the Bar
Bernard E. Witkin, the man who knows more about California law than anyone alive, was speaking about all the "adulation sessions" being held for him these days.
"They're becoming more frequent as people take a more realistic view of my limited life expectancy," he said.
At a love-in given by the Alameda County Bar Association, the 89-year-old Mr.
Witkin confronted his own mortality.
"I told them, 'The race is nearly over, and it's time for me to turn over my task to others,' and there was a deadly silence," he recalled.
" 'I have decided to retire' -- I paused in order to let the silence grow more deadly -- 'in the year 2001.' "


On Stage, and Off
Playing for the 'Cycle'
For months now the question about "The Kentucky Cycle," Robert Schenkkan's two-part, six-hour epic that opened at the Royale on Sunday, was whether a novice producer would be able to keep such a mammoth show afloat on Broadway.
The question was posed again -- with emphasis -- this week when the first reviews came in mixed, far short of what most Broadway watchers felt would be necessary to sustain it.
And though overall the favorable notices have outnumbered the unfavorable ones, box-office sales this week, according to the producer, David G. Richenthal, have been on the order of $10,000 a day, nowhere near breaking even for a show whose weekly expenses are about $170,000, not including advertising.
There is enough of an advance sale to keep the show on the boards through the first week in December.
Still, on Wednesday, Mr.
Richenthal said he had committed to a marketing plan that would keep the show open for at least four weeks, long enough, he hopes, to allow the show to kindle an enthusiasm among theatergoers.


The Spoken Word
SPALDING GRAY, Goddard Riverside Community Center, 593 Columbus Avenue, at 88th Street.
The author and monologuist reads from his novel "Impossible Vacation" to begin the Annual Book Fair for the Homeless.
Tonight at 7; cocktail hour at 6 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Information: (212) 873-6600.
READING, New York University, Glucksman Ireland House, 1 Washington Mews on lower Fifth Avenue, Greenwich Village.
Derek Mahon and John Banville read from their work.
Tonight at 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212)998-3950.


A Trial by Fists, Then a Trial by Jury
In boxing, where no outrage is too large -- witness a paraglider interrupting a heavyweight championship -- fans can pay to view a trial by fist tonight in the matter of Ray Mercer v.
Jesse Ferguson.
Or they can wait until Dec. 6 and see -- free -- Mercer's trial by jury with Ferguson as the key witness against him.
The two boxers meet in the Convention Center in Atlantic City to try to revive moribund careers.
But last Feb. 6, they battled in Madison Square Garden, in a bout in which Mercer had been promised a shot at the championship -- and a payday of at least $1.5 million -- if he won.
He didn't.
Worse, the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, has charged that when things were going badly in the fight, Mercer began offering Ferguson a bribe of $100,000 to lose.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.99
2.94
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.09
3.07
3.15
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.23
3.21
3.36
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.27
5.18
6.43
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.24
6.18
7.54
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.30
7.27
8.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.61
5.60
6.40
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


House Approves Measure On Anti-Abortion Attacks
The House voted today to make it a Federal crime both to attack abortion clinics and to assault, threaten or obstruct the people who use them, all but insuring that the proposal will become law.
The Senate voted 69 to 30 on Tuesday for nearly identical legislation.
The House approved the measure today on a voice vote, apparently to spare opponents from the embarrassment of a defeat by a large margin.
Only minutes before the House had rejected an attempt to send the bill back to committee by a vote of 246 to 182.


Review/Pop; Dylan Displays His Staying Power
On a whim backed by logistical muscle, Bob Dylan slipped into New York City this week for four shows in two nights at the Supper Club in Manhattan.
The tickets were free to fans who heard a radio announcement and braved long lines; the overjoyed audience became extras as the shows were filmed for purposes yet to be decided.
At Wednesday's late show, the final one, Mr.
Dylan strolled on stage with his band, took off his cowboy hat and picked up his guitar.
And for a little more than an hour, he performed with a fire, tenderness, playfulness and ornery charm that have surfaced only fitfully in recent years; he didn't hold back his smiles.
For those who have heard him mumbling his best songs or reducing their melodies to one note, the concert was a welcome reminder that one of America's greatest musical minds is nowhere near retirement.


William Koehler, Dog Trainer, 82
William Koehler, a trainer who taught dogs to perform in many movies and television shows, died on Wednesday at his home in Sequim, Wash.
He was 82.
The cause of death was a heart attack, said his wife, Lillian.


Brooklyn Street-Paving Chief Is Held in Theft of Equipment
The official in charge of all street repaving in Brooklyn was accused yesterday of turning the job into a criminal enterprise in which employees stole tens of thousands of dollars worth of equipment and supplies and did private paving work while charging New York City for overtime pay.
One private job on city time, investigators said, was repaving the driveway at the home of the official, Albert DelPrete, who was also accused of living in New Jersey in violation of a city residency requirement for municipal employees.


Ewing Says He'll Sit Out Until Neck Is Pain-Free
Patrick Ewing was still complaining of muscle spasms in his neck today, but the Knicks had few other complaints after a 7-1 start.
Despite injuries and playing six of their first eight games on the road, the Knicks ran off seven consecutive victories before losing to the Spurs, 95-90, Wednesday night at San Antonio.
New York has an opportunity to start another winning streak tomorrow night when it begins a five-game homestand by playing the Utah Jazz.


Inside Art
After the Auction
The untold story about art auctions is the many transactions that occur only minutes after the gavel goes down on the last work in a sale.
At Christie's contemporary-art auction in New York on Nov. 9, it was a surprise when the painting with the second highest estimate of the evening, Cy Twombly's "Untitled (New York)," from 1969, went unsold.
Christie's had expected the blackboard painting, with spiraling scrawls in chalk on a gray background, to bring $1.8 million to $2.2 million.
Although art experts consider the painting an important work, bidding never went higher then $1.5 million.
But at a news conference after the sale, Christie's officials said they thought they had a buyer for the painting.
They did.
The painting has been sold to Robert Mnuchin, the founder of C&amp;M Arts, an Upper East Side gallery that opened in January.
"Buyer and seller met on a playing field, and everyone's happy," said Diane Upright, who heads Christie's contemporary-art department.


Chemical Sales Described in Blast Case
The owner of a Jersey City chemical company described in court yesterday how he had sold large quantities of the ingredients that the Government says were used to make the bomb that exploded in the World Trade Center on Feb. 26.
Peter Wolpert, the president of the City Chemicals Corporation in Jersey City, provided a critical element in the complex web of circumstantial evidence that the prosecution is trying to spin around the four men on trial, which finished its seventh week of testimony yesterday.


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: Texas; San Antonio Celebrates New Free Trade World
Welcome to the new crossroads of North America.
Perhaps that is an embellishment of the situation here, one day after the House approved a continental free trade pact that many economists agree would benefit San Antonio more than any other major American city and Texas more than any other state.
But that was the exuberant boast from city officials, who threw a huge festival downtown this afternoon to celebrate the passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement, complete with mariachi bands and ritual shattering of cascarones, Mexican confetti-filled eggs.


A Romp in the Park Is Good for the Soul


B.C., Smarting Over Loss Last Year, Thinks Payback
The record was 0-2 and the Boston College season was already slipping away.
The Eagles had just lost at Northwestern, a team they had defeated by 49 points in 1992.
Tom Coughlin, the B.C. coach, often speaks in terms of the investment his players make during their week of work.
This was the time for a reminder that a renewed emotional investment was never so important.
So Coughlin met with the fifth-year seniors, who then talked with the rest of the team.
"We stood up," recalled Glenn Foley, the quarterback, "and said, 'We're going to play nine more games, no matter what. You guys are on scholarship. We're not going anywhere. We're not folding our tent.' "


Cuomo Sees Giuliani Role In Lobbying State Senate
After meeting with Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani for the first time since his election, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said yesterday that he expected Mr.
Giuliani to help win passage of a variety of proposals benefiting New York City that he said have been blocked by the Republicans in the State Senate.
Specifically, the Governor urged Mr.
Giuliani to clear the way for legislation that would have the state gradually take over the city's Medicaid costs in exchange for receiving a percentage of its income tax.
That proposal has been stalled amid resistance from the Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, a Long Island Republican.


Corrections
A picture caption on Monday about San Antonio's support for the free trade agreement reversed the identities of two executives of Labatt Food Service.
Blair Labatt Jr. was at the left and Al Silva at the right.


People
*
Diane Lonsdale, vice president and strategic planning director at W. B. Doner &amp; Co., Baltimore, was promoted to senior vice presidents.


On My Mind; Defining Bill Clinton
Billions to buy Congressional votes and a fist in the face to American labor -- after less than a year in office, that is what Clinton idealism came down to in the Nafta debate.
Now the President is in Seattle to face a different problem of political morality: the human right of Chinese men and women to live, work and talk without fear of years in torture cells -- to fight for it or not.


Two at U.S. Embassy Fall Afoul of Greece
The Foreign Ministry said today that two American agents of the Defense Intelligence Agency had been recalled to Washington after being arrested in a security operation that, it appears, had not been authorized by Greece.
The information was released after a meeting between Foreign Minister Karolos Papoulias and Ambassador Thomas M. T. Niles.


A Poll Shows Cuomo Rating Sliding Lower
As he nears a decision about running for a fourth term, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's approval ratings continue to slide, according to an independent statewide poll released today.
But the poll shows the Governor with a comfortable lead over the little-known Republicans who may challenge him in 1994.
Only 34 percent of the registered voters questioned by the Marist Institute for Public Opinion said they considered Mr.
Cuomo's performance in office either excellent or good.
That approval rating is the lowest registered by Marist in Mr.
Cuomo's 11 years in office and is 6 percentage points lower than in the last Marist poll, taken in May.
Half Say No 4th Term
Half of those surveyed said they did not want Mr.
Cuomo to run for another four-year term, while 40 percent said he should seek re-election.
Fifty-nine percent said they thought New York was going in the wrong direction, compared with 26 percent who approved of the state's direction.


A Wise Plan for the Mentally Ill
It took months of negotiations, but the mental health bill just worked out between the Legislature and Gov.
Mario Cuomo was worth the wait.
The measure is what it should have been in the first place: an intelligent plan to close wasteful, underused psychiatric hospitals and spend the savings on caring for the mentally ill where they live, in communities throughout New York State.
Even though the projected savings -- $210 million over five years -- won't be enough to deal with the problem, the money will help the mentally ill who roam the streets, threatening their own well-being and, in some cases, the safety of others.


McDowell Involved in New Orleans Scuffle
This year's American League Cy Young Award winner, JACK McDOWELL of the Chicago White Sox, was knocked unconscious during a fight in New Orleans's French Quarter early yesterday but was not charged.
A singer for Pearl Jam, EDDIE VEDDER, 28, was involved in the incident and booked for public drunkenness and disturbing the peace, Sgt.
ELIZABETH WIGGINTON said.
Wigginton said the fight reportedly started about 4:15 A.M. when Vedder spit in the face of another man.
McDowell, a rock musician in his spare time, was knocked out during the incident and was treated for a cut lip and scalp lacerations inflicted by a bouncer.
The pitcher was treated and released from the Medical Center of Louisiana, Wigginton said.
Vedder was released on $600 bond, a jailer said.


Ticketmaster Near Deal With Potential Partner
The Ticketmaster Corporation, the upstart whose computers dominate the sales of sports and concert tickets, is likely to acquire a major partner shortly: Paul G. Allen, the co-founder of Microsoft who is now a major shareholder in America Online, the computer-based information service.
Ticketmaster sells more than 52 million tickets a year and has annual sales of more than $1.3 billion.
The company, based in Los Angeles, is owned largely by the Pritzker family of Chicago, which owns the Hyatt hotel chain.


Joseph A. Fallon, Democratic Political Figure, 51
Joseph A. Fallon, a New York attorney and Democratic political figure, died on Wednesday in Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 51 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, said Ann Phillips, his companion.


U.S. to Weigh Blacks' Complaints About Pollution
The Clinton Administration has for the first time agreed to investigate complaints that states are violating the civil rights of blacks by permitting industrial pollution in their neighborhoods.
In a step that opens new avenues for legal challenges to the placement of hazardous waste sites and other pollution sources, the Environmental Protection Agency's office of civil rights notified Louisiana and Mississippi last month that it had opened investigations under the 1964 Civil Rights Act, which bars racial discrimination in federally supported programs.


Wall Street Sees Higher Bids as QVC's Hope for Victory
As more documents were made public yesterday in QVC Network's court battle for Paramount Communications, the sentiment on Wall Street seemed to be that QVC would have a better chance of winning by raising its bid once more, rather than hoping the court will strike down the merger agreement between Paramount and Viacom Inc.
The Delaware Chancery Court, which on Tuesday heard oral arguments in the case, yesterday released each side's legal briefs -- the hundreds of pages of detailed arguments that the court will consider in reaching its decision.


Pierce's Power Hits Knock Off Navratilova
Mary Pierce, a child of domestic upheaval who has grown into a young woman bent on survival, continued to shake off a history of private and professional vulnerability last night at the Virginia Slims Championships.
Pierce's latest victim in what she termed "a hard to explain" confrontation in her quarterfinal match at Madison Square Garden was Martina Navratilova, who became the second top-10 player to be felled by the mighty baseline whacks from Pierce's racquet this week in her Championships tournament debut.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMARILLO BANCORPORATION, Amarillo, Tex., said its stockholders had approved the sale of the bank to Boatmen's Bancshares Inc.
BASF A.G., Ludwigshafen, Germany, said it would build a plant for textile dyes as part of its Chinese joint venture in Shanghai.


Japanese Premier Wins Approval of Vote Reform
Parliament passed landmark electoral reform legislation today, handing Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa his first important victory and pushing the old party system toward a realignment.
The surprisingly strong 270-to-226 margin of victory in the powerful lower house broke a long deadlock on cleaning up Japan's scandal-tainted politics.
The outcome also underscored how much the leadership of the world's second largest economy is in the embrace of a whirlwind transition after five years of corruption scandals.


Sounds Around Town
Oliver Wasow
Janet Borden Gallery  560 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Wednesday
Collaged, rephotographed, Xeroxed and subjected to other technical transformations, Oliver Wasow's color photographs take on a soft-focus, grainy sweetness.
But that look belies their eerie subjects: in one, a colorful balloon floats over a petroleum refinery; in another, a giant radio telescope appears in a bucolic landscape.


Radar Detectors Mock Public Safety Laws
To the Editor:
"U.S. Vendetta Targets Radar Detectors" (letter, Nov. 9) by John Tomerlin, co-author of "Beating the Radar Rap: Your Best Defense Against Police Radar," suggests that the link between detector use and increased motor vehicle injury is unproved and that research for the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration concluded that "further studies of the subject were unjustified."


New TV 'Bug' for NBC
NBC said yesterday that it intended to add a new "bug" that will flash on-screen next year at the beginning of an interactive television show to alert viewers that they can play along.
It will be the first television network to start identifying interactive programming on-screen, a move that is expected to enhance the credibility of Interactive Network Inc., the first company to operate a by-subscription interactive system for television viewers.
The network has 3,000 subscribers in two California cities and began service in Chicago in September.


W.W.F.'s McMahon Indicted
Vince McMahon, the wrestling impresario, and his World Wrestling Federation have been indicted in Brooklyn on Federal charges that they conspired for years with a convicted steroid dealer to distribute anabolic steroids to W.W.F. wrestlers.
The primary case against McMahon was apparently developed with the cooperation of Dr.
George Zahorian 3d, a Pennsylvania physician who was listed in the indictment as an unindicted co-conspirator.
Zahorian was convicted of steroid distribution in 1991 after a Federal trial in Pennsylvania, in which he testified that he had supplied steroids to Hulk Hogan and other W.W.F wrestlers.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "A QUARREL OF SPARROWS," Promenade Theater, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street.
A comedy set in Sag Harbor, L.I., about a playwright who has a vision of God, by James Duffy; directed by Kenneth Elliott.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 3 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $30 to $37.50.
Information: (212) 580-1313.
"COME DOWN BURNING," American Place Theater, 111 West 46th Street, Manhattan.
A portrait of three black women and their children, by Kia Corthron; directed by Judyie Al-Bilali.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets, $15.
Information: (212) 840-3074.
Closing Next Weekend  "THE FIERY FURNACE," Lucille Lortel Theater, 121 Christopher Street, Greenwich Village.
A drama by Timothy Mason about a mother (Julie Harris) and two adult daughters struggling to find independence during the Eisenhower era.
Through Nov. 28.
Performances: Tuesday through Friday at 8 P.M.; Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"PTERODACTYLS," Vineyard Theater, 106 East 15th Street, near Union Square.
A dark comedy by Nicky Silver about a dysfunctional Main Line Philadelphia family trying to cope with a son who has AIDS.
Through Nov. 28.
Performances: Tuesday through Saturday at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $25 t0 $30.
Information: (212) 353-3874.
"SCARING THE FISH," Intar Theater, 420 West 42d Street, Clinton.
A three-character thriller by Benjamin Bettenbender, set during a company outing.
Through Nov. 28.
Performances: Wednesday through Friday at 8 P.M.; Saturday at 3 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Information: (212) 279-4200.
WILLIAM WEGMAN, Pace/MacGill Gallery, 32 East 57th Street, Manhattan.
New photographs.
Through Nov 27.
Hours: Tuesday through Friday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.; Saturday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Sunday and Monday.
Free.
Information: (212) 759-7999.


Woman Is Named to Head City Bar
Barbara Paul Robinson, a partner at Debevoise &amp; Plimpton, has been nominated to become president of the Association of the Bar of the City of New York.
By tradition, nomination guarantees election at the annual meeting in May, when Ms.
Robinson will replace John D. Feerick.
Ms.
Robinson will be the first woman to become president of the 123-year-old organization, which has a membership exceeding 19,000 lawyers.
A nominating committee chose her.


Prayer Over Intercom Is Reverberating Still
To the students at Wingfield High School, it seemed harmless enough: a simple prayer, recited three days last week over the school's intercom system at the start of the day.
But those few moments of worship have created an uproar in the school system here, exposing a rift between secular school officials and deeply religious residents of the surrounding community over the thorny issue of prayer in schools.


Try English Subtitles For World Cup in U.S.
Was that my heart fluttering with excitement while watching soccer on television?
Heavens to Edson Arantes do Nascimento, yes!
I had sat there for 83 minutes waiting for someone to score in Wednesday's Italy-Portugal World Cup qualifying game, when Dino Baggio dinked in a rebound, as Dennis Rodman would, to provide Italy with the 1-0 victory.


Crackdown in Nigeria
Almost all democratic institutions in Nigeria will be dissolved, the latest general to declare himself ruler said.
One day after taking power, the general, Sani Abacha, banned existing political parties, ordered strikers back to work and said military commanders would replace civilian officials.
Article, page A3.





Policy On Cubans Draws Fire
With an increasing number of Cuban players defecting to the United States and other countries, major league baseball's position on their signing has commanded closer scrutiny and appears to be growing closer to being challenged.
Unlike players from other countries like Australia or the Dominican Republic, Cubans are not considered free agents who may sign with any organization.
Instead, the commissioner's office says, they are subject to the amateur June draft or a special lottery between drafts and can sign only with the club that has rights to them.


Pacific Summit Should Take Up Taiwan Issue
To the Editor:
"Nationalist China or Nationalist Taiwan?" (Editorial Notebook, Nov. 9) by David C. Unger is timely, if not overdue.
China and Taiwan are not the same thing.
The Taiwanese are Chinese in the same way that we are English, though Chinese immigration to Taiwan preceded English immigration to North America.


Executive Changes
BRADLEES INC., Braintree, Mass., named Herbert R. Douglas senior vice president of merchandising.
FEDERAL NATIONAL MORTGAGE ASSOCIATION, Washington, known as Fannie Mae, named Julie G. St.
John senior vice president of transaction processing and management systems, and Michael J. Williams senior vice president of customer applications and technology integration.


Sounds Around Town
'Mexico Through Foreign Eyes'  International Center of Photography 1130 Fifth Avenue (at 94th Street) Through Dec. 12
If nothing else, this sprawling show demonstrates that an astonishing number of photographers from other countries have visited Mexico.
Edward Weston and Paul Strand are only the most prominent figures in a long parade of photographers that includes Aaron Siskind, Helen Levitt, Andre Kertesz, Ed van der Elsken, Eliot Porter, Tina Modotti and Paul Outerbridge.


Giuliani's Labor Puzzle: No Debts but Little Room
Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani will come into office in January owing fewer political debts to municipal unions than any mayor in recent memory.
But that apparent advantage will not necessarily help him fulfill his campaign promise to slash the work force and squeeze additional productivity from labor.
Mr.
Giuliani faces a political paradox.
The only major unions that supported him, the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association and the Uniformed Firefighters Association, are those with which he must bargain first.
But many fiscal experts consider the Police and Fire departments ripest for cost-saving changes in work rules.


Abroad at Home; Now, Be the President
The last week may have been the turning point for a flagging Presidency.
It can be if Bill Clinton acts on the lessons of his two triumphs in that week.
The Nafta vote in the House was the second.
President Clinton showed that he could work the political system to overcome the odds and win a tough one: win big.
He trounced the strange collection of Yesterday's Men who thought they had him beat: Ross Perot, Lane Kirkland, Pat Buchanan, Ralph Nader et al.


Williams-Sonoma
Shares of Williams-Sonoma Inc., a retailer of cookware and home furnishings, rose yesterday.
Analysts say the stock has improved recently because several of the company's businesses have posted significant turnarounds in the last four months.
As the holiday season approaches, sales appear to be accelerating.


Sabres' LaFontaine Out With Knee Injury
A rocky start by the Buffalo Sabres may get worse now that PAT LaFONTAINE, the team's top scorer last year, has been sidelined indefinitely because of a knee injury.
The injury, which has nagged LaFontaine since the season's first game, finally forced him out of the lineup for Wednesday's game against the Devils, which the Sabres lost, 4-0.


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: How Clinton Won; 56 Long Days of Coordinated Persuasion
In the last eight weeks, Representative Anna G. Eshoo, a first-term Democrat from California, has been to the White House three times, dined at the Vice President's residence once and held dozens of conversations with members of the Cabinet.
As she was leaving for Mexico on a fact-finding mission, President Clinton tracked her down by phone.
Representative Eshoo was on the receiving end of the White House strategy that amounted to a coordinated, computer-generated, all-hands-on-deck plan to pry votes loose for the North American Free Trade Agreement that consumed nearly all of the time of the President and his lieutenants for 56 critical days.


Robert Paradny, 68, Surgeon and Teacher
Dr.
Robert Paradny, a senior general surgeon at Mount Sinai Medical Center, died on Tuesday in Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
He was 68 and lived in Englewood Cliffs.
He died in a collision between his car and a truck in Englewood Cliffs, his family said.


Call for a New Study Derails a Plan to Build Luxury Homes on Robins Island
A plan to let a developer buy Robins Island, a 445-acre uninhabited island in Peconic Bay, and build 22 luxury homes there has apparently collapsed, giving new hope to groups that want Suffolk County to buy the island and turn it into a nature preserve.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has already offered to finance half the cost of a county purchase, but County Executive Robert J. Gaffney has insisted that the state finance the entire deal.


Mr. Rollins Should Say It in Public
It is understandable that Ed Rollins didn't want reporters to hear his deposition today on his own allegation that New Jersey Republicans handed out cash to suppress voting by blacks.
But his bashfulness offends the public interest in this case, which he alone brought to public attention.
Mr.
Rollins managed Christine Todd Whitman's gubernatorial campaign.
In the wake of her narrow victory, he boasted to reporters that black ministers and Democratic campaign workers were paid to keep the black vote down.
His subsequent retraction only fed the furious reaction.


Honors
*
Philip H. Geier Jr., chairman and chief executive at Interpublic Group of Companies, New York, was named 1993 American Person of the Year by the Brazilian-American Chamber of Commerce. *
Daniel B. Burke, president and chief executive at Capital Cities/ABC Inc., New York, was named to receive the Distinguished Public Service Award by the Advertising Council, New York.


After the Nafta Victory
A neophyte watching the House vote on the North American Free Trade Agreement could be excused for thinking President Clinton was the leader of the Republican Party, supported by a minority of the Democratic Party.
But however odd the coalition -- 132 Republicans and only 102 Democrats -- Mr.
Clinton won a small economic and huge political victory in pushing Nafta through the House.
Nafta will open Mexico's borders to more U.S. exports and investment, a worthwhile achievement.
More important, the Nafta win empowers Mr.
Clinton to complete the more important Uruguay Round of international trade talks.
And the vote tells Congress that the White House knows how to play tough, which should make health care and welfare reform a bit easier to achieve.


FRANCE NOW FACES U.S. ON TRADE ISSUE
The progress of the North American Free Trade Agreement has given an important spur to attempts to conclude a world trade agreement by Dec. 15, but it has also placed Prime Minister Edouard Balladur in a tight corner.
"Last night, President Clinton won half the battle," Peter Sutherland, director general of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, said today, summing up a widespread European feeling that if the accord had failed, global talks known as the Uruguay Round would have had scant chance of approval.
"I'm not here to tell you that the Uruguay Round is now in the bag," he said.
"It isn't. But it's almost within our grasp."


ISRAELIS DISCOVER ANCIENT ARTIFACTS
Racing against a deadline of imminent Palestinian self-rule, Israeli archeologists said today that teams sweeping through the Judean Desert had discovered manuscript fragments and other second-century artifacts in cliffs overlooking the West Bank city of Jericho.
The finds were not what the research teams had set their sights on: previously unknown religious writings comparable to the Dead Sea scrolls that were found in the same general area four decades ago and that became one of the archeological sensations of the century.


Miscellany
*
Pat Riley, the New York Knicks basketball coach, has signed on as the spokesman for the New York, New Jersey and Connecticut Lincoln-Mercury Dealers Association.
The first television commercial, created by Young &amp; Rubicam Detroit, carries the theme "Everybody Wins."


Killers as Victims: Defending Menendez Brothers
The defense concluded three months of impassioned testimony today in the Menendez brothers' murder trial after turning the tables on the prosecution in its final week and presenting the most damaging evidence against the brothers, a taped confession they had fought to keep out of the courtroom.
The tactic, intended to steal the thunder of the prosecutors, seemed a fitting close to an aggressive defense that has sought to turn the seemingly obvious on its head, making victims of the defendants and villains of the parents they admit they killed.


Differing on the Help Homosexuals May Need
In its treatment of the battle between the Christian right and gay rights, television often resorts to pictures of fire-and-brimstone preachings on one side and parade-float exhibitionism on the other.
Both parties are made to seem over the edge.
Although those images are used as scene-setters in "The New Holy War," Bill Moyers avoids such simplifications in this close look at the way the issue has been joined in Colorado Springs, home to a statewide movement against local laws to protect homosexuals against discrimination in jobs, housing and public accommodations.


Review/Art; Classics From the Whitney Permanent Collection
This seems to be the season for major New York City museums to retool portions of their permanent collections.
The Metropolitan Museum of Art has remounted its display of 19th-century European art in an appropriately Beaux-Arts setting, and the Museum of Modern Art has replaced its traditionally streamlined version of modernism with a disjunctive, more historically accurate onslaught of styles.
Early next month, the Brooklyn Museum inaugurates new galleries for its famous collection of Egyptian art.
Now the Whitney Museum of American Art, the smallest of the majors, has joined in with an ambitious if heavy-handed effort titled "In a Classical Vein: Works From the Permanent Collection."


Season Eye-Opener: Towson Tips Redmen
So, how are the Redmen going to do this season?
This time of year, that's always the question going around St.
John's, and it was no different before last night's season opener against Towson State in the Preseason National Invitation Tournament.


Relaxing in the Park in Autumn's Waning Warmth


Advice for Travelers During the Strike
Some advice for travelers who are planning to fly on American Airlines:
Q.  Are tickets and reservations on American still valid?


St. John's to Drop Redmen Nickname
St.
John's announced that a university committee has been established, chaired by the former head basketball coach, Lou Carnesecca, to review nickname changes for the Redmen.
The administration has decided to drop the nickname Redmen in sensitivity to Native American communities.


Autopsy Is Inconclusive in Wagner's Death
Tests of the blood of Robert F. Wagner Jr. showed evidence of Prozac, a widely prescribed anti-depressant, but the drug was not a factor in his death in a hotel room here on Monday, the local Medical Examiner's office said today.
Mr.
Wagner, a former New York City Deputy Mayor, had a prescription for Prozac, and Dr.
Vincent J. M. DiMaio, the Chief Medical Examiner for Bexar County, said in a statement that the drug "was present in therapeutic levels, i.e., levels one would expect if he was taking this medication as prescribed."


CLINTON NOW TURNS TO WIDENING TRADE ACROSS THE PACIFIC
Hoping to build on his triumph with the North American Free Trade Agreement, President Clinton arrived here today vowing to open new markets in the Pacific.
He immediately ran into obstacles from Asian officials who say the world's most booming economies are not yet ready for free-trade zones of their own.
"We come here today hoping to drive down trade barriers, open up tradeopportunities and promote more growth," Mr.
Clinton said after arriving at Boeing Field here.


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: The Partners' Reaction; Mexican Leader a Big Winner As the Trade Pact Advances
Arduously as it may have come, many Mexicans today hailed the approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement as resounding confirmation of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari's vision of a new economic future for their country.
"It's an enormous personal and political victory," the novelist Carlos Fuentes said of Wednesday night's vote.
"Salinas has really clinched his whole economic revolution. Mexico's economic position in the world is assured."


National Book Awards Announced
E.
Annie Proulx's novel about a down-on-his-luck newspaper reporter in Newfoundland, "The Shipping News" (Charles Scribner's Sons), won the National Book Award for fiction, publishing's version of an Oscar, at a gala dinner at the Plaza Hotel on Wednesday night.
In nonfiction, Gore Vidal won the award for "United States: Essays 1952-1992" (Random House), his collection of essays published over the last four decades.


Herbert Tarr, Rabbi Who Found Calling As Writer, Dies at 64
Rabbi Herbert Tarr, who left his synagogue and became a best-selling author and humorist, died yesterday at the home of his sister in Roslyn Heights, L.I.
He was 64 and lived in Brooklyn.
The cause was liver cancer, said Joe Wershba, a friend.


Sony Pictures Chief Extends Contract
Peter Guber, the chairman of Sony Pictures Entertainment, has quietly extended his contract for at least five more years to quell speculation that the top ranks of the company are in turmoil, officials close to Sony said today.
The officials said Mr.
Guber's multimillion-dollar contract had recently been signed to send a signal to senior Sony executives -- and the rest of Hollywood -- that the rumors about high-level shifts in the film company were unfounded.


CHRONICLE
RICHARD CHESNOFF , a senior correspondent for U.S.
News &amp; World Report, had just finished interviewing YASIR ARAFAT at his home in Tunis recently when the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization invited him to lunch.


Ruling Bans Recruiters Of Military From SUNY
A state court judge ruled late Wednesday that the state law school in Buffalo, and presumably all public schools and universities in New York, must ban military recruiters as long as the military continues to discriminate against gay men and lesbians.
The ruling overturns a 1991 decision by the state Division of Human Rights.
That decision said that a 1983 executive order by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo that prohibits state agencies from discriminating on the basis of sexual orientation did not apply to military recruitment on campuses.


Time to Warm Up to New Zealand
President Clinton's meeting with Pacific heads of government today gives him a superb opportunity to end one of the oddest and most painful diplomatic anomalies of the cold war: the 10-year chill between the U.S. and New Zealand, two countries that by all rights should be the warmest of friends.
Until yesterday, it was unclear who Mr.
Clinton's opposite number from New Zealand would be.
But with the final counting in a very close parliamentary election now complete, Prime Minister Jim Bolger has emerged as the winner.
Mr.
Bolger will represent his country at the APEC conference and presumably Mr.
Clinton will shake his hand.
But Mr.
Clinton should go further, by offering to begin discussions aimed at ending the impasse.


Blackhawks Reach Pact With Chelios
The Chicago Blackhawks have reached a tentative agreement with defenseman CHRIS CHELIOS on a new contract.
The five-year deal is valued at about $12.5 million, the richest contract ever negotiated by the Blackhawks.
The contract would insure that the 31-year-old Chelios, who won the Norris Trophy as the league's best defenseman for the second time last season, would finish his career in Chicago.
The team said the agreement was reached Monday night.
Only final details remain to be worked out. (AP)


Stocks Continue Their Broad Fall
For the second day, stocks continued their across-the-board retreat, as a slumping bond market and rising fears of inflation led to an investor selloff in equities.
Traders said investors were using the approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement on Wednesday as a reason for cashing in on the run up in stocks before the vote.


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: Labor; Unions Vow to Punish Pact's Backers
Leaders of the nation's labor unions today swore to get even with the representatives who voted for the North American Free Trade Agreement, and they accused President Clinton of outright political bribery in his deals to win votes for the pact.
But amid the rancor, Mr.
Clinton, on his way to Seattle for a Pacific Rim meeting, tried to mend fences, calling Lane Kirkland, the president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., from Air Force One.


Corrections
The headline of an article in some editions yesterday about the book awards announced on Wednesday night in Manhattan misidentified them.
They were the National Book Awards, not the American Book Awards.
The article misidentified the author of "The Pugilist at Rest," a finalist in the fiction category.
He is Thom Jones, not Powers.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Hertz is set to compete with Times Square's glitzy billboards.
YET another gaudy billboard is scheduled to join Times Square next week.
The Hertz Corporation has been erecting a huge sign on the side of the Marriott Marquis Hotel at Broadway and 46th Street.
The display includes the Hertz logo, a rectangular space of rotating images and a message strip at the bottom that can flash words or animation.


CHRONICLE
At one point during the Children's Defense Fund's 20th anniversary celebration on Wednesday, MAYA ANGELOU, the master of ceremonies, looked around the Warner Theater in Washington and said, "This is a hot evening."
But "hot" in Washington may be different than it is elsewhere.
The more than 1,500 members of the audience could not bring themselves to shout more than a tentative "oh yeah" or two as WYNTON MARSALIS played his trumpet.
Nor did they muster up the enthusiasm to clap to the rhythm of the Hallelujah Singers of Beaufort, S.C., who appeared as a special tribute to MARIAN WRIGHT EDELMAN, the founder and president of the organization.


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: Congress; Leadership Begins to Rebuild Old Alliances for Health Care Fight
President Clinton and the Congressional Democrats he fought with over trade began assessing the damage today, trying to find the unity they will need for health care, a legislative battle they expect will make trade look like a tea party.
President Clinton began the day by telephoning some of the Democrats he defeated on Wednesday on the North American Free Trade Agreement, said White House aides.
Representative David E. Bonior of Michigan, the House Democratic whip who led the opposition, urged him to start catering to his party's traditional base, especially labor, which bitterly fought the accord.


Review/Dance; Marking Communism's Fall With a Confessional Style
The title of "Requiem for Communism," a premiere by the experimental modern-dance troupe Amy Pivar Dances, promised, refreshingly, a political work that would look beyond the personal experience that dominates the current brand of social protest choreography.
But by the end of Sunday afternoon's performance at the Bessie Schonberg Theater of Dance Theater Workshop, the familiar confessional streak had surfaced again in the monologues of Bill T. Jones, who performed as a guest artist, Ms.
Pivar and some of her dancers.
Much if not all of what they related spoke to their real experience.
But even if it did not, the structure of the piece had a therapeutic cast -- a talking-out of problems and events rather than ideas -- all intercut with or accompanied by dance movement.


Push for Clean Air Aims to Shove 300,000 Out of the Driver's Seat
If Pennsylvania carries out a new strategy to meet Federal clean-air standards, about 300,000 people who drive to work in a 5,400-square-mile area stretching across Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Delaware and Maryland will have to switch to public transit, car pools or company vans in the next several years.
But just as big employers in the area are making plans, due late next year, to wean an average of 20 percent of their workers from their cars as required, a regional business organization is pushing Pennsylvania officials to challenge the Federal rules.
Last month, the State Legislature called on state and Federal environmental officials to reconsider the need for the transportation program.


And Now, the Asbestos Cleanup Is Complete


Home Video
A Listing Frenzy
Covers of video guides and catalogues now read 1994 and trumpet new levels of comprehensiveness.
For example, the cover of "Leonard Maltin's Movie and Video Guide 1994" (Signet) says there are more than 19,000 entries in the new edition.
Another guide, "Video Hound's Golden Movie Retriever 1994" (Visible Ink Press) counts 22,000 videos.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Rockets Still Perfect Otis Thorpe scored 16 of his season-high 24 points in the third quarter, lifting the unbeaten Houston Rockets to their eighth victory, 99-83, over the Indiana Pacers last night in Indianapolis.
Houston's 8-0 start matches its franchise record, set in 1984.
The National Basketball Association's leading defensive team, the Rockets have yet to allow 100 points in a game.
Hakeem Olajuwon had 19 points, 10 rebounds and 5 blocked shots for the Rockets and moved into third place on the N.B.A. career list with 2,476 points. (AP) Trail Blazers Thump Bulls: Rod Strickland had 9 points and 6 assists during a second-quarter offensive, and Portland went on to rout Chicago, 120-98, last night in Portland, Ore.
It was the Blazers' most one-sided victory ever over the Bulls.
They shot 68 percent from the field and outscored the Bulls by 35-15 in the second quarter to take a 64-36 halftime lead.
Portland led by as many as 37 points in the third quarter and 36 in the fourth.
Clifford Robinson, starting in place of Harvey Grant, who was ill, led the Blazers with 21 points in less than three quarters before sitting for the rest of the night.
Clyde Drexler added 19 points and Strickland had 14 points and 9 assists for Portland, which outrebounded Chicago, 59-38. (AP) N.H.L.
No. 250 for Barrasso Goalie Tom Barrasso recorded his 250th National Hockey League victory in leading the Penguins past the Washington Capitals, 3-2, last night in Pittsburgh.
Barrasso is 250-185-58 and ranks third in victories among active goaltenders.
He has 126 victories with Pittsburgh. (AP) TENNIS Sampras's Year That Is A great year for Pete Sampras is looking better.
Sampras advanced to the semifinals of the ATP Tour World Championship yesterday in Frankfurt by beating Stefan Edberg, 6-3, 7-6 (7-3).
Sampras, assured of finishing the year as the top-ranked player, improved his round-robin record in the event to 2-0.
Edberg, ranked fifth, is 1-1 and could reach the semifinals if he beats Goran Ivanisevic in the last group match today.
Ivanisevic overcame breathing problems and beat Sergi Bruguera, 6-4, 7-6 (7-4), to go 1-1.
In an evening match, Andrei Medvedev of Ukraine beat Michael Chang, 2-6, 6-4, 6-2, to earn a match with Sampras. (AP) BOXING Vazquez Keeps Title Wilfredo Vazquez of Puerto Rico defended his World Boxing Association junior featherweight title yesterday in Tokyo by taking a unanimous decision over Hiroaki Yokota of Japan.
Vazquez scored the only knockdown, flooring Yokota with a right in the fifth round of the scheduled 12-round match. (AP) HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL Back Gains 222 Yards Amos Zereoue carried the ball 31 times for 222 yards and 3 touchdowns as Mepham downed MacArthur, 21-7, in the Nassau County Conference II semifinals last night at Hofstra in Hempstead, L.I.
Zereoue, a junior, set three county season records -- 28 touchdowns, 192 points and 1,915 yards.
In an earlier conference semifinal at Hofstra, Matt Fischer completed 13 passes for 224 yards and two touchdowns as Garden City defeated Valley Stream Central, 27-12.


Nonvoting, but Student Speaks Out; Representative on New York Board of Education Chides Classmates and Colleagues
Andrea Schlesinger was explaining to a group of high school students last week the results of a survey she conducted to gauge student familiarity with the New York City Board of Education.
"We didn't do too well," said Ms.
Schlesinger, who is a 17-year-old senior at Edward R. Murrow High School in Brooklyn and the Board of Education's student representative.


What's Between Devils and First? Nothing
The Devils are hot again and playing with poise.
By beating the Ottawa Senators, 5-2, tonight, they moved back into a tie for first place with the Rangers in the Atlantic Division and they increased their winning percentage to .777, tops in the National Hockey League.
They have 28 of a possible 36 points in 18 games.
After squandering a two-goal lead late in the second period, the Devils scored three unanswered goals in the third, with Stephane Richer, Tom Chorske and Aleksandr Semak doing the honors.


Punish Demjanjuk's Prosecutors? Not Likely
Tangled jurisdictional questions plus the wide latitude traditionally given to prosecutors make it unlikely that the Justice Department lawyers chastised by a Federal appeals court on Wednesday for their handling of the John Demjanjuk case will face any sanctions beyond the stinging language of the decision itself.
And that would be all right with him, said the lawyer for Mr.
Demjanjuk, whom the Israeli Supreme Court recently cleared of charges he was the infamous Nazi concentration camp guard "Ivan the Terrible."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  CALL FOR ASIAN MARKETS  Hoping to build on his triumph on the North American Free Trade Agreement, President Clinton arrived in Seattle vowing to open new markets in the Pacific.
But he ran into obstacles from Asian officials who say their booming economies are not yet ready for freer trade.
A1  U.S.
POLICY FOCUSES ON ASIA  Administration officials say the talks in Seattle serve notice that Western European issues no longer dominate foreign policy.
A6


High Cost of Prudential's Woes
Prudential Securities has seen its share of Wall Street's huge profits this year, with record pretax earnings for the first nine months of 1993.
But for almost every penny earned, another has gone toward building reserves to cover the sizable liabilities from allegations of fraud for more than a decade.
Hardwick Simmons, the chief executive, said yesterday that the firm had already set aside $700 million to cover liabilities from sales of limited partnerships, up from about $400 million just in March.
And that figure will likely keep climbing to at least $800 million by next year, he said.


A New Jersey Neighbor, He's a Superstar in Israel
HE is mobbed in Israel.
The fans come running, wanting autographs, gushing over this or that song.
Then the superstar who fills concert stadiums and thousands of adolescent dreams returns to Cresskill, his home base for nine years, and presto: a struggling singer-songwriter is back.


Books of The Times; A Supreme Court Justice Who Turned Out Liberal
A Justice for All  William J. Brennan Jr., and the Decisions That Transformed America
By Kim Isaac Eisler
Illustrated. 303 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster.  $22.
There are enough precedents in the last half-century to prove that no President knows how a Supreme Court justice will turn out once on the bench, surrounded by formidable colleagues and embraced by the aura of the past.
President Dwight D. Eisenhower appointed Earl Warren and William J. Brennan Jr. to the United States Supreme Court -- two justices whose liberal decisions changed the country's laws and affected almost every American -- although he soon discovered they were not on his wavelength politically and regretted that he had ever chosen them.


Let Whitman Govern, Newark Mayor Tells Party
Gov.-elect Christine Todd Whitman moved today to heal a rift between her campaign and black residents of New Jersey that she said had been caused by the "unfortunate remarks" of Edward J. Rollins Jr., who was her campaign manager.
And the Mayor of New Jersey's largest city said it may be time to end the controversy that erupted on Nov. 9 when Mr.
Rollins said the Whitman campaign used $500,000 to buy the political neutrality of black ministers and to pay Democratic workers to stay home.


Pacific Summit Should Take Up Taiwan Issue; Deserves a U.N. Seat
To the Editor:
"Nationalist China or Nationalist Taiwan?" (Editorial Notebook, Nov. 9) by David C. Unger states that Taiwan independence is the official rallying cry of the island's opposition Democratic Progressive Party and that Taipei has begun to press for its own United Nations seat.
Taiwan is seeking United Nations membership as part of a divided China, not as an independent Taiwanese republic.


Ally Quits School Board to Give Dinkins a Choice
Victor Gotbaum resigned from the New York City Board of Education yesterday at the request of Mayor David N. Dinkins so that the Mayor -- and not his successor, Rudolph W. Giuliani -- could appoint a replacement to serve out the last six months of the term.
The maneuvering was the latest sign of an increasingly contentious transition between the outgoing Dinkins administration and the Giuliani team after an abbreviated honeymoon that had seemed to signal a graceful changing of the guard.


Ukraine Ratifies the Missile Pact, But Delays Ending Nuclear Status
Parliament ratified the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty today, resolving to destroy more than one-third of Ukraine's nuclear arsenal immediately.
But Parliament did not approve an accord to become a nuclear-free state, and instead resolved to destroy the rest of its nuclear weapons "gradually" after a list of 13 conditions were met.


Review/Theater: The Loman Family Picnic; The Life Of Salesman In Brooklyn
DON'T be too quick to groan over the news that there is yet another play in New York about an unhappy family drowning in disillusionment.
In "The Loman Family Picnic," a deceptively sketchy portrait of an uncomfortably married Jewish couple and their two young sons in Brooklyn in 1965, Donald Margulies has taken material as stale as yesterday's bagel and woven it into a phantasmagorical comedy of both lacerating humor and infinite compassion.
Though the play is more of an embroidered conceit than a cogently worked out drama (as Mr. Margulies provided in last year's "Sight Unseen"), it generates its own enduring resonance as a study in the wistful, self-conscious fantasies that emerge from mundane lives.
And bolstered by two impeccable central performances, this production finds a tone of bizarrely heightened naturalism that can accommodate both the play's deliberate banality and its high-flying whimsy.


House Passes Measure to Limit Use of Public Lands for Mining
The House of Representatives today approved the most significant changes since the era of wagon trains in the law controlling mining on hundreds of millions of acres of public land in the West.
The bill, which passed by a vote of 316 to 108, would eliminate the ability of mining companies to take title to valuable Federal lands containing gold, silver and other "hard rock" minerals for just a few dollars an acre.


A Strike at American Airlines Disrupts Travel of Thousands
American Airlines' flight attendants went on strike yesterday morning, disrupting service for tens of thousands of passengers in the United States and overseas.
The flight attendants -- who walked out over disagreements with American over staffing, scheduling and work rules, as well as health benefits for retirees -- said they would strike for 11 days to hamstring the airline during the busy Thanksgiving holiday period.


Imagine a Night Without Referees
The traffic cops of SportsWorld -- umpires, referees, line judges -- rarely get respect unless someone is using them to club athletes.
Some owner or league executive or media smarty will say, without the officials, those overgrown adolescents would turn Our Game into anarchy.
Everyone will nod, Oh, yes, those zebras, those blue bellies, those whistles, give a shape to Our Game, an integrity, the security of law and order.


Diner's Journal
Arrivederci, Trattoria
After a run of nearly 30 years, Trattoria, in the Met Life Building atop Grand Central Terminal, is taking its final bow today.
It opened in 1964, along with Charley Brown's and Zum Zum, in what was then the Pan Am Building, one of three theme restaurants created by Restaurant Associates.
At a time when most of the Italian restaurants in the city were either neighborhood spaghetti joints or ultra-formal places, Trattoria was sleek, modern, yet casual.
Nick Valenti, the executive vice president of Restaurant Associates, who is to assume the presidency of the company on Jan. 1 upon the retirement of Max Pine, the current president, said Trattoria was closing for necessary renovations planned for some time.
"We expect to reopen it in 14 to 18 months as an Italian restaurant in the trattoria style," Mr.
Valenti said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
A strike by American Airlines' flight attendants disrupted service for tens of thousands of passengers in the United States and overseas.
Other airlines are honoring American tickets.  [ Page A1. ]
Cable companies are being investigated by at least 23 states, including New York and Connecticut.  [ D1. ]
Prudential Securities' chief, Hardwick Simmons, said his firm had set aside an amount equal to almost all its earnings this year to cover liabilities from fraud in sales of limited partnerships.  [ D1. ]
Republic New York's hostile bid for Green Point Savings was deemed illegal by New York State's bank superintendent.  [ D1. ]
Ticketmaster is expected to get a new partner: Paul G. Allen, co-founder of Microsoft and an America Online shareholder.  [ D3. ]
Goldman, Sachs will give 30 percent year-end bonuses to salaried employees, reflecting a highly profitable year.  [ D3. ]
Merck completed the $6 billion purchase of Medco Containment and said Medco had signed General Motors and others.  [ D3. ]
UST named its president, Vincent A. Gierer Jr., to succeed Louis F. Bantle as chairman and chief executive.  [ D3. ]
Wall Street thinks QVC has a better chance to buy Paramount by raising its bid than by fighting Viacom in court.  [ D4. ]
Sony Pictures' chairman, Peter Guber, was said to have extended his contract to quell speculation of management turmoil.  [ D4. ]
Consideration of a recall of General Motors pickup trucks is being handled personally by the Transportation Secretary.  [ A18. ]
The F.D.A. approved tests of Roussel-Uclaf's RU-486 abortion pill to treat women with advanced breast cancer.  [ A20. ] International
Asian officials said their economies were not ready to establish free-trade zones as President Clinton arrived in Seattle for a summit meeting vowing to open Pacific markets.  [ A1. ]
U.S. will sell China a supercomputer in a strategy to increase trade ties by embracing the country.  [ A1. ] The Free Trade Pact
Mexicans hailed the passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement as confirmation of President Salinas's vision of a new economic future.  [ A1. ]  American businesses big and small began their rush to pursue new opportunities in Mexico.  [ D1. ]
Approval of the pact puts pressure on France to conclude a world trade agreement by Dec. 15.  [ A7. ]
Some U.S. auto workers said the trade agreement gives management an advantage in labor talks.  [ A26. ]  Union leaders swore to get even with House members who backed the pact.  [ A27. ] The Economy
The House approved changes in the law controlling mining on public lands.
The bill bars mining companies from taking title to mineral-rich land for just a few dollars an acre.  [ A1. ]
The O.E.C.D predicted the Fed would soon push up short-term interest rates because the inflation rate has stopped falling.  [ D2. ] Markets
Stocks fell again, reacting to higher interest rates.
The Dow industrials dropped 19.01 points to 3,685.34 in heavy trading.  [ D6. ]
Treasury prices fell on reports of a stronger economy.
The 30-year bond yield jumped to its highest level since August.  [ D13. ]
The dollar strengthened, partly in reaction to approval of the free trade agreement.  [ D15. ]  Oil prices fell sharply.  [ D15. ] Today's Columns
Chevron's stock plunged, taking the Dow with it.
But some think the shares are now more attractive.
Market Place.  [ D1. ]
Hertz will erect a huge billboard in Times Square, but will its message effectively reach consumers?
Advertising.  [ D17. ]


Sports of The Times; Cup Watch: Here Comes Maradona
IT was destiny.
We get Italy.
We get Ireland.
We don't get the English thugs but we do get Diego Armando Maradona.
He was always coming to the World Cup, but he waited until last because that is what megastars do.
They hide out until everybody else is assembled and then they traipse casually into a crowded room and they bat their eyes and they ask, "Oh, my goodness, was everybody waiting for me?"


Whitman Campaign Aide Testifies in Newark


Fitzgerald Spins Off Unit
Fitzgerald &amp; Company in Atlanta said yesterday that it had spun off its media department to form a separate operating company called the Media Investment Group.
Rich Simms, 36, Fitzgerald's senior vice president and media director, will head the new shop as president.
The agency opens with seven other employees and two media-only accounts from Fitzgerald -- the Mizuno Golf Company in Norcross, Ga., and Haverty's Fine Furniture in Atlanta.
In addition, all of Fitzgerald's other clients, including Popeyes Famous Fried Chicken and Biscuits, will be serviced by the agency.


ORNDA HEALTHCORP TO BUY AMERICAN HEALTHCARE
Ornda Healthcorp, a health care service company based in Nashville, said it would acquire American Healthcare Management Inc. in a stock swap worth about $400 million, including the assumption of debt.
The merged company will own or operate 34 acute-care hospitals and two psychiatric centers in 14 states and will be the fifth-largest publicly traded hospital management company in the nation.
Stockholders of American Healthcare, based in King of Prussia, Pa., will receive six-tenths of a share of Ornda common stock for each share held.


Sounds Around Town
They Are Family
Michael Leonhart Quartet, featuring Carolyn Leonhart, Zinno, 126 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 924-5182.
The musical Leonharts first won the attention of New Yorkers when Jay Leonhart began playing bass in cabarets and jazz clubs here a quarter-century ago.
The family now includes Jay's wife, Donna, a singer, and their children -- Carolyn, 22, also a singer, and Michael, 19, a trumpeter.
Michael won a Grammy Award in 1992 as the outstanding musician in high school in the United States; this year, Carolyn won Down Beat magazine's award as outstanding vocalist in college.
The two younger Leonharts will play together on Sunday in a quartet that includes the bassist Tony Scherr and the pianist Bill Charlap, another second-generation jazz star, and son of the composer Moose Charlap and the singer Sandy Stewart.
The group plays on Sunday from 7 to 11 P.M.
There is a $15 minimum and a $5 music charge.
JOHN S. WILSON An Octet at St.
Peter's
Loren Schoenberg Octet, St.
Peter's Lutheran Church, 54th Street at Lexington Avenue, (212) 556-3865.
Although Loren Schoenberg is best known as a saxophonist, he will concentrate on the piano at a concert of music originally recorded by Duke Ellington's small groups, which were led in the 1930's and 40's by Cootie Williams, Barney Bigard, Rex Stewart, Juan Tizol and Johnny Hodges.
The program may include such rarely heard gems as "Delta Mood," "Charlie the Chulo" and "Diga Diga Doo." The octet includes the trumpeter Peter Ecklund, the trombonist Mike Christianson, the saxophonists Steve Wilson, Ken Peplowski and Mark Lopeman, the bassist John Goldsby and the drummer Chuck Redd.
The concert is on Sunday at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets, $15, will be sold at the door.
J.
S.
W.
Up on the Roof
Leny Andrade, B. Smith's Rooftop Cafe, 771 Eighth Avenue, at 47th Street, Clinton, (212) 247-2222.
The Brazilian singer Leny Andrade, like Ella Fitzgerald and Sarah Vaughan, uses a mixture of bossa nova and scat singing to create strong settings for her virtuosic voice.
When she first came to the United States 10 years ago, she was not very secure singing in English; but now she mixes Portuguese and English casually, giving her singing an unusual flavor that removes her from comparison with others.
She sings with her trio tonight and tomorrow night at 9 and 11:15.
There is a $20 cover charge and a two-drink minimum.
J.
S.
W.


At Goldman, Bonus Equal To 30% of Pay
Employees at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, one of Wall Street's best- performing firms, probably left work in a good mood on Tuesday.
The firm's management informed all staff members in an internal memorandum that day that salaried employees on the payroll as of Nov. 26 would receive year-end bonuses equal to 30 percent of their annual pay.


Market Place; Plunge in Chevron's Stock Has Silver Lining for Some
Contrarians might consider opening their wallets, some bravely bullish analysts say.
When the Chevron Corporation's stock price nose-dived yesterday, taking the Dow Jones industrial average with it, the stock just became more attractive, the analysts argued, because of management's impressive job of cutting costs and hunting for new oil.
Chevron, the nation's third-largest oil company, took a major beating, falling by $4 a share, to $89, in moderately heavy trading after the Pennzoil Company sold nearly 8.2 million Chevron shares.
Pennzoil sold the stock for tax reasons and to lock in a big gain on its original investment.


Corrections
An article on Monday about a New York City police officer who committed suicide misidentified the organization, headed by Gerald W. Lynch, that produced a suicide-prevention film called "By Their Own Hand." It is the New York City Police Foundation, not the Finest Foundation.


Sounds Around Town
A Pianist's Moods
Stephen Scott, Bradley's, 70 University Place, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6440.
Mr.
Scott is the most brooding of all the young pianists, willing to let a solo sit and stew in its own funk.
His playing, more than that of many of his contemporaries, is terse and pared down, instead of overwrought.
He's also fascinated with dissonance and the shading of harmony.
He'll be playing with his new trio, including Michael Bowie on bass and Clarence Penn on drums.
Shows tonight and Saturday night are at 10 P.M., midnight and 2 A.M.
There is a $12 cover and an $8 minimum.
PETER WATROUS Keeper of the 88 Keys
Tommy Flanagan, Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, above Bleecker Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 242-1785.
The piano master returns, bringing with him his regular band of Peter Washington on bass and Lewis Nash on drums.
They'll perform perfectly balanced pieces from the jazz repertory, drawing on Thelonious Monk, Thad Jones, Bud Powell, John Coltrane and others.
The trio is one of jazz's great offerings, a chance to hear elegance in motion.
This weekend's shows, through Sunday night, are at 9, 11 and 12:30; there is no third set on Sunday.
There is a $15 cover and a $10 minimum.
P.
W.


Review/Design; Something for Everyone in 'Modernism' Show
It's "Modernism" time again.
The annual fair, subtitled "A Century of Style and Design," is in its eighth incarnation at the Seventh Regiment Armory in Manhattan this weekend, its opening salvo a compact, elegantly streamlined 1957 Studebaker Silverhawk just inside the entrance.
The car makes an appropriate spokes-object for the fair, which has shrunk a bit and shed most of the cluttered, sometimes schlock-prone booths that marred its previous appearances.
As usual, "Modernism" satisfies that not-at-all eternal question: What do you get when several dozen dealers -- whose obsessions range from American Esthetic Movement furniture and Arts and Crafts silver through French Art Deco glass to mid-century designs by Warren McArthur and Charles Eames -- display their best wares as attractively as possible under one roof?


Police Called Better Prepared for Disorders Since Crown Hts.
Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly told a City Council committee yesterday that the New York City Police Department was better prepared today to handle street disturbances than it was two years ago during the Crown Heights disturbances.
The department, under Mr.
Kelly's predecessor, Lee P. Brown, was criticized last July in a report by Richard H. Girgenti, the state's Director of Criminal Justice, as having been slow to mobilize in the Crown Heights unrest, unable to control marches and demonstrations and sluggish in changing tactics when the original ones failed.


No Headline
"I don't think that there is any doubt that low-income and minority communities have borne the brunt of our industrial life style. The cases that have been filed demonstrate the real frustrations that these communities feel." -- CAROL M. BROWNER, administrator of the E.P.A.  [ A16:4. ]


Somali Warlord Emerges From Hiding to a Hero's Welcome


Review/Film; A Movie Within a Movie, With a Demure Madonna
"Dangerous Game," his latest, is a "Bad Director" to Mr.
Ferrara's previous "Bad Lieutenant," with Harvey Keitel again personifying the film maker's darkest, most mischievous thoughts about the human condition.
Those who admired Mr.
Keitel's warmly romantic performance in "The Piano" had better see "The Piano" again for more of the same, since the Mr.
Keitel on display here is a far more sodden and primal being.


States Act On Cable Rate Rises
Concerned that some cable-television rates have continued to rise, the attorneys general of at least 23 states, including New York and Connecticut, are investigating whether cable operators are evading the rate-regulation laws Congress passed last year.
The attorneys general are studying contentions that cable operators have raised prices through what is known as "negative option" billing -- charging consumers for a service unless the customers specifically decline it -- and by shuffling some popular channels into new pricing categories to avoid rate regulations.


Rome Journal; In the Spider's Web: Olivetti Chief's Tale of Graft
Carlo De Benedetti, the head of the Olivetti computer and business machine company, is by far the most illustrious private businessman to be caught up in Italy's vast bribery scandal.
The experience, which included his spending a few hours in jail, has left him "totally at peace with myself," he said in an interview today, not because he authorized $6 million in bribes in return for Government contracts, but because such actions were what he called inevitable in the context of the times.


Review/Film; Audacious Spanish Comedy
"Welcome Mr. Marshall," a satirical Spanish comedy made in 1952, is a remarkably cheeky film considering that it was made during the repressive Franco era.
Set in Villar del Rio, a tiny Andalusian farming village where life has hardly changed over many decades, it remembers an event that turned life upside down.
Shortly after the end of World War II, a Government official arrives in the village to announce that an American committee for the Marshall Plan to rebuild Europe will be visiting Villar del Rio.
Although it isn't clear exactly when the Americans will show up, every town in the region has been asked to prepare a grand welcome.


Antiquities From Not So Long Ago
THE cultural attic has been emptied at the American Museum of the Moving Image.
This quietly spectacular five-year-old museum, part of the Kaufman-Astoria Studios in Queens, has filled its capacious third-floor gallery with hundreds of pieces of historical video and film equipment that conjure memories of a family's early television set or 8-millimeter camera and of the images they produced: the first "Life of Riley," the first "Playhouse 90," the first Uncle Miltie in drag and the first birthday party with everybody waving on a reel of Kodak.
The video evolution to today's picture-in-picture, large-screen and cable-ready television sets preparing viewers for the 500-channel universe of interactivity is abundantly accessible in "Creating a Collection," an exhibition of nearly 1,000 pieces.
Television sets produced through the 1950's looked like radiators, credenzas and huge radios with tiny screens.
The bulkiness of construction in the ancient era generated a furniture-cum-video experience.


THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: Auto Workers; Anger, Fear but Also Hope on the Assembly Line
As the first shift poured out of the mammoth Buick assembly plant here this afternoon, Bill Ferguson, an Igloo cooler and newspaper in hand, gave his version of the resignation that many auto workers felt about the passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
"That sucking sound was there before Nafta," said the 53-year-year-old Mr.
Ferguson, alluding to Ross Perot's prediction during last year's Presidential campaign.
"I think our jobs -- they're gone."


Pro Bono Accounts
*
Tampa Bay Opera, Clearwater, Fla., to Cramer-Krasselt, Orlando, Fla., as the first agency to handle its account. *
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention of the Department of Health and Human Services, Washington, to the Advertising Council, New York, to handle a five-year contract for advertising on childhood immunization to consumers and health care providers.


METRO DIGEST
BROOKLYN STREETS OFFICIAL ARRESTED
The official in charge of repaving all streets in Brooklyn was accused of turning the job into a criminal enterprise in which employees stole tens of thousands of dollars worth of equipment and supplies and did private paving work while charging New York City for overtime pay.
A1.


In the Hands of Each, an Agenda for New York


Corrections
A front-page picture caption on Nov. 10, about School of American Ballet students being fitted for "Nutcracker" costumes, reversed the identities of the children shown.
From the left were Jed Peterson, P. J. Spencer and Chris Nunez.


Treasury Notes and Bonds in Fall
Good economic news is continuing to be bad news for the bond market.
More reports yesterday showing that the economy is picking up pace helped send the prices of Treasury notes and bonds down across the board while yields, which move in the opposite direction, rose.
The yield on the 30-year bond jumped to 6.24 percent, its highest close since Aug. 18.


Man Accuses Barkley of Punching Him
CHARLES BARKLEY has been accused of punching a man in a bar who says the Phoenix Suns star swore at two women trying to start a conversation with him.
The incident happened early yesterday at Stixx, a bar and pool hall in Scottsdale, Ariz.
The police said they will investigate.
Lt.
MIKE KEELEY identified the man as EDWARD DURHAM, 36 years old, of Glendale, Ariz.


Schmalz Memorial
A memorial service for Jeffrey Schmalz, a reporter and editor at The New York Times, will be held on Dec. 7 at 7 P.M. in the Martin Theater of the Dalton School at 108 East 89th Street in Manhattan.
Mr.
Schmalz, who most recently covered AIDS and gay issues, died on Nov. 6.


CHRONICLE
What next, MADONNA?
The performer has taken her penchant for offending people wherever she goes to Australia -- by handling a didgeridoo.
According to custom, only men are allowed to play or even touch the long, tubelike wind instrument that is traditional among the Aborigines.
Madonna received a five-foot didgeridoo on her arrival in Sydney on Wednesday as a gift from the promoter of the Australian part of her "Girlie Show" tour, The Associated Press reported yesterday.


John P. Giuggio, 63, Company Executive At The Boston Globe
John P. Giuggio, former president of the company that owned The Boston Globe, died on Wednesday at his home in Cohasset, Mass.
He was 63.
The cause was multiple myeloma, said Helen W. Donovan, The Globe's executive editor.


Farr in Critical Condition After Seizures
HEATHER FARR, the golfer who has undergone surgery three times since Nov. 11 in an effort to stop brain hemorrhaging, had seizures early yesterday and remained in critical condition, her surgeon said.
"In the big picture, she takes one step forward and two steps back," said Dr.
RICHARD ZIMMERMAN of the Mayo Clinic in Scottsdale, Ariz.
Farr is hospitalized in the intensive care unit of Scottsdale Memorial Hospital-North.
She underwent her latest operation there Wednesday.
Farr, 28 years old, has battled breast cancer and other ailments since 1989. (AP)


A Times Co. Fax Service
The New York Times Company and the Nynex Corporation said yesterday that they would test a service to deliver articles and listings from The Times to readers through facsimile transmissions, starting next spring.
A customer of the service could specify an area of interest, and all articles in that area would be faxed to the customer, said William Adler, a spokesman for The Times.
No fees for the service have been determined yet, he said.


Corrections
A report by Bloomberg Business News in the Company News column of Business Day on Saturday, about the collapse of a joint bid to acquire Katy Industries, misstated the action of the Pensler Capital Corporation.
Pensler did not withdraw from the joint bid; only Pensler's former partner, Rosecliff Inc., withdrew.


Art in Review
'Fritz Bultman'  'Abstract Drawings 1958-1961'
Gallery Schlesinger
24 East 73d Street  Through Dec. 3
Fritz Bultman (1919-1985) was an artist very much in the thick of things as American modernism blossomed in the postwar years.
Although his best-known works are bright-colored Matissean paper collages from late in his career, in the 1950's and early 60's he produced a stirring body of paintings and drawings in an Abstract Expressionist vein.


Disenfranchised! How the Board of Elections Stole My Vote
To the Editor:
As a 20-year-old student attending college outside New York City, where I am registered to vote, I am careful to request absentee ballots well in advance of elections, knowing that the Board of Elections is bound to hold up my ballot for weeks.


Johnson to Buy Skin-Care Line
Johnson &amp; Johnson plans to buy a European skin-care line for an undisclosed sum, giving the American company a leading brand in France where its own products have gained little consumer acceptance.
The health-care-products company is buying the Roc line from LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton S.A. the French luxury-goods conglomerate.
LVMH was reportedly negotiating a sale price of $170 million, the French newspaper Le Figaro reported.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $90 million of debentures due 1998 priced at 100 to yield 5.31 percent through Lehman Brothers.
The issue is callable in one year.


Real Life to Linebacker For Jets' Merriweather
Until two days ago, Mike Merriweather had all the time in the world to do whatever he wanted to do.
Mainly, he puttered around his home in Stockton, Calif., playing with his 5-year-old daughter and getting in his wife's way.
All that changed on Monday when the Jets called his agent and explained their predicament at linebacker.
Starting middle linebacker Kyle Clifton, backup Marvin Jones and strong-side linebacker Bobby Houston were injured in the Colts game.
Jones is out for the season with a hip injury and Clifton and Houston are both questionable for Sunday's game against the Cincinnati Bengals.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 11 about a meeting between President Clinton and Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel misstated the whereabouts of Jonathan Pollard, a convicted spy for Israel whose release was sought by Mr.
Rabin.
He has been moved to the Federal prison in Butner, N.C., and is no longer at the maximum-security prison in Marion, Ill.


Nam June Paik to Speak
The video artist Nam June Paik is to talk about his life and work on Monday at 7 P.M. at the Asia Society, 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street.
David A. Ross, the director of the Whitney Museum, is to interview Mr.
Paik.
The event is part of the Asia Society's yearlong festival of Korea.
Tickets are $15; $10 for members, students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 517-2742.


Corporate Rescuer Is Picked To Run California Schools
Turning to a business expert for solutions that have proved elusive to educators, Gov.
Pete Wilson of California yesterday nominated a specialist in turning around failing corporations as the state's new Superintendent of Public Instruction.
The nominee, Sanford Sigoloff, who has no background in education, must be confirmed by the state's Senate and Assembly.
The 62-year-old Mr.
Sigoloff is known in the corporate community for his cost-cutting tactics in making troubled companies profitable.


Ickes Cleared After Inquiry, Partner Says
Harold M. Ickes, a friend and adviser to President Clinton whose hopes for a White House appointment were dashed in January by reports that his New York law firm was under investigation for its work for a mob-influenced union, has been cleared of the allegation by a court-appointed investigator, his associates said yesterday.
Responding to the report, White House officials said last night that Mr.
Ickes, who had been in line to become Mr.
Clinton's deputy chief of staff until the controversy forced him to withdraw before Inauguration Day, was once again being considered for a high Administration post.


U.S. Will Allow Computer Sale To Court China
In a good-will gesture toward China, the Clinton Administration has agreed to sell it a sophisticated $8 million supercomputer, senior Administration officials said today.
The decision is part of the Administration's strategy to embrace rather than isolate China despite disagreements over human rights, weapons proliferation and trade.
The Clinton Administration is determined to grab an ever-larger share of China's market, the fastest growing in the world, and reduce a trade deficit that could exceed the one with Japan by the end of the decade.
G.E.
Stands to Profit
Even more significant for American business, the Administration has also decided to lift the ban on important components for China's nuclear power plants, like generators, senior Commerce Department officials said.
That could mean billions of dollars in sales for the General Electric Company, which has begun to break into China's burgeoning nuclear power market.


TV Weekend; More on John F. Kennedy, With Patrick Dempsey
In his book "J. F. K.: Reckless Youth," the British biographer Nigel Hamilton tears into the Irish-American Kennedy family with a ferocity that a Boston Brahmin of the 1920's might have envied.
They are portrayed as vulgar poseurs.
Joe, the patriarch, is an unscrupulous businessman and a coward.
His wife, Rose, is little more than a coldly pious and superficial woman.
John F. Kennedy generally escapes the scorn, but only because he is perceived as an outsider, neglected and unappreciated until his older brother, Joe Jr., is killed in World War II.
This Sunday at 9 P.M., and continuing on Tuesday at 9, "J. F. K.: Reckless Youth" comes to television on ABC as a fairly standard four-hour movie.
Commercial television once again runs true to form.
The more inflammatory portions of the book are eliminated or muted, perhaps because the Kennedy family and their friends have publicly attacked the Hamilton book.
What's left is another television portrait of John Kennedy that promotes style over substance, focusing on what ABC calls "intense passions and inspirational courage."


INSIDE
Pollution and Civil Rights
Opening new avenues of environmental law, the Government agreed to investigate industrial pollution as a matter of civil rights.
Page A16.
New Approach on Schools
An executive who specializes in cutting costs to salvage floundering businesses was named to head California's public school system.
Page A16.
Recruiters Barred at Campus
A New York judge ruled that a state law school must ban military recruiters because the Pentagon discriminates against homosexuals.
Page B5.


Bright Sun of Trade Rising in the East
A prominent European ambassador was at the White House recently for a talk with members of President Clinton's national security team and to raise an unusual protest: the Administration, the ambassador complained, was spending too much time focused on Asia and the Pacific and not enough on Europe.
Officials say the ambassador was told politely that with Asia's emergence in world trade and with North Korea now the most dangerous threat to global stability, Washington was going to focus more of its post-cold-war foreign policy on Asia and the Pacific.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Named Don Buford bench and outfield coach.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Announced that Norm Charlton, pitcher, refused a minor-league assignment and elected free agency.
Agreed to terms with Keith Mitchell, outfielder, on a one-year contract with Calgary of the Pacific Coast League.
Gave Brian Deak, catcher, his unconditional release.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Purchased the contracts of James Hurst and Julio Santana, pitcher, and Rusty Greer and Desi Wilson, outfielders, from Oklahoma City of the American Association, and Duff Brumley, pitcher, and Terrell Lowery, outfielder, from Tulsa of the Texas League.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Designated Turner Ward and Juan de la Rosa, outfielders, for assignment.
Purchased the contracts of Lee Daniels, Dennis Gray and Paul Spoljaric, pitchers; Tilson Brito, infielder; Rick Holifield, outfielder; and Angel Martinez, catcher, from Syracuse of the International League, and Howard Battle, infielder, from Knoxville of the Southern League.
National League  ATLANTA BRAVES -- Calimed Jarvis Brown, outfielder, off waivers from the San Diego Padres.
COLORADO ROCKIES -- Claimed Darrell Sherman, outfielder, off waivers from the San Diego Padres.
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Named Harvey Dorfman instructor-counselor in charge of performance enhancement and staff development at the major and minor league levels.
NEW YORK METS -- Claimed Joe Kmak, catcher, off waivers from the Milwaukee Brewers.
Basketball National Basketball Association  INDIANA PACERS -- Placed Derrick McKey, forward, on the injured list.
Activated Kenny Williams, forward, from the injured list.


G.M. Pickup Case Is Taken Over By the Secretary of Transportation
In an unusual move, Transportation Secretary Federico F. Pena has personally taken over the case of the General Motors pickup trucks that critics call fire hazards, an agency spokesman said today.
But the spokesman, Richard Mintz, denied a report in The Wall Street Journal today that Mr.
Pena's action to take the job from the agency staff suggested that the Government might retreat from its earlier request for a costly recall of the 4.7 million vehicles.
He said the Secretary was studying several options and had made no decision in the case.


Restaurants
"You're ordering too much!"
The waiter seems genuinely appalled by our greed.
"There's no way you can eat all of that," he says as we forge ahead with our order, ignoring his warning.
But who could resist these dishes?
One description on this incredibly cross-cultural menu sounds better than the last.
We're eager to try tempura sashimi in its hot mustard Champagne sauce.
Corn-crusted skate sounds swell.
And is there anyone alive who could read "jade pesto on dragon's whiskers" and not order the dish?
Perhaps, but I am not one of them.


Georgian Talks of New War With Separatists
Georgia's head of state, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, said today that the state of emergency that was to end on Saturday will be extended indefinitely because of the rebellion in Abkhazia and warned that the Caucasus could become another Yugoslavia unless a solution to the crisis is found soon.
Mr.
Shevardnadze said in an interview that he is prepared to launch military action to recover the secessionist province unless a political solution is achieved quickly.


Pacific Summit Should Take Up Taiwan Issue; The New Intermingling
To the Editor:
In "Nationalist China or Nationalist Taiwan?" (Editorial Notebook, Nov. 9), David C. Unger recognizes the changing political sentiments in Taiwan regarding the island's international status.
His call for Washington and Asian states to begin a diplomatic dialogue in preparation for an independent Taiwan is also laudable.
However, the statement that "Taiwanese nationalists distinguish themselves from 'mainlanders' " deserves clarification.
The officially sanctioned line between "Taiwanese" and "mainlanders" has been steadily breaking down as a result of intermarriages and, more important, political liberalization.
Being Taiwanese has almost exclusively been associated with the native (nonmainlander) population, but today "mainlanders" are increasingly calling themselves "first- or second-generation Taiwanese," acknowledging their adopted home or birthplace.
A fairly young organization called Mainlander Association for Taiwanese Independence promotes not only its stated mission but also the peaceful coexistence of the island's diverse populations.
In view of Taiwan's long and often turbulent immigration history, this development is to be welcomed.
HENRY H. CHEN-CHENG  Ithaca, N.Y., Nov. 10, 1993


Russia Still Imprisons Men for Homosexuality
To the Editor:
If more attention had been paid to the translation of Arkady Bronnikov's "Body Language" (Op-Ed, Nov. 6), about tattoos in Russian prisons, it might have been more enlightening on the subjects of Russian prisons and Russian homophobia.


Rollins Says He Fabricated Payoff Tale to Irk Foes
At times expressing bewilderment and at other times turning morbidly plaintive, Edward J. Rollins Jr. spent nearly seven hours today explaining under oath the circumstances that he said led to his assertions about efforts to suppress the urban black vote in the recent governor's race in New Jersey.
In a rambling soliloquy, Mr.
Rollins said it was an effort to get in a dig at his rival political strategist in the race, James Carville, that ultimately led him to boast to Washington reporters about an elaborate election scheme that he now says is a lie.


Pentagon Nominee Defends Views As Ideologies Collide at a Hearing
A civil libertarian and opponent of the Vietnam War today defended himself publicly for the first time against attacks by conservative senators who said that his cold war liberalism made him unfit for a new Pentagon job.
In testy exchanges that reawakened ideological animosities dating back 30 years, President Clinton's choice for the post, Morton H. Halperin, responded with controlled anger to senators who challenged his judgment and patriotism.


Packwood Weighs Quitting the Senate, His Lawyer Asserts
Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon, his 25-year career clouded by a yearlong inquiry by the Senate into sexual harassment charges, is now the target of a criminal investigation by the Justice Department and is considering resigning.
"The Senator has not resigned," said his lawyer, James F. Fitzpatrick.
"The matter is under consideration."


Flight and Fancy in a Misty Harbor


Classical Music in Review
Alex Slobodyanik  Pianist 92d Street Y


Bond Prices Drop Sharply; Is the Rally Over?
The rally in the bond market, which has carried long-term interest rates to their lowest level in 25 years, may be over.
Such a turn in the market would send home-mortgage rates higher and could make the stock market, already at its own record levels, jittery.
Such a declaration is risky, mainly because of the economy's erratic performance in the last several years.
But at least that seemed to be the view yesterday as bond dealers sold and sold as if they were running for the exits.
The yield on the 30-year bond rose as high as 6.36 percent, the highest level in more than three months.


Democracy Struggles in Africa; Back to the Generals in Nigeria
The latest military coup in Nigeria is a cruel setback for democracy in Africa's most populous country and one of its richest.
Thirty years ago Nigeria was among Africa's proudest political pioneers.
Today it has become a stumbling laggard, mired in old-fashioned military rule while other parts of the continent move, however haltingly, toward democratic renewal.
The United States and Britain are right to condemn the coup and to consider further tightening the sanctions they imposed in June, when elections were abruptly canceled.
Still, the main burden of continued struggle for democracy will fall on ordinary Nigerians who, like so many other Africans, are thoroughly fed up with strongman rule.


Review/Dance; The Stylized Movements Of Indonesia
Dancers and musicians from Losari, a village in Indonesia, offered a tantalizing glimpse of a highly unusual style on Tuesday night at the Triplex Performing Arts Center, 199 Chambers Street.
It was also a frustrating glimpse, for blinding camera flashes throughout the evening made it extremely difficult to concentrate.
The Masked Dancers of Losari, accompanied by a full gamelan orchestra, were led by Sawitri Sumitra, a 64-year-old performer known as Sawitri, who is celebrated for her interpretation of the Losari style, which developed in relative isolation.
In addition to a somewhat different handling of the traditional masked-dance repertory and the different placement of the orchestra onstage, Losari dancing is distinguished by an angular, abrupt attack that gives its performers the look of hinged, stylized Indonesian shadow dance puppets.
The dancers portrayed characters, in solos and duets, rather than telling fully developed narratives.
Their masks, serene, fierce or grotesque, offered clues to whether they were good or evil.


A Casino and a Crooner: They Did It Their Way; And for the Mashantucket Pequot Tribe in Connecticut, It Was a Very Good Year
Lenny DiBartolomeo sneaked out early from his auto-repair shop to be here, partly to make it on time for the show, and partly to avoid his father, Leo, the last of the great Frank Sinatra fans and a man without a ticket.
"He would have fought for those," Mr.
DiBartolomeo said.
The elder Mr.
DiBartolomeo has reportedly transformed Revere Auto in Melrose, Mass., into something of a shock-and-strut shrine to the Sinatra legend, with pictures and album covers pasted in every open space.
"He's 70-something years old and he makes believe he's him and sings all the time," said the son.
"He did it his way, my way, back ways, any way."


A Pair of Deuces Leaves the Rangers Feeling Flush
The way Mike Gartner sees it, the Rangers' unbeaten streak seems to have taken on a life of its own.
After every game, the players check the next team listed on the schedule.
"We can beat that team," they say, shrugging off the pressure.
"And we can beat that one. And that one."
And they do.


Battles on Trade Are Far From Over
Now that the Administration has won approval of the trade agreement with Mexico and Canada, it will have to start worrying about people like Nancy J. Weaver.
Mrs.
Weaver, a 51-year-old homemaker from Mentor, Ohio, never thought much about international trade until Ross Perot's warnings of job losses made her an ardent opponent of the pact.
She came to Washington for the first time in her life on Wednesday and spent her 24-hour visit in the hallways of Congress, telling lawmakers to vote against the pact.


Pacific Nations Willing to Cut Tariffs
Seeking to spur talks taking place in Geneva to liberalize world trade, officials from Pacific rim countries said today they would be willing to reduce or eliminate tariffs on a number of industrial and agricultural goods as part of an overall agreement on world trade.
The decision by trade and foreign ministers of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum marks the first time the diverse group approached a common negotiating position on the trade talks on the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, which are currently stalled.


Review/Music; Period-Instrument Solos
It must be Generosity to the Troops season in the period-instrument world.
A few weeks ago, the Four Nations Ensemble opened a season in which regular players were to be featured as soloists.
Concert Royal, an ensemble that has been exploring the 17th- and 18th-century repertory for the last 19 years, is also giving some of its regulars evenings in the spotlight.
Its series began on Tuesday evening, when Stephen Hammer was the recorder and oboe soloist in works by Italian and German composers.
The concert began with a piece from off the beaten path, Dario Castello's Sonata Prima.
Mr.
Hammer sailed easily through the work's gorgeously ornate recorder line, and James Richman, the ensemble's artistic director and harpsichordist, provided a stylishly ornamented accompaniment, supported by Myron Lutzke's straighforward cello line.
Mr.
Hammer played the recorder gracefully in Bach's Trio Sonata in C (BWV 1032), with Lisa Rautenberg, a violinist, and Mr.
Richman and Mr.
Lutzke.


A Top Hewlett-Packard Official Is Retiring
Richard A. Hackborn, the chief architect of the Hewlett-Packard Company's $4 billion printer business, said today that he would take early retirement at the end of the month.
Mr.
Hackborn, who is 56, will step down as executive president and head of the company's Computer Products Organization, which he has headed since its formation in 1990.


Airline Sees Strike as Test of Industry
The last thing American Airlines and its chairman, Robert L. Crandall, wanted was a major strike.
Even if the strike is short -- the attendants say they will be out 11 days -- the airline stands to lose almost as much as it made all year, and this is the first year in several that a profit appeared likely.
But by taking a strike, Mr.
Crandall is hoping to make the flight attendants accept a contract that will give him more control over work rules at a time when the largest airlines see the best chance for improved profitability is lower labor costs.


Jailed Sheik's Lawyer Withdraws From Case
A lawyer named to help the blind and ailing Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman represent himself in court against charges of leading a terrorist bombing conspiracy said yesterday that he had withdrawn from the tangled case amid a judicial investigation into his conduct in other cases.
The lawyer, Robert M. Beecher, was picked at random this week from a list of lawyers certified to represent indigent defendants at Federal expense.
He was the third counsel to take on and then leave the case of the radical Egyptian cleric, who now plans to defend himself in the trial in Federal District Court in Manhattan sometime next year.


Regents Postpone Voting On Revised AIDS Guide
After being criticized by both the State Health Commissioner and a variety of AIDS organizations, the State Board of Regents deferred a vote today on a revised curriculum guide that would advise teachers how to instruct students about AIDS.
Among the changes reflected in the new guide is the view that using condoms is an acceptable way to reduce the risk of H.I.V. infection.
The old guide, which was adopted by the Regents in 1987, said that failure rates for condoms made them an unacceptable risk.


Mending Images With Pandas and Taking Home 747's
In another era of Asian diplomacy, American leaders visiting China would always stop in at the home of a Chinese worker, sip tea and painfully follow a scripted conversation about his life at home and work.
This time it was President Jiang Zemin's turn, sitting in the loveseat in Cary Qualls split-level house in Marysville, a blue-collar suburb 25 miles north of Seattle.
China's leader came with a giant stuffed panda for the Qualls's 2-year-old son, Gregory, and a doll for Marinda, their 4-year-old daughter.
There was Chinese silk for Mr.
Qualls's wife, Melanie.
And he had a lot of questions about the capitalist life of the 33-year-old mechanic at the Boeing Company, who makes mid-wing stub joints for 747's when he is not entertaining world leaders.


Ski Merger May Perk Up Aspen
For years, Aspen has been celebrated as much for celebrities like The Donald and The Ivana, as for, well, The Snow.
Now the area's two skiing companies plan to merge, which may again put snow at the forefront in Aspen at a time when the nation's $2.5 billion ski industry has finally recovered from a recession.


Review/Dance; Solo and Group Interplay: The Fagan Specialty
Garth Fagan's odd and individual brand of dance was on exhilarating display on Thursday night at the Joyce Theater when Garth Fagan Dance presented its second program of repertory.
The two opening dances, both signature pieces from the early 1980's, are Mr.
Fagan at his best.
"Prelude," danced to music by Abdullah (Dollar Brand) Ibrahim and Max Roach, could almost be looked at as the perfect introduction to Mr.
Fagan's unusual style.
Several seconds after the curtain rises, a male dancer sails onto the stage in a high stag leap.
At rest, his body is a matter of long, clear intersecting planes of arms and legs.
A descent onto one knee suddenly turns into a buoyant somersault.


Hispanic Students at Cornell U. Protest Vandalism of Artwork
More than 120 Hispanic students at Cornell University, irate over vandalism of an artwork at a Hispanic art exhibition in the center of campus, occupied the administration building yesterday and said they would not leave until the school's president agreed to meet with them publicly.
The sit-in began at 2 P.M., following a noontime rally on the arts quad, Cornell's academic center, when representatives of the school's eight Hispanic organizations formed a human fence to prevent anyone from crossing the quad.
Some pushing and shoving occurred between protesters and other students, but Cornell police reported no arrests or serious injuries.


Johnson Departs For Denver, but Mets Too Busy to Notice
Howard Johnson signed a contract yesterday to play for the Colorado Rockies, and management for the Mets barely acknowledged it.
Johnson, whose successes set franchise records and whose failures typified a club in a free-fall decline, is clearly seen as part of the past at Shea Stadium, and there is too much focus on the future for the club to pretend to be distraught over the third baseman's departure.
"I don't want to dwell on what was," Fred Wilpon, an owner of the Mets, said at a briefing for reporters at Shea yesterday.
"I want to dwell on what is."


Short Sales Outstanding Increase 3.7%, to a Record
Rising stock market volume and volatile price movements were encouraging signs to investors who sold shares short last month.
Those conditions helped the number of shares sold short and not yet covered to rise 3.7 percent on the New York Stock Exchange, to a record 1.23 billion shares in the month that ended on Nov. 5, according to Big Board figures released yesterday.
In September, the number of shares sold short fell for the first time this year.


Volek's Father Dies
DAVID VOLEK has left the Islanders temporarily because his father died in the Czech Republic.
Volek's father, PAVEL 50, suffered a heart attack.


Lower Interest Rates Favor Treasury Funds
For the last three years, the story among the 46 Treasury bond funds has been interest rates.
Unlike the United States Government bond funds, Treasury funds do not buy agency or mortgage issues.
And Treasuries carry virtually no credit risk.
So shifts in interest rates create straightforward changes in their share prices.


Owners Offer Financing For Hard-to-Sell Homes
ALTHOUGH housing sales have picked up and mortgages are available at enticingly low rates, vacation homes and hard-to-sell properties sometimes are easier to sell if their owners provide the financing.
In part, that is because home lenders are reluctant to make new mortgages on some co-op apartments, condominiums and waterfront houses.
Caveats abound about seller-financing, sometimes referred to as taking back a mortgage or making a private mortgage.
Real estate lawyers urge homeowners considering such a deal to assess the risks.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about depositions and other legal actions involving the Nov. 2 election for governor in New Jersey referred imprecisely to another deposition, in a New York case last August.
The New York Times went to court to ask that a reporter be present when Mayor David N. Dinkins gave a deposition in a Federal civil suit involving the 1991 disturbance in Crown Heights.
The Dinkins deposition was not related to a Federal investigation into possible criminal charges in the Crown Heights case.


CHRONICLE
In 1971, RUTH BADER GINSBURG got a call from MICHAEL I. SOVERN, then the dean of Columbia Law School, recruiting her for its faculty.
"Mike called and said that Columbia had given me my law degree and wanted me there," the newest member of the Supreme Court recalled at a dinner on Thursday honoring Mr.
Sovern, who stepped down as the president of Columbia University in June.
"I was made to feel very much at home and promptly joined the faculty."
Justice Ginsburg was the surprise guest at the dinner in Low Memorial Library.
Mr.
Sovern received Columbia College's highest honor, the Alexander Hamilton Medal, a prize he had presented to others 13 times during his presidency.


Nuggets Get Robertson
Denver yesterday acquired needed backcourt experience, getting guard ALVIN ROBERTSON from the Detroit Pistons for guard MARK MACON and forward MARCUS LIBERTY.
Denver also received a 1995 second-round draft pick and future considerations.


Press Eagerness for 'Miracle' Drugs Hampers Cancer Research
To the Editor:
"The Aura of a Miracle Fades From a Cancer Drug" (front page, Nov. 6) conveys disappointment with the new cancer drug taxol, implying that it was not all it was cracked up to be.
However, those involved with taxol's development never claimed it was a "miracle" or "the cure" that has been expected since war was declared on cancer.
Such false expectations have been due in part to overzealous press reports that followed reports in medical journals.


Conquering Metal at a Dauntless 91
"At 91 years old, you're immune to being disconcerted," said the artist Dorothy Dehner with a quick laugh as she adjusted to the arrival of a reporter, a photographer and a telephone repairman at her downtown Fifth Avenue apartment.
Sitting erect in a chair, her hair cut just above shoulder length and not too different from her hair style in pictures taken half a century ago, Ms.
Dehner is firm of both voice and opinion, and conveys a sense of enthusiasm -- even optimism -- hard to find among young American artists today.
The optimism is especially notable, considering that circumstances beyond the merely disconcerting have marked Ms.
Dehner's life, from the early deaths of her parents to a turbulent marriage to the sculptor David Smith, to the vicissitudes of being a female artist in what has traditionally been a male world.
From the very start, she says, it was making art that pulled her through.


Life Sentence For Youth In Strangling
James P. Wanger, 19 years old, was sentenced today to life in prison with no chance of parole for 40 years for the ritual strangling of a friend forced to recite the "Hail Mary" before his death.
Superior Court Judge Ronald G. Marmo's sentence drew gasps from spectators in the crowded courtroom, but no detectable reaction from Mr.
Wanger.
His sentence included the 30-year minimum mandatory sentence for murder under New Jersey law, plus additional terms for two attempted murder counts.


Clinton Sees Asia Exports as Key to Jobs
President Clinton today summoned the nation to look eastward now that the cold war has ended, asserting that unemployment in the United States can only be dealt with by expanding foreign trade and that the most dynamic markets for American exports are in Asia and the Pacific, not in Europe.
"The fastest-growing region is the Asian Pacific, a region that has to be vital for our future," Mr.
Clinton said in a speech to representatives of the nations taking part in the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation conference.


No Headline
"Since we are convinced he already has and will in the future put American lives and interests in jeopardy, we have a constitutional and moral obligation to oppose him." -- SENATOR STROM THURMOND, referring to Morton H. Halperin.  [ 9:1. ] "I resist any suggestion that I have done anything which compromises our nation's security or weakens our defenses. -- MORTON H. HALPERIN."  [ 9:1. ]


That Light Shining Is In Lou Holtz's Eyes
The light was lighted last Monday evening.
They gathered at Grace Hall, not far north of Notre Dame Stadium, for a ceremony that had not taken place since the current seniors were freshmen.
For the first time since 1990, the light -- #1 -- was shining atop the dormitory, across the street and up the road from Lou Holtz's office.
Last Sunday morning, when the celebration that followed Notre Dame's victory over Florida State was still fresh, Holtz said the No. 1 on Grace Hall was the one aspect of being the top-ranked football team in the nation that he actually enjoyed.
He could leave his office at night and head for the light that leads him toward home.


Jones Expects To Play Next Year
Marvin Jones, the Jets' heralded rookie, was released from Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan today and said he expected to play football next year despite a potential career-ending injury.
Jones, a 21-year-old middle linebacker from Florida State, was the Jets' first-round choice in this year's National Football League draft.
In Sunday's 31-17 victory over the Indianapolis Colts, he had a chip fracture of the left hip socket.


Charles Feidelson, Literature Professor At Yale, Dies at 75
Charles N. Feidelson Jr., an authority on American literature and on literary modernism, died on Thursday at his home in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 75 and had recently moved to Cambridge from New Haven.
The cause was colon cancer, said his son, John.


It's Time For Knicks To Play, Ewing or Not
Patrick Ewing, still bothered by a strained neck, is listed as day to day.
And Coach Pat Riley is tired of answering questions about when his All-Star center will play again.
"That's up to the player," Riley said testily today after practice.
"I never make that decision. The player knows what his limitations are. Patrick's no different. He's a warrior. He never misses games, never misses practices."


Transamerica Is Buying Key Assets of Tiphook
The Transamerica Corporation said today that it had signed a letter of intent to acquire cargo-container assets from Tiphook P.L.C., the financially troubled British ship container company, for about $1.2 billion in cash.
The assets, which make up Tiphook's container division, consist primarily of 526,000 containers called T.E.U.'s, for 20-foot equivalent units.


Dinkins and Giuliani Clash As Transition Grows Bitter
While aides to Mayor David N. Dinkins and Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that the workaday matters of turning over power were continuing apace, the two men traded accusations and sniped over contracts and appointments.
The appearance of decorum and cooperation that marked the first days of the transition continued to deteriorate yesterday amid remarks by Mr.
Dinkins, Mr.
Giuliani and some of their surrogates that underlined the tensions that have emerged between the old and new administrations.
And they could lead to more serious obstacles to a graceful changing of the guard in the waning days of Mr.
Dinkins's term.


Showdown in the House
After months of procrastination, and endless hours of back-room wrangling, the House this weekend faces a crucial vote on one of its least favorite topics: campaign finance reform.
Most lawmakers publicly deplore the special interest money that now dominates Congressional politics.
But privately many are terrified of changing a system that got them elected and keeps them comfortably ensconced.
The question is whether enough members are prepared to set aside their private ambitions and vote as the public wishes -- for reform.


Prayers and Tributes for Robert F. Wagner Jr.


Man Guilty In Killing Of Officer
A 25-year-old Queens man was convicted yesterday of murdering an off-duty police officer whose body was found in a marshy lot near Kennedy International Airport.
Prosecutors argued that the defendant, Kwame Jackson, shot the officer, Milagros T. Johnson, on Nov. 11, 1992, during a robbery in her car.
In his testimony, Mr.
Jackson admitted shooting the 25-year-old officer, but said he had done so in self-defense after she drew her gun and falsely accused him of robbing her.
He also testified that she had picked him up in the street and that they had had consensual sex at his friend's home.


Classical Music in Review
The Consortium  Kathryn Bache Miller Theater


'DIALOGUE' IS BEGUN AS CLINTON MEETS WITH CHINA'S CHIEF
Having promised this morning to tread "a more constructive path" in relations with China, President Clinton met this evening with President Jiang Zemin, leader of the Chinese Communist Party, in the most important contact between the two countries since the massacre in Tiananmen Square in 1989.
But little tangible progress was reported.
"I thought we began a dialogue," Mr.
Clinton said afterward when asked whether he had made any headway in persuading the Chinese Government to lower trade barriers, limit missile sales and ease up on dissidents.
He appeared subdued, and made it clear that there had been no real meeting of the minds between the two.


Still Tuned In
Because of urgent pleas from the receiving end, Radio Free Europe/ Radio Liberty is not going to be shut down, as planned.
Instead, legislation before Congress provides for it to be drastically truncated and reorganized under the United States Information Agency.
That's better than nothing at all, but far short of an opportunity to do far better by showing Western support for democracy in Eastern Europe at no more cost.
The immediate reason for the cuts is deficit reduction.
Beyond that is a question: why is the radio service needed now that Eastern Europe is free?


Fighting a Stockbroker -- and Winning
Rita McNamara Pleet, a widow in New York, had a complaint with her broker, and decided to take the matter to arbitration.
Instead of hiring an expensive lawyer, she got some coaching from an expert and handled the proceeding herself.
People who hire a lawyer are about 1.6 times more likely to win a securities arbitration, according to the General Accounting Office.
Those who don't, like Mrs.
Pleet, really have to do their homework.


Classical Music in Review
John Browning  Pianist Alice Tully Hall


Molestation Measure Has Come Up Before
To the Editor:
Your news article discussing my amendment to expand the admissibility of similar crimes evidence in rape and child-molestation cases (Nov. 6) describes me for some reason as someone "who is not known as a leader of feminist causes."


Observer; Easy On That Cucumber
When history honors the role played by victuals in the annals of the Great Republic, let it be recorded that it was the fruit-and-veggie bloc that saved the White House's bacon when the North American Free Trade Agreement was in jeopardy at the Capitol.
To say that the President bought a victory with oranges, tomatoes and cucumbers would be unkind to the Congressfolk of the garden and sunshine states.
Mr.
Clinton had predicted that many patriotic Congresspersons would bravely risk their political careers "to do what they think is right."


CHRONICLE
The people who plan parties for the Brooklyn Academy of Music want to take no chances with the weather.
Last December, a ferocious northeaster struck on the night of the academy's annual gala benefit.
It included a performance of "The Hard Nut" in Brooklyn followed by a subway ride to Grand Central Terminal for a party.
The show went on, but it was touch and go.
Several weeks later, Karen Brooks Hopkins, the executive vice president of the academy, and Tammy Dillon, the director of special events, were passing by the General Post Office, on Eighth Avenue at West 33d Street, when they noticed the inscription, "Neither rain, nor snow nor heat. . . ."


Magazine Deal Aims at Youths
To develop joint ventures in the youth magazine market, Cowles Magazines Inc. and the Welsh Publishing Group will form a partnership to publish Quake, an entertainment and style magazine for teen-agers.
Quake was started in August by Welsh as a kind of People magazine for 13- to 19-year-olds.
The two founding editors are in their 20's.


Corrections
A picture caption on Monday about the search for ways to dispose of plutonium described the bunker shown at a plant near Amarillo, Tex., incorrectly.
It is being used to test a storage system; no plutonium is stored in the bunker now.


Q &amp; A
Using a Credit Shelter Trust
Q When should a credit shelter trust be used in a will?
RUSSELL HERTOPHILIS, Ridgewood, N.J.


Jordan Gets $4 Million
MICHAEL JORDAN will be paid his full 1993-94 salary of $4 million, apparently in a gesture of gratitude and possibly to protect the Bulls' option to sign another player for $2 million, published reports say.
Team owner JERRY REINSDORF, is also expected to honor an additional $11.7 million remaining on Jordan's deal, The Chicago Sun-Times reported yesterday. (AP)


A.T.&amp; T. In a Large Ad Shift
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said yesterday that it was awarding the largest piece of its long-distance advertising business to FCB/Leber Katz &amp; Partners in New York, a move that takes the lucrative account away from Ayer Inc. in New York, which has worked with A.T.&amp; T. since 1908.
The change underscores the intensity of competition with the MCI Communications Corporation and the Sprint Corporation for long-distance customers.


Yanks Stay by the Phone. It's Not Ringing.
Randy Johnson, Mark Langston and Pete Harnisch would fit nicely into any team's starting pitching rotation, but the Yankees' effort to place one of the trio into theirs is progressing so slowly it's not going anywhere.
The general managers of the teams those pitchers work for said yesterday that they were not close to making a trade with the Yankees and offered reasons why it would be difficult, if not impossible, for the Yankees to get any of the three.


Mob Boss and Stoolie Share a Day in Rome Court
They sat in court today side by side, the mob boss and the informer, with no more between them than a few feet of space and a mutual hatred.
Salvatore (Toto) Riina, the reputed "boss of all bosses" of the Sicilian Mafia, sat accused, among many other things, of ordering the murders of two sons, a brother and 33 other relatives of Tommaso Buscetta, the man who sat next to him.
A Star Witness
Mr.
Buscetta, living under witness protection in the United States, is probably the most important of the Mafia bosses to have turned against the mob and informed on it.
The huge Mafia trials of recent years, when more than 300 mafiosi were jailed, were based in part on Mr.
Buscetta's disclosures about the era of the early 1980's when Mr.
Riina's family battled its way to dominance in the Sicilian mob.
Mr.
Buscetta was one of the losers in that power struggle.


Review/Music; Urbane Dance Rhythms Offered by Dutoit
Charles Dutoit's program with the Philharmonic on Thursday night had great promise, intelligently combining three very different works from the first half of the 20th century: Strauss's "Bourgeois Gentilhomme" suite, Martinu's Symphony No. 6 (from 1953) and "La Valse" by Ravel.
What these pieces all share is a certain urbane, post-Romantic extension of dancing rhythm: Strauss's pastiche of minuets and courantes, Martinu's stamping, folk-tinged sequences and Ravel's apotheosis of the waltz.
Unfortunately, the Philharmonic didn't seem to be in the mood to dance.
The Strauss, at the beginning of the program, received an alarmingly drab and desultory performance.
Here is a score marked with instructions like "grazioso," "galante," "animato" and, over and over, "schnell" -- fast.
Yet Mr.
Dutoit's tempos consistently sagged, and some crucial shifts of pace were brushed aside.
The Philharmonic players rambled through the score with little grace or gallantry; brass and winds repeatedly overwhelmed the strings.
Strauss stacked a house of stylistic cards in this piece, and on Thursday night it came tumbling down.


27 Inmates Killed in Salvadoran Prison Riot


Priest Charged In Robbery Freed on Bail
Calling the charges against him "fabricated" and "totally preposterous," the Rev.
Patrick Moloney was freed on $1 million bail yesterday, a week after he and two other men were charged in the $7.4 million robbery of a Brink's armored-car service in Rochester.
"I see it as an F.B.I. conspiracy," Father Moloney, 61, said while surrounded by relatives on the steps of the United States Court House at Foley Square.
Raising his voice, he said, "Remember, you're innocent until proven guilty."


Dow Makes Slight Gain In Broad Market Slump
Stocks were mostly lower yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average the only market indicator posting a gain on the day.
The average rose 8.67 points to close at 3,694.01, up 9.50 points for the week.
On Tuesday the Dow posted a record high of 3,710.77.
While some of the large capitalization stocks rose, the remainder of the market slumped.
Investors, some traders said, were focused on rising interest rates and the state of the economy.


Where Museums Will Find Their New Leaders; A Comeback in Detroit
To the Editor:
While it is understandable that you would want to present a worse-case comparison in your Nov. 9 article on the troubles of the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, I would suggest that the Detroit Institute of Arts deserves better treatment than you afford us.


Two Paths Taken to Semifinals Of Slims
Tie breaker, tie breaker, win me a match, or at least help me postpone losing it.
That was Arantxa Sanchez Vicario's tune last night as she lost the first set tie breaker but used a second-set one to force a third set against Jana Novotna, who shot boldly but not always sharply in the quarterfinals of the Virginia Slims Championships.


Where Museums Will Find Their New Leaders
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 9 article on the Los Angeles County Museum of Art is a welcome addition to the discussion of that troubled institution's history since the departure of Earl A. Powell 3d more than a year and a half ago.


Palermo Has Surgery
Former umpire STEVE PALERMO was in stable condition last night following nearly 10 hours of risky neurosurgery on his spine.
The operation was undertaken in an effort to give him full use of his left leg, damaged in a 1991 shooting.
There was no word on the result of the surgery, performed at the University of Massachusetts Medical Center in Worchester, Mass.


Bridge
The American Contract Bridge League's Fall National Championships, the 65th in the series, began here this afternoon.
Thousands of players are assembled for 10 days of competition that will decide seven major titles and a host of minor ones.
The earlier contest for the Presidential suite at the Sheraton Hotel here has been settled diplomatically.
Barbara Nudelman, president of the American Contract Bridge League, continues to occupy the suite, but the label on the door has been transferred to the slightly smaller suite now occupied by the President of South Korea, who is attending the Asian leaders' conference with President Clinton.


Corrections
A dance review last Saturday misstated the name of a troupe.
The dance company is Iso; it calls itself Isobobs only when it performs with the Bobs, a singing group.


Retail Post Is Filled
John W. Burden, the former chairman of Federated Department Stores Inc. and Allied Department Stores Inc., has joined Retail Options Inc., a retail consulting firm.
He is taking the position formerly held by Melvin Jacobs, a founding partner in Retail Options and a former chairman and chief executive of Saks Fifth Avenue, who died in October.


U.S. Offers a $100 Million Peace Deal to Somalia
After deciding to pull all American troops out of Somalia by the end of next March, the Clinton Administration announced today that it would offer the country $100 million in aid at a big international conference on economic reconstruction opening in Addis Ababa later this month if its warring factions agree to make peace.
The Clinton Administration has asked other aid-giving countries to make similar concrete offers to the Somalis at this meeting.
The idea, officials here say, is to encourage Somalia's warring factions to lay down their arms and accept national reconciliation by showing them they can expect a sizable amount of foreign aid if they cooperate.


Dawn Upshaw Cancellation
The soprano Dawn Upshaw has canceled her Dec. 5 recital at Alice Tully Hall because of her pregnancy.
Refunds may be obtained in person or by mail from the Tully Hall Box Office, Broadway at 65th Street, New York, N. Y. 10023.
Information: (212) 875-5050.


David R. Schweisberg, Journalist, 39
David R. Schweisberg, manager at the Beijing bureau of United Press International, died on Nov. 11 in Beijing.
He was 39.
He collapsed in the lobby of the China World Hotel after playing squash in the gymnasium there.
He was pronounced dead at Union Hospital.
U.P.I. said a heart attack was apparently the cause.


Music for Hunger Relief
A benefit performance to raise money for Oxfam, a hunger relief organization, is to take place at Avery Fisher Hall tomorrow at 7:30 P.M.
Among the artists scheduled are the sopranos Grace Bumbry, Leona Mitchell and Kallen Esperian, the bass Paul Plishka and Vincenzo La Scola, a tenor.
Robert Bass is to conduct.
The first half of the program is to be devoted to opera arias; the second half to American works, spirituals and folk songs.
Tickets are $15 to $55.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


3DO Sales Called Pleasing
About 30,000 of the new video-game machines designed by the 3DO Company have been bought by consumers since the product went on sale in the United States in October, an official of the Japanese company that makes and sells the machine said today.
Executives of the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company and of 3DO's Japanese subsidiary cited the figures today to take issue with comments made Thursday by Tsuzo Murase, executive vice president of Matsushita.
Mr.
Murase had said the new 3DO machine was not selling well because only four games were available to play on the machine.


Joseph Gillis, Mathematician, 82
Joseph Gillis, a mathematician and educator at the Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovot, Israel, died there on Thursday.
He was 82.
From 1948 until recently, Dr.
Gillis taught mathematics at the institute and helped develop mathematics education in Israel.
He became director of the institute's science research and teaching programs, and later a professor emeritus.


Air Travelers May Face a Void as Thanksgiving Nears Without American
With American Airlines crippled by the walkout of its flight attendants, other carriers are re-routing planes, adding flights and putting bigger aircraft on routes shared with American.
Unfortunately for passengers booked on American, the other airlines said yesterday that they could add only a tiny percentage of extra flights with Thanksgiving week, the busiest travel week of the year, upon them.


INSIDE
Man Gets Life Sentence In 'Hail Mary' Strangling
A 19-year-old man from Clifton, N.J., was sentenced to life in prison with no chance of parole for 40 years for the strangling of a friend, who was forced to recite the "Hail Mary" before his death.
The defendant, James P. Wanger, was convicted of killing Robert A. Solimine Jr., 17.
Page 23.
School Acid Attack Hurts 18
A 17-year-old girl sprayed sulfuric acid in a Queens high school, injuring 18 people, the police said.
Page 23.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about turmoil in Georgia referred incorrectly to Eduard A. Shevardnadze, the Georgian leader.
He is a former Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union, but not the last one.


Generals May Bring Chaos to Nigeria
With the generals once again in open and absolute command, Nigeria is facing the prospect of economic chaos, political upheaval and perhaps even conflict between its two major tribes, the politically dominant Hausa in the north and the restive Yoruba in the southwest, Nigerians, diplomats and foreign experts say.
Some of the experts say the crisis is more dire than any since 1967, when the eastern region called Biafra tried to split away, plunging the country into three years of civil war that cost up to a million lives.


Critic's Notebook; Tuning In Once Again to Albee
"You don't listen," a sometimes catatonic girl reiterates, with varying degrees of resignation and anger, in one of the two single-act plays that make up the second offering of the Signature Theater Company's season, which is devoted to the works of Edward Albee.
It is an accusation that Mr.
Albee himself might address to the New York audiences who have largely abandoned him in recent years.
When "Listening" and "Counting the Ways" were first presented in the States, at the Hartford Theater Company in 1977 (they are only now receiving their New York premiere), fashionable theatergoers were growing tired of dutifully furrowing their brows over Mr.
Albee's increasingly opaque plays.
And by the mid-1980's, after several Broadway disasters, Mr.
Albee's work had been largely consigned, in this country at least, to academia.


Publio A. Esperdy, 89, Immigration Official
Publio A. Esperdy, who was the Immigration and Naturalization Service's district director for the New York region for a dozen years beginning in 1959, died on Wednesday at Sunrise Medical Center in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
He was 89 and had lived in retirement in Fort Lauderdale.
The cause was cardiac arrest, said his son Philip.


For Travelers in New Jersey, the 'Missing Link' Is No Longer


Sports of The Times; A Forecast Calling For Nasty
SAM HUFF is praying for rain.
And snow, and bone-chilling cold, and anything else that will make life miserable for the Miami Hurricanes here today when they take on Huff's beloved, undefeated West Virginia Mountaineers.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Purchased the contracts of Joe Vitiello and Les Norman, outfielders, and Joe Randa and Shane Halter, infielders, from Memphis of the Southern League, and Chad Strickland, catcher, Gary Caraballo, infielder, and Darren Burton, outfielder, from Wilmington of the Carolina League.


New Socialist Realism: Emigres' Bleak Canvases
FOR most of the 250 visual artists and musicians who filed into a meeting room at the UJA building on 59th Street in Manhattan, things had not been going so well as they had hoped when they left the former Soviet Union.
"To leave one country for another and to try to make a living in the arts is very hard," said Michael Preston, an official of the New York Association for New Americans, greeting the guests at a daylong seminar for the immigrants entitled "The Business of Arts in America."


Classical Music in Review
Patricia Spencer  Flutist Da Capo Players Sonic Boom Festival Merkin Concert Hall


Rap Performer Is Charged In Midtown Sex Attack
The rap performer Tupac Shakur, who was charged in Atlanta last month in the shooting of two off-duty police officers during a traffic dispute, was arrested on Thursday night and charged with taking part in a sexual attack on a woman in a Manhattan hotel, the police said.
Mr.
Shakur, who had a leading role with Janet Jackson in the recent movie "Poetic Justice," held down the victim as another man sodomized her in the bedroom of a suite at the Parker Meridien Hotel, police investigators said.
As the woman tried to escape, two friends of the rapper restrained her, said Sgt.
Edelle James, a police spokeswoman.
They were also arrested, but the fourth man got away.


Democracy Struggles in Africa; A Victory in South Africa
South Africans of every color, haves as well as have-nots, have brought off a considerable political feat.
They agreed this week to an interim constitution free of racist taint; for the first time it makes the black three-fourths of the population full citizens.
It establishes a multiracial transition regime that will govern until April 27, when an elected parliament will give final form to the new system.
The interim document incorporates a bill of rights, assures minority parties a cabinet voice for an initial five years, dissolves 10 apartheid-engendered homelands, yields important powers to regional governments and is crowned with a constitutional court, its judges named by the President from a list prepared by a nonpartisan judicial panel.


Panel Gives Giuliani List of 3 for Police Post, Including Kelly
A search committee has given Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani three recommendations for police commissioner, including Raymond W. Kelly, the current head of the 30,000-officer force, Giuliani aides said yesterday.
Besides Mr.
Kelly, the committee gave high marks to John C. Lawn, a former chief of the Drug Enforcement Administration who served with Mr.
Giuliani in the Reagan Justice Department, and Henry I. DeGeneste, a former superintendent of the Port Authority police.


American Airlines' Pilots Decide To Fly Empty Jets to Back Strike
Pilots at American Airlines announced today that they would not walk off their jobs, saying they could better support striking flight attendants by continuing to fly empty jets, costing the carrier millions of dollars a day.
The pilots' union said more than half of American's nearly 3,000 flights scheduled since the start of the strike Thursday morning had gone without passengers.
The pilots contend that the strike is costing the carrier $25 million a day, but some industry analysts say the figure is much lower.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-6 CLINTON TELLS OF CHINA DIALOGUE
After President Clinton met with President Jiang Zemin, little tangible progress was cited in the most important U.S.-Chinese contact since the Tiananmen massacre in 1989.  1


Dr. Ronald M. Abel, Cardiothoracic Surgeon, 52
Dr.
Ronald M. Abel, a cardiothoracic surgeon, died on Thursday at University Hospital in Newark.
He was 52.
The cause was injuries received in an automobile accident when he was driving to his home in Essex Falls, N.J., on Wednesday night, his family said.


Republic Withdraws Offer for Green Point
Faced with tough opposition from the New York State Superintendent of Banking, the Republic New York Corporation said late yesterday that it was withdrawing its $250 million offer to acquire Green Point Savings Bank.
It was unclear, however, whether Republic had completely ended its efforts to acquire Green Point, which had previously rejected the hostile takeover bid.
Green Point is planning to convert from a mutual savings bank to a publicly owned company through a stock offering.


Friends and Officials Pay Tribute At Mass for Robert F. Wagner Jr.
Thousands of mourners, from five former, present and future Mayors to onetime constituents and City Hall gadflies, jammed St.
Patrick's Cathedral yesterday to celebrate a funeral Mass for Robert F. Wagner Jr., who was hailed as a dedicated son of the city.
Mr.
Wagner, who died on Monday in San Antonio at age 49, was a heart-attack victim, Dr.
Vincent J. DiMaio, the Chief Medical Examiner there, concluded yesterday.
He said the heart attack was possibly set off by a flulike illness that Mr.
Wagner complained of over the weekend.


Bad Liebenwerda Journal; For Passionate East German, a Bushelful of Love
Apples and applause follow Regine Hildebrandt on her high-powered drive to humanize the process of German unification.
Apples are known as Mrs.
Hildebrandt's favorite food.
She eats 10 to 20 a day, and because her legend precedes her wherever she goes hosts often welcome her with a ceremonial bowlful.


Actors' Equity Ratifies Off Broadway Contract
Actors' Equity, the 35,000-member actors' union, has ratified a new four-year contract with the League of Off Broadway Theaters and Producers, after six weeks of negotiation.
The contract, approved on Tuesday by the union's 70-member council, will cover 40 Off Broadway theaters and producing organizations in Manhattan, both commercial and nonprofit.
Some of New York's best-known institutional theaters, including the Manhattan Theater Club, the New York Shakespeare Festival and Playwrights Horizons, are included.


METRO DIGEST
ROLLINS EXPLAINS HIS ASSERTIONS
Sometimes expressing bewilderment and at other times turning morbidly plaintive, Edward J. Rollins Jr. spent nearly seven hours explaining under oath the circumstances that he said led to his assertions about efforts to suppress the urban black vote in the recent governor's race in New Jersey.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY
DINKINS AND GIULIANI TRADE ACCUSATIONS
While aides to Mayor Dinkins and Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani said that the workaday matters of turning over power were continuing apace, the Mayor and his successor traded accusations and sniped over contracts and appointments.
Page 24.


19 Injured as Student Sprays Acid in High School
A 17-year-old girl who a friend said had been bullied by other girls for a year sprayed highly corrosive sulfuric acid in a crowded hallway at a Queens high school yesterday, critically burning an assistant principal and inflicting less severe burns on a security guard and 16 students, the police said.
Pandemonium erupted in the second-floor hallway at Springfield Gardens High School in Springfield Gardens shortly after 10:30 A.M., the police said, as the girl showered the faces, necks, arms and hands of the victims by repeatedly pumping the trigger of an acid-filled plastic spray bottle.


Review/Film; Dog Bites Man and Everything Else in Sight
Don't blame poor Max for all the mayhem he wreaks.
Without his tranquilizers, the canine horror who growls and chomps his way through John Lafia's film "Man's Best Friend" can't help losing his temper.
A guard dog who becomes increasingly crazed and vicious as the movie goes along, he is the object of a genetic experiment that has infused him with the aggressive qualities of other creatures, including a cobra and a leopard.
If Max, an enormous Tibetan mastiff, doesn't get his regular shots, he will go ballistic.
And when he escapes from the laboratory in which he is being bred by the fiendish Dr.
Jarret (Lance Henriksen), there is no one to pacify him.
Max can scurry up trees, outrun any police car and comprehend 350 spoken words, in English and Spanish.
If he doesn't like his food, he'll personally dump it into the toilet.
He is even capable of mechanically sabotaging an automobile.
And heaven help the mailman.


Corrections
An article in some editions last Saturday about the arrest of three suspects in an armored car robbery in Rochester referred imprecisely at one point to one suspect, the Rev.
Patrick Moloney.
As the article stated elsewhere, Father Moloney is a priest in the Melkite Catholic church (Eastern rite).
That church recognizes the authority of the Pope but is not usually referred to as Roman Catholic.


A Lifetime of Care: What's It Worth?
Twenty years after selling a chain of pastry shops in Tulsa, Okla., and retiring to Florida, William and Marilou Mobley made another big life decision.
This month, they moved into a full-service retirement community in Naples, Fla., with nursing care.
Mr.
Mobley, 80, and Mrs.
Mobley, 75, live in an apartment complex chock-full of amenities, receive one meal a day, and can count on nursing home care at no additional cost if they ever need it.


Refs, N.H.L. to Meet
DON MEEHAN, the agent representing the 58 striking officials of the National Hockey League, said yesterday that the association and the league would meet tomorrow in an attempt to negotiate a settlement of the walkout that began last Monday.
The sides are about $1.5 million per year apart.


Beware the Odd Twists In Foreign Investments
AS more and more Americans invest abroad, there is something they should know: Kansas it's not.
Foreign markets are not as odd as Oz, of course.
But in seeking profits from free trade agreements or Communism's eclipse, investors will encounter issues they need not worry about at home.


The Scribners List
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 11 Business Day report of the sale of Macmillan to Paramount names as prominent writers on the Macmillan list Edith Wharton, Ernest Hemingway and Scott Fitzgerald.
These are not Macmillan authors, but Scribners authors.
For a decade Scribners has been part of the Macmillan group, but it retains its imprint and editorial staff and continues, for example, to provide Wharton's "Age of Innocence" to moviegoers dazzled or puzzled by the film.


Japan Gets Unfair Blame on Peacekeepers
To the Editor:
An Oct. 24 article on Japanese participation in the United Nations transitional authority in Cambodia is based on erroneous information from United Nations officials in Cambodia.


In the Ring, Decision Goes Ray Mercer's Way
The judges failed to agree on Ray Mercer tonight.
But he won a 10-round heavyweight split decision here over Jesse Ferguson, the man he calls a friend and who will testify against him in Manhattan in 17 days in Mercer's trial for sports bribery.
This was an intense rematch of their bout last Feb. 6, when Ferguson won an easy decision at Madison Square Garden.
In that bout, Manhattan District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau has charged that Mercer repeatedly talked to Ferguson and offered him $100,000 if he would throw the fight.


Picturing the Presidents


Dr. Walther F. Goebel, Immunologist, 93
Dr.
Walther F. Goebel, an immunologist who was a professor emeritus of biochemistry at Rockefeller University in Manhattan, died on Nov. 1 at his home in Essex, Conn.
He was 93.
Dr.
Goebel joined the university in 1924 and during his 46-year career there conducted research aimed at a greater understanding of the body's chemical defenses against infection.


SPLITS OVER GUNS
The Senate today overwhelmingly passed a broad and expensive anticrime package whose leading provisions would add 100,000 police officers to the nation's streets, build a network of high-security regional prisons and create more boot camps for young offenders.
But a related and more contentious piece of legislation, the Brady gun-control bill, stumbled badly when its supporters failed tonight to break a Republican-led filibuster against it.
That development appeared to doom the bill's chances for two months at the very least, until after the Senate returns in late January from its winter recess.


Topics of The Times; Smooth Talker
That New Yorkers will start talking at the drop of a hat, the blink of a traffic light or the beginning of a question is known to anyone who's ever hung around a coffee shop or a street corner.
What is probably not so well known is that many of them have many languages in which to say, "Hey! How about those Giants?" and "Do you come here often?"
Take, for instance, the man in the blue serge suit.
The man in the blue serge suit got on a Lexington Avenue bus one day this week, sat down and immediately said something about the weather ("like a day in May") to the woman at his right.
His English bore no trace of a foreign accent.


Missing Link of Interstate Opens, Despite Lawsuit
The dream of traffic planners of the 1950's -- the creation of a high-speed bypass around the New York metropolitan area to New England -- moved closer to reality today as New Jersey officials opened the "missing link" of Interstate 287.
But even as Gov.
Jim Florio and other officials gleefully snipped the red, white and blue ribbon stretched across the roadway where it spans the Wanaque River in Passaic County, officials in Rockland County in New York State were trying to shut down the six-lane section of superhighway, which has been on drawing boards for nearly 40 years.


Classical Music in Review
David Starobin  Guitarist Weill Recital Hall


F. William Scott, Art Director, 62
F.
William Scott, a retired art director at The New York Times, died yesterday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 62 and lived in Upper Black Eddy, Pa.
He had had a brief illness, said a friend, Donn Talenti.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Ukraine's formal ratification of the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty misstated the date of the country's first agreement to be bound by the pact.
It was in May of 1992, not November.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Ivanisevic Continues Mastery of Edberg  Goran Ivanisevic fired 20 aces and beat Stefan Edberg for the sixth time in a row to reach the semifinals of the ATP Tour World Championship yesterday in Frankfurt.
Ivanisevic won the error-filled match, 7-6 (7-3), 6-7 (5-7), 6-3, and will meet Michael Stich in the semifinals today.
Edberg, the tournament champion in 1989, served 9 double-faults, had only 3 aces and hit 35 winners to Ivanisevic's 59.
The Croatian also had 27 service winners to Edberg's 4.
Pete Sampras, the top-ranked player in the world, will face Andrei Medvedev in the second semifinal. (AP) HOCKEY  Mogilny Scores 3 as Sabres Shut Out Jets  Buffalo's new captain, Aleksandr Mogilny, scored three goals and had one assist as the Sabres won their first home game of the season, beating the Winnipeg Jets, 6-0, last night.
Buffalo was 0-7-0 in home games this year.
Goalie Grant Fuhr made 22 saves in recording his first shutout of the season.
Mogilny was made captain after it was announced Thursday that Pat LaFontaine would be out indefinitely with a knee injury. (AP) HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL  Michielini's 200 Yards Pace Lynbrook  Andrew Michielini ran for 200 yards and 2 touchdowns as Lynbrook defeated Seaford, 31-20, yesterday in the Nassau County Conference III semifinals at Hofstra University.
His scores came on runs of 3 and 2 yards.
Quarterback Lou Santorella completed all 5 of his pass attempts for 68 yards and scored on a 3-yard dash.
In the conference final on Dec. 3, Lynbrook meets New Hyde Park, which routed West Hempstead, 35-6, last night as Greg DiNicola rushed for 3 touchdowns in the first half.


Religion Notes
Greetings for Charity
It may still seem a bit early to send Christmas cards, but baskets full of old cards have been arriving virtually since last Christmas at a church in Dutchess County, N.Y.


Elliott Likely to Miss Game With Eagles Because of Bad Back
First the bad news: Giants offensive tackle Jumbo Elliott probably won't play against the Philadelphia Eagles on Sunday because of a bad back.
The good news?
The Eagles are so banged up on the defensive line that they really don't have the players to take advantage of Elliott's absence.
Elliott suffered back spasms on Thursday during a routine blocking play while running at three-quarter speed.
At first, the Giants thought the situation wasn't bad, saying that he has a chronic back problem and that he has been through this type of injury.
This morning, their hopes of a quick recovery by Elliott were dashed after he woke up with a sore back.


Both Sides in Coal Strike Report Settlement Is Near
After weeks of trying to negotiate an end to a strike that has closed many of the nation's coal mines for six months, union and company officials said today that considerable progress was being made and that an agreement might soon be reached.
The strike, involving 17,700 miners and six coal producers in seven states, began on May 10 after fruitless talks over job security, health benefits and work rules.
"We're driving toward a conclusion," said Thomas Hoffman, a spokesman for the Bituminous Coal Operators Association, which represents the producers.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
President Clinton met with China's President, Jiang Zemin, hoping to persuade his Government to lower trade barriers, limit missile sales and ease up on dissidents.
But he said there had been no real meeting of the minds between the two.  [ Page 1. ]
Pacific Rim countries offered to reduce or eliminate many tariffs to spur stalled GATT world trade talks.  [ 6. ]  Now that the three-nation North American Free Trade Agreement has been passed, attention is shifting to the 116-country GATT.  [ 45. ]


COALITION IN HOUSE MOVES ON DEFICIT
The same kind of pot-luck stew of House Democrats and Republicans that just swept President Clinton's free trade accord to victory suddenly is threatening to give the White House an embarrassing drubbing on the year's most persistent political issue: reducing the deficit.
Without much fanfare, Representatives Timothy J. Penny, Democrat of Minnesota, and John R. Kasich, Republican of Ohio, have pushed to a vote in the full House, probably on Monday, a proposal to cut an additional $90 billion from the Federal budget by 1998.
They say Congress must approve the package, or something like it, if lawmakers are ever to convince voters that they have shed their spendthrift ways.


Anti-Drug Unit of C.I.A. Sent Ton of Cocaine to U.S. in 1990
A Central Intelligence Agency anti-drug program in Venezuela shipped a ton of nearly pure cocaine to the United States in 1990, Government officials said today.
No criminal charges have been brought in the matter, which the officials said appeared to have been a serious accident rather than an intentional conspiracy.
But officials say the cocaine wound up being sold on the streets in the United States.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about the ouster of the President of Nigeria misidentified the country in one reference.
It is Nigeria, not Algeria, that achieved independence from Britain 33 years ago.


GIVE AND TAKE
Uncomfortable as it was to read of the atrocities committed against Linda Cutting by her parents, her story serves as a valuable reminder that even the most depraved acts can be carried out in a setting of moral propriety.


Dial P for Parks
The Parks Department is changing its so-called hot-line telephone numbers beginning Jan. 1, Barry C. Samuel, the Acting Parks Commissioner, announced earlier this month.
The telephone number giving callers general information about department programs will be 593-7275 (593-PARK).


Ms. Abramoff, Mr. Hirsch
Charles and Andree Abramoff of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Monique Abramoff to Timothy J. Hirsch, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Hirsch of Buffalo.
A June 1994 wedding is planned.
Ms.
Abramoff is an architect and sculptor in New York.
She graduated from the Parsons School of Design and received a master's degree in fine arts from Hunter College.
Her parents own Cafe Crocodile, a restaurant in Manhattan.


Moms, Dads and That Jungle Out There
Both church and state last week gave affirmations of the changed roles of men and women in society.
First the Labor Department conceded that a woman's place is in fact often not in the home.
It reported that for at least a decade it has been underestimating the unemployment rate (to which many benefits programs are linked) by erroneously classifying many women as homemakers and thus not job-seeking members of the labor force.
The department promised that its new, bias-free methods of surveying of the work force would correct this counting lapse and others, which it said kept the reported jobless rate down by a half percentage point (7.1 percent instead of 7.6) over the year through August.


Candlelight Vigil Against Handguns in Harlem


U.S. Aid Hasn't Stopped Drug Flow From South America, Experts Say
It was the summer of 1989, and drug lords were gunning down presidential candidates in Colombia and flooding American cities with cocaine.
Declaring that there was "no match for an angry America," President Bush announced that he was expanding the war on drugs.
Though his main pledge was to crack down on street sales, Mr.
Bush also asked Congress to increase spending to help cut off the drug supply at its source in Peru, Colombia and Bolivia.


A Kick That Will Not Come Down
Magnitude?
Someone wanted to know about magnitude.
And after the longest field goal of his college career had given Boston College one of the biggest football victories in its history, David Gordon was not sure what to say.


Making the Yard Tidy Before Winter
THIS is the time of year when everyone likes to make their yards neat and tidy.
Sometimes this is a good thing.
In the good category: The leaves most certainly should be off the lawn.
The grass underneath them needs air, and the new shoots that are coming up need room to spread.
In many yards, the grass has never looked greener in spite of the summer drought.
The fall rains and the mild weather that accompanied it surely helped.


Another Look at Working Assets
To the Editor:
From the sparse data in "She Took One Look at the Age of Greed and Made a Quick Left" (Nov. 7), one might estimate that Working Assets Funding Service has taken in at least $25 million since its inception, while doling out about $2.5 million.
That would mean that Laura S. Scher has done about 10 times as well as she has done good (to borrow your phrase), which is very well indeed.


Meghan Hughes, Kimball Mayer
Mr. and Mrs.
James E. Hughes of Indianapolis have announced the engagement of their daughter Meghan Lois Margaret Hughes to Kimball Powning Mayer, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Walter B. Mayer Jr. of Atlanta.
A January wedding is planned.


W. Virginia Provides Its Own Storm
West Virginia fans didn't get the nasty "West Virginia weather" they'd hoped for, but they got a long-awaited victory over Miami in a bruising game that pushed their Mountaineers to the brink of a Big East Conference championship -- and a possible shot at the national championship.
Robert Walker rushed for 100 yards and scored the winning touchdown late in the game after a holding penalty against Miami this afternoon as West Virginia (10-0, 6-0,) defeated Miami (8-2, 6-1) by 17-14, only the second victory for the Mountaineers in nine meetings with the Hurricanes.
West Virginia had not beaten Miami since 1973.


Giving Vegetables a Special Holiday Zing
THANKSGIVING is about tradition, so few people would want to dispense with turkey.
But sometimes I like to serve holiday vegetables in new and different ways.
Steaming is fine for the rest of the year, but this occasion is a good time to do something special.
Beets are superb baked and tossed with their greens in a balsamic and olive oil dressing with toasted pine nuts.
The best way to cook beets is in the oven in their skins.
This concentrates and brings out their flavor in the most remarkable way.
The cooked skins slip off easily, and the beets can then be diced and tossed in a dressing.
If the beets are sold with their greens, the greens can be sauteed with red Swiss chard and served as a bed for the beets.


Vendors Opposed
"This has to be the most moronic and imbecilic action that the city has ever taken," Don Siegel said angrily last week as he took a break from serving up orders of spaghetti, burgers and fries at his diner on 18th Avenue in Bensonhurst.
He was talking about a decision by the city's Department of Consumer Affairs that would allow street peddlers to sell items like books, scarfs, purses and watches in a two-block area in the community's commercial center.


GIVE AND TAKE
I can think of a reason why Linda Cutting would go public with her sordid and sickening account (Hers: "Give and Take," Oct. 31).
Perhaps she needed further cleansing, in addition to the catharsis she achieved by returning the latest gift of lingerie to her parents.
Whatever the reason, I tell myself, she's entitled.
So be it.


A Handbag That Pushes The Envelope
Witty fashion is usually something I can do without, thank you very much, but this envelope bag for evening ($450) is close to irresistible.
It is addressed to Ines de la Fressange at her original shop on Avenue Montaigne, and comes in black, red or green satin with gold script.


Victim of Apartheid Promises His Jailers Justice He Never Knew
IN the bleary hours before dawn Thursday, as the leaders of South Africa rose to celebrate their new, nonracial constitution, the oratory was falling short of the moment.
Nelson Mandela, who can rise to an occasion, was earthbound this time.
President F. W. de Klerk was better scripted, but he was hardly the man to express the thrill of emancipation.
Then Ismail Mohamed stood, and soared.
Mr.


New Brooms Sweep Madrid's Museums
In this city where change can't come fast enough, and often doesn't, perhaps nowhere have changes come faster than in the art museums.
Even though recession has slowed the pace of that change, every year seems to bring news, whether it is the acquisition of Baron Hans Heinrich von Thyssen-Bornemisza's coveted collection of Old Master and modern paintings earlier this year, or the unexpected bequest of a private fortune to the Prado two years ago, or the renovation of the Reina Sofia art center, which reopened in 1990.
Now a new culture minister, Carmen Alborch, who was appointed in July as the first culture minister in memory with a background in art, has forced the resignation of the Prado's director, Felipe Garin, and installed one of her allies as head of the country's premier museum.
Mr.
Garin stepped down on Oct. 19, and the same day Mrs.
Alborch named Francisco Calvo Serraller, the art critic for El Pais, Spain's leading daily newspaper, to replace him.
El Pais has not only been a supporter of the Socialist Government, to which Mrs.
Alborch belongs, but was also critical of Mr.
Garin, particularly during his last days, when record rains caused conspicuous leaks in the Velazquez galleries.
The leaks created a public scandal and drew hordes of gawkers.
The episode seems to have provided Mrs.
Alborch with an excuse to bring in her friend.


Clearing the Way for the Holidays
The cranes, dump trucks and backhoes pulled out of Westchester Square last week, but not because the reconstruction of this modest downtown area in the northwest Bronx is complete.
Rather, the work crews took a break last Tuesday to allow merchants and shoppers to pursue the holiday season unhindered.
The crews are scheduled to return on Jan. 2.


Lauren M. Smith, Peter P. Brown
Mr. and Mrs.
James P. Smith of Wellesley, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lauren Margaret Smith to Peter Patterson Brown, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore S. Brown of New London, N.H.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Smith is a corporate development research analyst for the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge.
She graduated from Pine Manor College and received a master's degree in fund-raising management from Lesley College.


In Painful Rebirth of P.L.O., Planners Replace Guerrillas
Struggling to transform itself from a revolutionary movement in exile to a state bureaucracy, the Palestine Liberation Organization is being restructured as it prepares to take over the Israeli-occupied Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho in about a month.
The strains of this metamorphosis and the financial crisis that has crippled the P.L.O. in the last three years have shaken its vast establishment of guerrillas, political factions, diplomats and staff members.


Michigan Scrambles Ohio State Dreams
Michigan 28, Ohio State 0
Sure, the game was at Ann Arbor.
Still, fans on both sides wondered why Michigan -- No. 21 in the New York Times computer rating and out of the top 25 in the Associated Press poll -- was favored over Ohio State, which was No. 7 according to The Times and No. 5 with The A.P.
Now they know.


Rabies Fear Is the Latest Barrier to Deer Hunting
For the first time in 20 years, Brian Yorck will not get up before dawn on Monday to go out hunting on the opening day of the deer season in southern New York State.
"My concern is the rabies problem," he said.


Mutual Funds; Readers' Mail: A Market Slide
Question: With so many people owning mutual funds and the stock market at an all-time high, what would happen if the market dropped sharply and everyone tried to take out their money at the same time?
Answer: The huge numbers of new fund investors plus the fact that the stock market has largely been very favorable since the 1987 market crash have caused concern.
Some people theorize that mass redemptions by investors at the first sign of a serious market drop would fuel a decline by forcing fund managers to sell into a down market.
But a recent random survey of 501 United States stock-fund investors, commissioned by Neuberger &amp; Berman Management Inc. in New York, found that more shareowners said they would buy shares in a declining market than would sell.
In a market decline of 10 percent, 20 percent of investors said they would buy and 5 percent said they would sell; in a 20 percent decline, 20 percent said they would buy and 8 percent sell, and in a market drop of 40-plus percent, 21 percent said they would buy compared with 11 percent who would sell.


IN SHORT: FICTION
HOMAGE TO HOLMES SHERLOCK IN LOVE  By Sena Jeter Naslund.  Godine, $21.95.


The Executive Life; In a Fast Lane On the Data Highway
I'm an entrepreneur,
Why do I feel like a gunslinger,
Or a buffalo hunter,
Or a dinosaur,
Here, on what was the unfettered frontier,
Of free enterprise?  -- "That Sinking Feeling," by Yankee Jones, "Briefcase Poetry, Volume 2," 1981.
"I'M NOT in the cable business," insists Glenn R. Jones, chairman and chief executive of Jones Intercable Inc., Jones Spacelink Ltd., Jones International Ltd. and Mind Extension University.
"I'm in the business of extending the human mind."
Certainly, Mr.
Jones, 63, is not your everyday cable executive.
The owner of 23-year-old Jones Intercable, the country's seventh-largest cable operator, which owns or manages 44 cable systems serving 1.4 million subscribers in California, New York and 18 other states, sees himself as a visionary pioneer on the information highway, an entrepreneur/ risk-taker, a poet of technology.
He works from a high-tech headquarters in Denver.
And he reads voraciously, cites science fiction easily and writes books and poetry (as Yankee Jones).
Like Ted Turner, Mr.
Jones is also producing his own programming.
In 1989, he founded the Jones Entertainment Group, which produced the current release "Household Saints." And like other cable moguls, Mr.
Jones has recently seen his wealth ballooning -- Intercable's shares are up nearly 70 percent since May, trading at around $17 last week -- as Wall Street has become bullish on cable's role in the future delivery of home entertainment.
Witness Bell Atlantic's deal for Tele-Communications, the nation's largest cable operator, and the battle between Viacom and QVC Network for Paramount Communications.
Indeed, Intercable and Spacelink themselves may merge to help attract a partnership deal or capital from Pacific Telesis or Bell Canada.
"The entertainment business," Mr.
Jones says, "impacts the human mind, which is the determination point of the electronic highway. The brain is a three-pound electrochemical device that cooks along at about 25 watts, mostly glucose. It's really the world's first computer."
Mr.
Jones's mix of management philosophy and technological jargon suggests a cross between Carl Sagan and Ross Perot.
To keep up with the latest ideas, Mr.
Jones often buys $500 worth of books at a time and stuffs them into three backpacks, keeping one in the office, one on his five-seater jet and one in the trunk of his white Mercedes.
At his Frank Lloyd Wright-style home in Denver, he just finished reading a biography of Jefferson and has started one on John Paul Jones.
"Those people," he said, "talked about the idea of individual freedom and the concept of self-government -- a delicate, tenuous experiment still going on because it was based on having an informed electorate, which brings you right into education. Our democracy needs to become more electronic."
The education of America is Mr.
Jones's passion.
He has lavished some $30 million on his Mind Extension University since he founded it in 1987 to provide college classes -- with credit -- by cable.
This type of education, he said, would not have worked before the advent of the VCR, with its taping capabilities.
Right now, 25.5 million subscribers to basic cable systems that carry the MEU channel can watch classes for free, but those seeking credit must enroll at one of the 26 universities.
The schools, which charge MEU students less than the full cost of actually attending class, include the University of California at Berkeley, George Washington University, the University of Maryland and Colorado State.
Currently, Mr.
Jones said, 36,000 students are enrolled in at least one course.
Linda Roberts, special adviser on technology for the United States Education Department, gives Mr.
Jones credit for being on the cutting edge of the information highway.
"Mind Extension University is a very important example of how we can use today's technological systems, whether cable or interactive fiber," she said.
While he is proud of his educational mission, Mr.
Jones is a bit defensive about MEU's for-profit status as well as its current lack of profits.
"It is a legitimate purpose of the private sector to focus upon and help resolve the intractable problems of our culture," he insisted.
He added: "I'm taking the risks. And it's un-American for me not to make a profit somewhere down the line -- about three years."
Mr. Jones is used to being called crazy -- like a fox.
"We started small when people didn't understand the limited partnership concept" in acquiring cable systems, he said, "so we had to form our own securities company. We raised $152,000 with the first limited partnership, then started raising $33 million and $55 million at a clip. It was un-American at the time, but it became mainstream when I raised $200 million. Since 1972, we've raised $1.3 billion in capital. We have 170,000 limited partners."
In many ways, Mr.
Jones is already living the future.
Of the company's 3,600 employees in the Denver area, 350 work in the suburb of Englewood in a glass office building with a helicopter pad.
Fiber-optic and coaxial cables snake under the floors.
Mr.
Jones's circular office has 16 television sets and a computer that can manipulate several satellite dishes.
At the center of the building is an atrium, featuring a big reflecting pool with an island.
In a ceremony in the atrium each year, Mr.
Jones honors one of his employees for a job well done.
The employee receives the award on the island as colleagues watch and bagpipes play.
"There's a lot of poetry in business," Mr. Jones said. "Hard as it is."


The Glad, the Mad, the Graceful
AT the party for Greg Donaldson's new book, "The Ville: Cops and Kids in Urban America," at the downtown club Fez on Tuesday night, Gary Lemite, a housing-police officer in Brooklyn, was getting the celebrity treatment.


Margaret Wacker, Richard Brawley
February wedding plans for Margaret Morrissey Wacker and Richard Warren Brawley have been announced by the bride-to-be's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Warren E. C. Wacker of Brookline, Mass.
Mr.
Brawley is a son of Barbara B. Ackerman of Taunton, Mass., and Harry E. Brawley Jr. of Weston, Mass.
Miss Wacker, a graduate of Carnegie Mellon University, is a communications manager for the Millipore Corporation, a manufacturer of industrial equipment in Boston.
Her father is a professor of hygiene at Harvard University.


Godfather to Pacific Era? Clinton Succeeds by Merely Getting Asians to Meet
If Harry S. Truman was the midwife who attended at the birth of new Atlantic institutions such as NATO in the years following victory in World War II, President Clinton pictures himself as the godfather of new linkages in the Pacific in the aftermath of the cold war.
But in the last half-century, Asia has usually been more intractable for the United States than Europe, and this week's pioneering summit meeting of Pacific Rim leaders showed that shaping its future remains difficult.


Making the Yard Tidy Before Winter
THIS is the time of year when everyone likes to make their yards neat and tidy.
Sometimes this is a good thing.
In the good category: The leaves most certainly should be off the lawn.
The grass underneath them needs air, and the new shoots that are coming up need room to spread.
In many yards, the grass has never looked greener in spite of the summer drought.
The fall rains and the mild weather that accompanied it surely helped.


The Mist of Perfume River
The traditional Vietnamese costume known as the ao dai is said by the Vietnamese to hide everything -- and to hide nothing.
Everything, because it is a full-length, high-neck tunic that covers almost every inch of a woman's body.
Nothing, because it is so close-fitting that it leaves little to the imagination.
The ao dai is worn for formal occasions.
And in Hue, home to Vietnam's 19th-century emperors and the geographical and spiritual heart of the nation, the locals can think of no lovelier sight than the one offered to them on festival mornings, when groups of young women pedal their bicycles down the misty emerald banks of the Perfume River, their long ao dais fluttering in the chill morning breeze, their fair skin shielded from the early sun by elbow-length gloves and conical bamboo hats.


SUNDAY, November 21, 1993; TOMATOGATE
It's not quite clear what happened in Chicago.
One possibility is that the City Council realized it wouldn't be good for appearances if the city of the big shoulders, hog butcher to the world, seemed to be afraid of vegetables.
Another possibility is that Council members remembered the old eggplant scare (the eggplant did not actually eat Chicago) and wondered how bad the new gene-spliced tomatoes could be.
This much is known: This fall, Chicago became the first city in the nation to require the labeling of genetically engineered produce.
In early November, John Madrzyk, the Chicago alderman who proposed the ordinance, explained why: "My people said, 'Don't force it down my throat.' " ("It" being an engineered vegetable.) "The Federal Government tells us how good a product is, and 10 years later they tell you you've got 5 years to live."
Two days after the conversation, the City Council rescinded the ordinance, at Madrzyk's request.


Health Companies and Clinics Vie to Enroll Medicaid Patients
MEDICAID recipients, once relegated to medical backwaters, have become an object of intense competition.
Managed-care companies, spurred by a law setting targets to enroll Medicaid recipients and encouraged by prospects that the patients would be included in a national health plan, are vying with public-health and hospital clinics for the 120,000-patient Medicaid market on Long Island.


For Some, More News Is Bad News
After months of debate and two rejections by Community Board 8, a new newsstand appeared 10 days ago on the southwest corner of 86th Street and Lexington Avenue just a few feet from the subway entrance.
Subway riders and community leaders say they were surprised and upset by the newsstand's arrival, and the owner of a nearby building sued four city agencies last week, charging that the stand is in violation of a city ordinance.
Opponents say that it adds to congestion on the corner, which now has three newsstands.
Jim Leyton, co-chairman of the board's committee on security and street life, called the kiosk "a potential danger to pedestrians who are forced to walk in the street during rush hour." He said it also represented "a complete disregard of the guidelines on newsstands and the community's opinion."


Empty Home Security
THE holiday season is a a time not only to celebrate, but also to travel.
And going away, even if only for a few days, heightens a homeowner's sense of vulnerability to burglaries and break-ins.
Going away also means that the family dog -- that trusty low-tech guard cited by convicted offenders as more of a deterrent than high-cost electronic surveillance -- may be temporarily housed elsewhere.


Jay A. Mattlin and Laura S. Weiss
Laura Susan Weiss, a lawyer at Imclone Systems Inc., a biotechnology company, was married last evening to Jay Alexander Mattlin, a research associate with the magazine circulation division of Time Inc.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Charles Klein performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Weiss Mattlin, 33, graduated from Tufts University and from Brooklyn Law School.
She is a daughter of Dr.
Stanley and Elaine Weiss of Todt Hill, S.I.
The bride's father is a dentist in New Dorp, S.I.
Her mother is the director of the Junction Senior Citizens Center in Brooklyn.


F.Y.I.
An 'S' Curve
Q.
Longtime residents of Queens remember the days when what is now known as Flushing Meadows-Corona Park was Flushing Meadow-Corona Park.
Who sneaked the "s" in and how did they get away with it?


Without Earlier Drama, Trade Accord Is Passed
With little of the drama or emotion that characterized the debate in the House on Wednesday, the Senate gave final Congressional approval tonight to the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Under the accord, tariffs and other trade barriers between the United States, Canada and Mexico will be gradually removed beginning on Jan. 1, creating the largest free-trade zone in the world.


Rollins Gives Sworn Denial On Vote Ploy
In two days of testimony, Edward J. Rollins Jr., the man who set off a furor in New Jersey when he told of an effort to suppress the black urban vote in the governor's race, has offered a combination of total denials and hints of strategies that could support Democrats' contentions of improper overtures to black churches.
But in the comments that have been revealed so far, he offered little hard evidence that could help anyone understand precisely what happened in the days before the election of Christine Todd Whitman.


Margie Filter, Jerry Hostetter
Eunice Margie Filter, the treasurer, secretary and a vice president of the Xerox Corporation in Stamford, Conn., was married yesterday to Jerry W. Hostetter, the senior corporate communications vice president for Triarc Companies, a holding company in New York.
The Rev.
Theodore G. Hoskins performed the ceremony at the Saugatuck Congregational Church in Westport, Conn.
The bride, known as Margie, is the daughter of Catherine S. Matthews, of Ridgewood, N.J., and the late Russell S. Matthews.
She graduated from City College.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.
Mr.
Hostetter is the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
James Hostetter.
He graduated from the University of Arkansas.


Karen Li And Mark Koide
Karen Kuen-Roh Li, a daughter of Ting-Kai and Susan Li of Carmel, Ind., and Mark Kenji Koide, a son of Samuel and Sumi Koide of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Joseph Freeman performed the Lutheran ceremony at Christ the Savior Church in Fishers, Ind.
The bride, 29, is a product manager for Colgate-Palmolive in Manhattan.
She graduated summa cum laude from Harvard University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She also received a master's degree in management from Northwestern University, as did the bridegroom.


DAVID GERGEN, MASTER OF THE GAME
Kelly should study Gergen's Lutheran roots for a deeper understanding of the man.
Gergen's faith rests on grace, not works.
Now that he has joined forces with a President of substance, it sounds as if Gergen has rediscovered Luther's call to personal vocational priesthood.
I wish him well.
MARIANNE BAHMANN New York, N.Y.


Here Come the Consultants
TAKE one turn-of-the-century Manhattan mansion, stir in the classy strains of an ensemble piece or two, add white wine, hors d'oeuvres, baskets of white roses, two wedding cakes, a half-dozen or so bridal gowns and close to 200 people who paid $35 each -- and what have you got?
Last Monday night, at the James Burden mansion on 91st Street at Fifth Avenue, it was what Gayle Labenow called "the third annual fall extravaganza meeting" of the Association of Bridal Consultants.
Ms.
Labenow is the metropolitan New York coordinator for the bridal association as well as the president of You Are Cordially Invited Inc., a party planning company based on Long Island.
The bridal association has more than 1,200 members, who get together to network, compare notes and new resources for food and flowers, dispense advice and swap wedding stories.
For instance: the couple who insisted on forgoing flower girls for flower dogs; another couple so stressed out (the bridegroom's mother could not stand the idea of having her former husband's name on the invitation) that their consultant advised them to postpone their wedding -- they dismissed her instead.


Yangtze Gorges
To the Editor: Overbooking of tourist facilities in China, particularly in the busier seasons, spring and fall, continues to be a maddening problem.
The better Yangtze River cruise ships are no exception, as our recent experience from Sept. 14 to 22, will illustrate.
The travel agency that put together our independent one-month trip to China, which included trips both down and up the river between Chongqing and Wuhan, stressed the necessity of booking space on the Yangtze Pearl, mentioned in your article, as it was supposedly one of the two or three newest and most comfortable vessels.
Space was requested in June and presumably confirmed in August by the China Travel Service-Xian, which handled our arrangements inside China.


'Telltale Hearts': Seeking Relationships
LOVE has everything to do with "Telltale Hearts," at the Crossroads Theater Company.
Even though the play by Joe Barnes, which had an Off Off Broadway run in 1990, passes as an audience-pleasing singles-bar type of sex comedy -- the bar is portentously called Paradise Lost -- it touches on more lasting things: suddenly tapped emotions, unexpected entanglements and lowered expectations.
And there are no guaranteed happy endings.
Well, maybe just one, out of a possible four.


Hidden Palermo, Revealed
YOU may be fascinated, frightened or simply daunted by the thought of visiting Palermo's centro storico, the four neighborhoods that fan out from the Baroque fountains of the Quattro Canti intersection.
The city's historic center is one of the biggest in Europe, and the only one where bomb damage from World War II is still to be found.
Cautious tourists dart in from the main thoroughfares just far enough and long enough to visit the neighborhood's churches and museums; food enthusiasts brave the push-and-shove to admire the spectacular displays of the markets and ponder the unfamiliar produce; the adventurous attempt to pursue an itinerary through the maze of narrow streets, or simply wander where they fancy.
But everyone, whether fueled by esthetic, gastronomic or sociological curiosity, comes up against padlocked gates and unanswered questions.
It is not easy to understand the centro storico's present state, still less to see where its future might lie.


Not Cranky; Not Grumpy; Not Any of Those Things
EXTRA INNINGS A Memoir.
By Doris Grumbach. 298 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $22.


Studio Owners Struggle to Find Buyers
LORI KOCH, a lawyer, is one of the innumerable New Yorkers trapped in a studio that has become a financial straitjacket.
Her 570-square-foot apartment, which she bought in 1989, is in a doorman condominium at 295 Greenwich Street at the corner of Chambers Street on the southwestern edge of TriBeCa, a few blocks north of the World Financial Center.
Like many young professionals in the 80's, Ms.
Koch dearly wanted to own real estate.
She paid well for it, too.
Her studio cost $175,000.
It's now worth about $90,000 -- if she could find a buyer who could get a mortgage.
And while similar apartments in her building are renting for about $1,000 a month, her own monthly costs for carrying her mortgage and paying taxes and monthly fees for building operations total about $1,900.


DAVID GERGEN, MASTER OF THE GAME
How sad it is that David Gergen, a man who stands for everything, for nothing, for all of the above, can play the role of "wise man." Sadder yet is the fact that we have a President who chose such a man to be his counselor.
KATHLEEN P. MULLINIX Ridgewood, N.J.


Boots Today, Loafers Forever
To the Editor:
This boot craze is just another passing fad ("Working Class," Oct. 31).
Granted, Presidents Bush and Clinton and Kevin Costner all wear cowboy boots once in a while, but real yuppies and preppies would never be caught without their penny loafers.


Rough Sailing in Wake of Drug Crackdown
Instead of running all day, drug sales now begin at nightfall.
Dealers are slightly more discreet, walking alongside potential buyers rather than announcing brand names to passers-by, and avoiding the avenues, which are often lined with police officers.
The Police Department's years-long efforts to root out the drug trade in "the Well" -- an eight-block corridor of Knickerbocker Avenue between Troutman and Jefferson Streets that is one of the most active and flagrant drug markets in New York -- have paid off to that degree.
But residents and merchants say the street sweeps and high police visibility have not significantly damaged the drug trade.


SENATE APPROVES BRADY LEGISLATION AND TRADE ACCORD
The Senate passed the Brady gun control bill and the North American Free Trade Agreement tonight and finished its major work for the year.
That left the House still struggling to conclude the first session of the 103d Congress as it faced tough fights Sunday and Monday over campaign finance and lobbying legislation and a measure to impose $90 billion in further budget cuts.


Fight to Keep Smokestacks Well Plugged
If the residents of Gravesend have their way, the incinerator that they say spewed smoke and soot over their neighborhood until two years ago will never reopen.
But the city, which is running out of places to put its garbage and which has already withstood a fierce battle over an incinerator in the Brooklyn Navy Yard, has every intention of rehabilitating it.
The city closed the hulking three-story building at 26th Avenue and Shore Parkway in 1991 and is now awaiting permits to upgrade it at an estimated cost of $75 million.
City officials hope to reopen the incinerator in January 1996.


DAVID GERGEN, MASTER OF THE GAME
In 43 years of reading The Times, Michael Kelly's article "David Gergen, Master of the Game" (Oct. 31) is without doubt the finest, truest piece yet written on what has come to be, lamentably, our one-party political system.
A towering, seminal achievement that would make de Tocqueville smile.
Bravo, Michael Kelly!
JOHN P. CONNELL Forest Hills, Queens


Out of Control
Under a cartoon of a man in underpants with a drink in hand racing along a tropical beach, The Economist headlined, "Don't you just love being out of control?" The cartoon character in the London-based magazine represented the recently privatized British utilities, freed from government's heavy hand, but the phrase is the latest extension of the psychological cliche of the year.
To be in control, as in "As of now, I am in control here in the White House," a phrase used in 1981 by Secretary of State Alexander Haig when Ronald Reagan was wounded, is to be boss.
To have a blaze under control is what every firefighter hopes to announce.
To be beyond control, as in "circumstances beyond my individual control," was a cop-out first used by Mr.
Micawber in Charles Dickens's novel "David Copperfield." But to be out of control is to be damnably difficult in every field of endeavor.


Egos &amp; Ids; It's Demi Vu All Over Again
The recent ballyhoo over Demi Moore's third appearance on the cover of Vanity Fair in three years has obscured the fact that the monthly magazine has also managed to publish three full-length feature articles on the 31-year-old actress.
The first, in the August 1991 issue, was written by Nancy Collins and featured Ms.
Moore naked and pregnant on the cover.
In August 1992, Ms.
Moore was shown on the cover with a trompe l'oeil men's suit painted on her body; inside was an article by Jennet Conant.
The most recent story, in the December 1993 issue, is by Leslie Bennetts; the cover shows the actress, actually dressed, sitting on the lap of David Letterman, who's disguised as Santa Claus.


A 'Cinderella' Plan On the East River
To the Editor:
Indeed, the Cinderella-like transformation of the former garbage dumping platform on the East River at 60th Street  [ "An Open-Air Pavilion at the East River," Nov. 7 ]  is a wonderfully upbeat development.
It's truly a testimonial to the enduring creativity and optimism of so many New Yorkers ---- from staffers of public agencies to volunteers in civic groups and local institutions.
Thank you for your coverage.


A Sierra Jaunt for the Intrepid
FOR years I have longingly pored over the contour lines of Yosemite topographical maps, dreaming about winter skiing in the park's virgin back country, free from the year-round crowds that plague the valley below.
Unfortunately the towering peaks have remained elusive.
It is a three-day 27-mile ski from Yosemite Valley to enter the snowbound reaches of Tuolumne Meadows.
The pristine land of forests, meadows and granite domes, lovingly described by John Muir and photographed by Ansel Adams, is hidden from all but the most hardy adventurers during the winter months.
As a reasonably skilled back-country skier, capable of making a less-than-graceful bent-kneed telemark-style turn (favored by those who use three-pin bindings), I have contented myself for the most part with skiing the lovely but more pedestrian stretch from Badger Pass Ski Resort to Glacier Point along the valley's south wall.


Frequent Fliers
To the Editor: The Practical Traveler column "Frequent Flying for Dilettantes" (Aug. 1) and a letter to the editor (Oct. 10) discussed partnerships that airlines set up in these programs.
This is my experience:
I flew from New York to Los Angeles on American last year, then switched to Qantas for my trip to New Zealand.
Later I flew from Australia to Los Angeles on Qantas and again took American to New York City -- a lot of mileage!


No Ewing, No Shot; Knicks Fall
Patrick Ewing did not play.
The Knicks did not win.
No, it was not a good night for the home team.
Ending New York's 22-game regular-season home winning streak, the Utah Jazz dumped the Knicks, 86-72, last night at Madison Square Garden.
As Ewing sat on the bench in street clothes, nursing his strained neck, the Knicks' offense disintegrated, producing a season-low point total.


Yangtze Gorges
To the Editor: Having long admired the journalistic talents of Nicholas D. Kristof, we grabbed eagerly at his account, "The Yangtze's Gorges" (Oct. 10).
He seemed to miss the sights that we most enjoyed on a similar voyage in September: tiny farms terraced high along narrow ridges on the deep-walled gorges; ancient paths carved into the sheer rock cliffs for the teams of "trackers" who strained to pull loaded junks up river in the days before powered craft; the whirling eddies of cafe au lait waters; the reflected glow of sunset and moonrise on sparkling waterfalls tracing deep crevasses in lush, green mountains.


Farmers, the Bulwark Of the Nation
The letter to the New Jersey editor on Oct. 17 about raising requirements to qualify for farm tax assessments in New Jersey prompts these thoughts.
Farmers must contend with floods, droughts, frosts, crop failures, labor problems, herd and flock diseases, masses of paperwork (not required in past years) and low crop prices.
Out of that $3 Danish, a farmer gets only about seven cents for his wheat in it.
Thus, taxes and restrictions of farmers need to be lessened instead of increased.
Farmers are the bulwark of our nation.


A Tropical Beat at the Botanic Garden
THE Brooklyn Botanic Garden is offering an all-day program today to celebrate Puerto Rican Heritage month.
Wendy Pantoja, one of the garden's guides, will conduct a bilingual tour of the Tropical Rain Forest Pavilion, designed to emulate El Yunque in Puerto Rico.
Visitors will get a chance to explore the fruits and foliage that grow in hot, rainy climates.
After the tour, Pepe Castillo (pictured at right) and his band, Estampa Criolla, will play the island's folk songs in the Steinhardt Conservatory.
Mr.
Castillo says he is a composer, singer and a comedian.


DAVID GERGEN, MASTER OF THE GAME
So political spin doctors can change sides at the drop of a dollar, and are admired by insiders for their ability to do it so effortlessly.
What is really perplexing is that no media guru has admitted that politics is professional wrestling for the educated.
The cheering throngs think they're witnessing an epic battle between good and evil, while the handlers/promoters know that it's all show biz, with the news media providing the color commentary.
DAVID KAHN New York, N.Y.


Paying Homage to a Master Organist
"IF I can leave behind me a correct style and method of organ-playing, it is all I ask for," Felix-Alexandre Guilmant said shortly before his death in 1911.
Though his name may be unfamiliar to the public, Guilmant's wish was granted.
He was an influential teacher at the Paris Conservatoire, and he is generally credited with having founded (together with Charles Marie Widor) the French Romantic school of organ playing.
In addition, Guilmant was a prolific composer whose works have long been a mainstay of programs for the organ.
The Yale University School of Music is paying homage to Guilmant with a three-day symposium of three concerts and six lectures at various locations on the New Haven campus.
The opening recital is 8 P.M. today at Woolsey Hall, with the faculty organists Thomas Murray and Charles Krigbaum sharing performing honors; tomorrow at 8 in Sprague Hall the all-Guilmant program includes chamber music, choral pieces, and sundry works for solo flute, violin, trombone and other instruments.
The concert finale, in Woolsey Hall at 3 P.M. on Tuesday, is a solo organ recital by Kurt Lueders, class of '72.
For details of the morning and afternoon lectures, call 432-4158.


A Bit of China in Kissimmee
The 4,200-mile-long Great Wall has been shrunk to half a mile at Splendid China, a new theme park scheduled to open in Kissimmee, Fla., on Dec. 19.
Nevertheless, the scale model, about four feet high, required more than six million bricks, one and two inches long, set in place by Chinese artisans.
The park, constructed over the last two years on a 76-acre site at a cost of $100 million, is two miles from Walt Disney World in Orlando.
Its sights include miniature reproductions of such Chinese landmarks as the Great Wall, Beijing's Forbidden City and Imperial Palace, and the Lunan Stone Forest.


Two Hollywood Loners Get in Each Others Stone Faces
When "A Perfect World" opens on Wednesday, it will bring together two of Hollywood's best-known rugged individualists.
Kevin Costner, as Butch Haynes, an escaped killer, is pursued by Clint Eastwood, who again plays a laconic law - enforcement type with great sunglasses.
Mr.
Eastwood also directed the film.
Their ages are far apart enough for Mr.
Eastwood to be a father figure - and there's a twist on that in the plot - but they are alike enough to prompt a comparison here.
Also director ** director only WHAT CRITICS HAVE SAID . . .
"He isn't an actor, so one could hardly call him a bad actor." (Pauline Kael, The New Yorker, reviewing "Dirty Harry")
"The screenply is ridiculous, and Mr. Eastwood's direction of it primitive." (Vincent Canby, The New York Times, reviewing "Sudden Impact")
"It's time to stop making jokes. More and more, he's beginning to look like the last serious man in Hollywood." (David Denby, New York, reviewing "Tightrope") WHAT HE'S SAID . . .
"Maybe being an introvert gives me, by sheer accident, a certain screen presence, a mystique."
Studied business administration at Los Angeles City College but did not graduate.
Pianist and composer - wrote music for "Pale Rider" and "Tightrope" Other jobs held: lumberjack and forest firefighter in Oregon; steelworker inSeattle, 1948-51; swimming teacher in Army; dug swimming pools in Beverly Hills, Calif., 1956; mayor of Carmel, Calif., 1986-88.
Lives in small stone house in Carmel.
Owns a vacation home in Sun Valley, Idaho, a house in Sherman Oaks, Calif. on the Warner Bros. lot and a 2,000-acre ranch in northern California.
Prefers forest-green GMC Typhoon to his white Mercedes.
POLITIC MOVE
Won landslide election as mayor of Carmel in 1986; salary was $200 a month.
Did not seek re-election because he provoked too much media attention.
HOW HE SIGNS AUTOGRAPHS
Asks who they are for, personalizes.
"His voice is flat but harsh and penetrating. When this actor snarles, he becomes a star." (David Denby, New York, reviewing "Bull Durham")
"Costner has feathers in his hair and feathers in his head." (Pauline Kael, The New Yorker, reviewing "Dances With Wolves") WHAT HE'S SAID . . .
"I'm just not that deep a thinker."
"Once I get home, I'm rather domestic. No Hollywood parties, no drunken brawls."
"I'm a loaner, I don't offer up everything there is . . . I'm not dying to tell people my story." CURRICULUM VITAE Born Jan. 18, 1955, in Los Angeles 6 feet 1 inches tall, 170 pounds, blue-gray eyes, brown hair Father: Bill Costner, an electrician Mother: (Name not divulged by Mr. Costner), a state welfare worker Family moved repeatedly Attended four high schools Prinicipal interests: baseball, basketball, football, conoeing.
Sang in church choir.
Had only one date in high school (he says) Graduated from California State University at Fullerton in 1978 with a degree in marketing Jobs held besides acting: 30-day stint in a marketing firm, 1978; stage manager, 1979 DOMESTIC LIFE Married Cindy Silva, college sweethears, in 1978 Two daughters: Annie, 13; Lilly, 10.
One son, Joe, 8 (contract stipulates that family must be with him on location) WHERE HE LIVES, WHAT HE DRIVES Lives in middle-class neighborhood in Pasadena, Calif.
Owns beach house in Santa Barbara, Calif., and condo in the Sierras Drives a pick-up truck POLITIC MOVE Was made a member of the Sioux Nation while filming "Dances With Wolves." Proposed building an 85-acre, resort/casino in Black Hills of South Dakota.
Recently all work was stopped by petition filed by Sioux.
Promised to kill project.
HOW HE SIGNS AUTOGRAPHS Stopped by fans after buying $450 worth of sungalsses in Dallas, signed hurriedly.
Seemed to want to leave. (Photos: Clint Eastwood; Kevin Costner)


This Season They've Rebuilt 'Picket Fences' . . .
On last year's prime-time map, there was no place like Rome, Wis., as a crossroads of the surreal and the serious.
Since most viewers bypassed the fictional hamlet that serves as the setting for the CBS series "Picket Fences," they aren't aware that Rome isn't as weird as it used to be.
This season the show's creators decided that less quirkiness and more normalcy was in order.
A critical smash and a triple Emmy winner (best series, best actor, best actress) in its first season, "Picket Fences" finished 78th of 140 shows in the ratings.
Whether a new scene in Rome ultimately helps that ranking remains to be seen, but the indications aren't that promising.
In the 10 P.M. time slot on Friday, the series still ranks 73d out of 97 programs.


Two Hollywood Loners Get in Each Others Stone Faces
When "A Perfect World" opens on Wednesday, it will bring together two of Hollywood's best-known rugged individualists.
Kevin Costner, as Butch Haynes, an escaped killer, is pursued by Clint Eastwood, who again plays a laconic law - enforcement type with great sunglasses.
Mr.
Eastwood also directed the film.
Their ages are far apart enough for Mr.
Eastwood to be a father figure - and there's a twist on that in the plot - but they are alike enough to prompt a comparison here.
Also director ** director only WHAT CRITICS HAVE SAID . . .
"He isn't an actor, so one could hardly call him a bad actor." (Pauline Kael, The New Yorker, reviewing "Dirty Harry")
"The screenply is ridiculous, and Mr. Eastwood's direction of it primitive." (Vincent Canby, The New York Times, reviewing "Sudden Impact")
"It's time to stop making jokes. More and more, he's beginning to look like the last serious man in Hollywood." (David Denby, New York, reviewing "Tightrope") WHAT HE'S SAID . . .
"Maybe being an introvert gives me, by sheer accident, a certain screen presence, a mystique."
Studied business administration at Los Angeles City College but did not graduate.
Pianist and composer - wrote music for "Pale Rider" and "Tightrope" Other jobs held: lumberjack and forest firefighter in Oregon; steelworker inSeattle, 1948-51; swimming teacher in Army; dug swimming pools in Beverly Hills, Calif., 1956; mayor of Carmel, Calif., 1986-88.
Lives in small stone house in Carmel.
Owns a vacation home in Sun Valley, Idaho, a house in Sherman Oaks, Calif. on the Warner Bros. lot and a 2,000-acre ranch in northern California.
Prefers forest-green GMC Typhoon to his white Mercedes.
POLITIC MOVE
Won landslide election as mayor of Carmel in 1986; salary was $200 a month.
Did not seek re-election because he provoked too much media attention.
HOW HE SIGNS AUTOGRAPHS
Asks who they are for, personalizes.
"His voice is flat but harsh and penetrating. When this actor snarles, he becomes a star." (David Denby, New York, reviewing "Bull Durham")
"Costner has feathers in his hair and feathers in his head." (Pauline Kael, The New Yorker, reviewing "Dances With Wolves") WHAT HE'S SAID . . .
"I'm just not that deep a thinker."
"Once I get home, I'm rather domestic. No Hollywood parties, no drunken brawls."
"I'm a loaner, I don't offer up everything there is . . . I'm not dying to tell people my story." CURRICULUM VITAE Born Jan. 18, 1955, in Los Angeles 6 feet 1 inches tall, 170 pounds, blue-gray eyes, brown hair Father: Bill Costner, an electrician Mother: (Name not divulged by Mr. Costner), a state welfare worker Family moved repeatedly Attended four high schools Prinicipal interests: baseball, basketball, football, conoeing.
Sang in church choir.
Had only one date in high school (he says) Graduated from California State University at Fullerton in 1978 with a degree in marketing Jobs held besides acting: 30-day stint in a marketing firm, 1978; stage manager, 1979 DOMESTIC LIFE Married Cindy Silva, college sweethears, in 1978 Two daughters: Annie, 13; Lilly, 10.
One son, Joe, 8 (contract stipulates that family must be with him on location) WHERE HE LIVES, WHAT HE DRIVES Lives in middle-class neighborhood in Pasadena, Calif.
Owns beach house in Santa Barbara, Calif., and condo in the Sierras Drives a pick-up truck POLITIC MOVE Was made a member of the Sioux Nation while filming "Dances With Wolves." Proposed building an 85-acre, resort/casino in Black Hills of South Dakota.
Recently all work was stopped by petition filed by Sioux.
Promised to kill project.
HOW HE SIGNS AUTOGRAPHS Stopped by fans after buying $450 worth of sungalsses in Dallas, signed hurriedly.
Seemed to want to leave. (Photos: Clint Eastwood; Kevin Costner)


Going One on One; It Takes the Special Ones, The Cover Guys, to Do It
Cover Guys don't pose.
But the ones who shut down receivers the best sure look good at what they do.


Extra Eyes And Ears For Police
Two years ago, when Jill Greenbaum walked around her West Side neighborhood, the sidewalks were crammed with illegal peddlers during the day and prostitutes at night.
On the side streets, homeless people urinated in alleyways or smoked crack on brownstone stoops.
Those problems remain, but, thanks in part to Ms.
Greenbaum and her organization, the Police Liaison Group, they are much less prevalent.


A New Life for an Old Path
There is a path in Morris Park that leads right to the 180th Street elevated subway station, but everyone simply avoids it.
It's been crumbling for several years, overrun by tall weeds, littered with broken bottles, paint cans and even a few refrigerators and washing machines.
But late last month something extraordinary happened, at least as far as the neighborhood's residents are concerned.
The Metropolitan Transit Authority began mending the path, laying a new foundation of concrete on the strip, which was once two long blocks of sidewalk stretching from 180th Street to Garfield Avenue, along Morris Park Avenue.


If You're Allergic to Smoke, Jury Duty Is a Nightmare
To the Editor:
I am a young free-lance artist who lives on the edge of poverty without financial security or savings.
It is ironic that a system designed to uphold justice continues to unjustly harass self-employed people like me, who cannot survive on the meager $15-a-day allowance.
If the jury system is truly concerned with dispensing justice, the organizers should automatically not send summonses to low-income self-employed individuals.
CHRIS LAUNOIS Manhattan


Hendrix On Wheels
WHAT: "Jimi Hendrix, on the Road Again," an art exhibition on steroids, which has turned into what its promoters describe as "an explosion of multidimensional visual images and interactive tactile sensations driven by the music of Jimi Hendrix."


Smugglers Prey on Immigrant Detainees, I.N.S. Critics Say
When the Immigration and Naturalization Service released a 16-year-old undocumented Chinese immigrant from its Los Angeles detention center in mid-September, the girl went directly into the hands of an accused smuggler.
Law-enforcement officials say the suspect, Lin Bao Lou, posted the teen-ager's $800 bond, took her to New York and held her captive for the next two months in a Brooklyn house, where he and seven other smugglers repeatedly raped and sodomized her at gunpoint.


A Memorial To Victims Of AIDS
Moira Cray, a social worker who lives in Stuyvesant Town, carefully pinned the red AIDS ribbon beside her brother's card: Connor Cray 10/ 9/61-5/19/86.
The family decided against putting up a photo "because, in his last pictures, he looked so gaunt and thin we didn't want to remember him that way," Ms.
Cray said.
But there are dozens of pictures -- mostly confident, smiling young men -- and hundreds of names on the crimson AIDS wall in the Old Chelsea Post Office Station on 18th Street near Seventh Avenue.


Melinda Phillips, C. J. Lisanti
Melinda A. Phillips, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Will R. Phillips of Charleston, S.C., was married there yesterday to Christopher J. Lisanti, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph T. Lisanti of New York.
The Roman Catholic ceremony was performed by Msgr.
Gerald T. Walsh at the Cathedral of St.
John the Baptist.


Ethnic Violence and Revenge in Burundi


The Recruiting Trenches
AT 0950 hours on a recent weekday, Staff Sgt.
Allen X. Johnson is deep into his square wooden box filled with information cards on prospective recruits.
Across the desk in the Army's recruiting station on East Fordham Road in the Bronx, the station commander, Sgt. 1st Class Richard Day, runs down a checklist and peppers Sergeant Johnson with questions.
"Garcia?"


Norfolk Opera House Opens With Puccini
The Edythe C. and Stanley L. Harrison Opera House in Norfolk, Va., opened Nov. 5 in a former theater and gymnasium built by the Navy for U.S.O. shows.
The 50-year-old building, which underwent a $10 million renovation, seats more than 1,600 people and has a four-tier balcony and boxed seats on two levels.
English translations of foreign operas will be projected above the stage.
The Virginia Opera Company was founded in 1975 by the new opera house's namesake, Edythe C. Harrison, a former delegate to the Virginia General Assembly.
The company takes its productions to the Carpenter Center for Performing Arts in Richmond, and to George Mason University in Fairfax.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Hamilton Grange Update; A Short Move, an Angry Dispute
At the center of the emotional neighborhood battle over Hamilton Grange, the 1802 home of Alexander Hamilton on Convent Avenue just north of 141st Street, is a larger issue: how best to preserve and honor the heritage of Harlem.
One side, backed by committees of Community Board 9, supports the National Park Service, which owns the building, in its plan to move the grange to St.
Nicholas Park.
The other side wants to restore the home where it now stands.


Taking Off With Start-ups
THERE are airlines out there you have never heard of.
It has been said that hundreds have been launched since the Government deregulated the industry in 1978.
But when the trade publication Travel Weekly took a tally recently, it tracked only 50 new lines that actually flew scheduled jet service in the last 15 years, either as start-up companies or as carriers that shifted under deregulation.
One of the 50, America West, has become a major carrier although it is currently operating under Chapter 11 of the bankruptcy code.
Most, like People Express and New York Air, rose and sank.
Some of the 50 now offer only charters, and 15 offer scheduled service.


Corrections
The Practical Traveler column on Oct. 24, about seat availability in the coach sections of airplanes, included an erroneous account from Trans World Airlines on the availability of seat assignments and boarding passes.
They are generally available 30 days before the departure date or later, not at the time the ticket is bought.


These Faithful Fans Always Know What Time It Is
IMAGINE this: parents in their 40's, with pre-teen-age children in tow, and both age groups singing and clapping to the silly antics of two men, one in his mid-70's, the other just shy of 70.
That was the improbable sight on a recent Saturday as Buffalo Bob and Clarabell performed children's songs from "The Howdy Doody Show" here at a Doodyville Historical Society convention at the Flemington Baptist Church.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Keeping Gray Cells Alive
DOROTHY MURPHY GLASSER returned to her alma mater dressed in a navy blue blazer and a dapper pea cap.
She must have selected the cap especially for the college trip.
"No," Mrs.
Glasser said.
"I woke up this morning with a stiff neck."


Designer, Yes, But Not Original
To the Editor:
Emily Prager's "Dressing Room" essay of Nov. 14 was an interesting mix of sentiment, fashion history, sociological content and psychology.
But even if she thinks the designers are "thinking about" things, how does she not challenge them for emphasizing the "little suit" and sheer clothing?


Seeking a G.M. Package That Pleases Everyone
WITH one hand, General Motors last month gave workers at the automotive plant here a brief reprieve, agreeing to keep its assembly lines busy for an extra year before closing for good.
With the other, the country's largest auto maker delivered an ultimatum to officials in this Hudson River village: either revoke a precedent-setting local environmental-cleanup law or face legal action.
While workers at one of General Motors' oldest plants were relieved to have a year's grace to plan their futures, village leaders bridled at the get-tough legal stance the auto maker had taken with them.


The Renaissance Of an Art Form
MEDALLIC sculpture began as an art form in Europe during the Renaissance, but since then it's never risen to a position of much prominence.
Perhaps that's because most of us expect sculpture to be as large and imposing a Noguchi or a Tony Smith.
But medallic art is still viable and is becoming more popular among both collectors and sculptors.
The smaller size makes it just right for a small bank account.
Now, several events are making these little sculptures even more accessible.


Confining Tuberculosis Patients: Weighing Rights vs. Health Risks
At a hospital complex on Roosevelt Island that opened in the 1930's to treat people stricken in an earlier epidemic of tuberculosis, a tiny ward has opened half a century later where 15 patients are being held against their will in effort to control another outbreak of the disease.
The patients, like Valerie Black, a 31-year-old former heroin user, and Rafael Serrano, a 33-year-old registered nurse, are being confined in New York's first modern-day tuberculosis sanitarium not because they are contagious and might transmit the disease, but rather because health officials say they have repeatedly failed to take their medicines.
Strict New Regulations
Their confinement in a ward of the Goldwater Memorial Hospital is the result of strict new regulations that allow city health officials to detain tuberculosis patients for the months and even years it takes to complete a cure.


Recreating A Spirit
There's a playfulness that comes with the last days of fall, when coats are discarded to catch the last rays of Indian summer.
In Central Park, children collect bouquets of vibrant autumn leaves.
For some, the the spirit of autumn is captured at the Union Square farmers' market, where $12 harvest wreaths made of grass and colorful hot peppers were a best seller last weekend.
Last Sunday's capricious weather outsmarted the studied disheveled style of a young couple dressed in their wintery sportswear.
Taking full advantage of the day, a young woman, in a sleeveless ankle-length dress, precariously balanced on a Columbus Circle fence to watch the New York Marathon.
For the actress Jessica Tandy, the traditional tweed suit, with a below-the-knee hem, was perfect for a stroll along the southern edge of Central Park with her husband, Hume Cronyn.


The Coup at Harper's
To the Editor:
Thank you for Lewis Lapham's letter.
What a joy it was to encounter such fine writing.
LORRAINE RYAN  Kittery, Me.


Business Diary: November 14-19
THE ECONOMY The Trade Vote's Over, But the Debate Isn't It's all over but the celebrations, the name-calling, the second-guessing -- so it's far from over.
With Bill Clinton sprinting to the tape in his lobbying marathon, the House passed the North American Free Trade Agreement last week, by a surprisingly comfortable 34-vote margin.
But the vote didn't banish the ambiguities -- the main one being, will this nation lose or gain jobs? (Check back in a decade or so on that one.) There was no ambiguity to the President's victory.
The only questions were whether he cut too many side deals for votes, whether he squandered too much political capital.
Another clear winner: President Salinas of Mexico.
The pact could vault Mexico into the big leagues.
A clear loser: organized labor, which went all out to defeat the pact.


A Musical 'Cyrano': Can a Dutch Hit Sell on Broadway?
He may have borrowed some bravery from the headstrong hero with the outsized nose himself, for how else would a Dutch producer dare take a classic French play, set it to music, add Dutch lyrics, have them translated into English, and send the whole package to Broadway?
Despite earlier lives as a soldier, poet, comic and scoundrel, Cyrano de Bergerac now sings about his secret passion for Roxanne.
"Cyrano: The Musical," after a successful year in the Netherlands and Belgium, has crossed the Atlantic and opens tonight at the Neil Simon Theater.


Trade Pact Offers Chance to Export Our Ideals; Nothing for Labor
To the Editor:
Gary Hufbauer's attack on the A.F.L.-C.I.O. for opposing the North American Free Trade Agreement (Op-Ed, Nov. 15) distorts organized labor's position on global trade.


Idling, and Anger, Along Ditmars Boulevard


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
New Jersey  Inspired by Coach Lou Rettino, who is recovering from surgery for stomach cancer, Union defeated Elizabeth, 14-7, in an emotional and hard-hitting Section 2, Group 4 semifinal playoff game yesterday at Williams Field in Elizabeth, N.J.
Elizabeth (7-2) was without its leading rusher, Kaream Brown, who was shot in the chest on Nov. 13 in what Elizabeth Coach Jerry Moore said was a dispute involving a young woman.


A NEW PEACE PLAN FOR THE BALKANS
In a last-ditch effort to bring peace to the former Yugoslavia before the brutal Balkan winter sets in, European Community foreign ministers plan to propose a new, wide-ranging settlement that covers Croatia as well as Bosnia and Herzegovina, European officials said today.
The plan, which the ministers are to discuss at a meeting in Luxembourg on Monday, would require Serbian nationalists to offer the Bosnian Muslims a little more land in addition to what the Serbs agreed to give up in exchange for peace last summer.


When Remodeling Becomes a Better Solution Than Moving
REMODELING, renovating and rebuilding.
There are other ways to get more living space, but moving was anathema to three homeowners on the same secluded street in Chappaqua.
Although they had outgrown their houses, they liked their neighbors and their surroundings.
Barry Bronfman, a partner in the architectural firm of Leitenberger Bronfman of Chappaqua, was the first one on Kings Court to decide to renovate his house.


A Civility Quiz: Do You Believe in 'WALK'?
ULTIMATELY, this is about the sanctity of the "WALK" signal.
If you can't trust the city's permission to cross a street, what can you trust?
"I don't trust it, not anymore," snaps Constance N. Bartlett.
"I look both ways on one-way streets. I'm very fearful. And angry."
Two years ago, Mrs.
Bartlett, then 70, was run down by a bicycle messenger while she was crossing Broadway on a rainy spring evening.
It was one of 359 bike-pedestrian accidents reported by the police in 1991.
Her right hip was broken.
She was hospitalized twice, immediately to put pins in her hip, later for a new plastic hip.
She sued, and stewed.


Recreating A Spirit
There's a playfulness that comes with the last days of fall, when coats are discarded to catch the last rays of Indian summer.
In Central Park, children collect bouquets of vibrant autumn leaves.
For some, the the spirit of autumn is captured at the Union Square farmers' market, where $12 harvest wreaths made of grass and colorful hot peppers were a best seller last weekend.
Last Sunday's capricious weather outsmarted the studied disheveled style of a young couple dressed in their wintery sportswear.
Taking full advantage of the day, a young woman, in a sleeveless ankle-length dress, precariously balanced on a Columbus Circle fence to watch the New York Marathon.
For the actress Jessica Tandy, the traditional tweed suit, with a below-the-knee hem, was perfect for a stroll along the southern edge of Central Park with her husband, Hume Cronyn.


All Mixed Up?
To the Editor:
The headline "All Mixed Up," given to Michael S. Gazzaniga's review of Richard E. Cytowic's book "The Man Who Tasted Shapes" (Oct. 24), was more appropriate to the reviewer's perspective than that of the book he criticizes.
I shall quote just one paragraph:


Sampras Is Bulldozer On Way to ATP Final
"Can you explain to us normal people what it means to play like that?"
It was a good question, the right question, and Pete Sampras could only grin his boyish grin and attempt to explain the unexplainable.


The Reebok Team
A CITY YEAR On the Streets and in the Neighborhoods With Twelve Young Community Service Volunteers.
By Suzanne Goldsmith.
Illustrated. 284 pp.
New York: The New Press. $22.95.


Exploring a Universe Teeming With Images of Time and Space
THE installation that is the focal point of the current show at the Hammond Museum and Japanese Stroll Garden in North Salem is called "Travels in Space, Movements Through Time," and it is the result of a project that grew and grew until, the artist Sonia Sacoder Astor said, her husband gave her a deadline to finish the work.
Otherwise, said Ms.
Astor, a painter known for her Bosch-like triptychs and intricate collages, she might still be in her studio here, cutting out images from magazines and adding them to the teeming cosmos she has painted on seven-and-a-half-foot panels of foam core.
Some of the imagery, which ranges from the earth's ozone layer to the depths of the sea and encompasses at least five centuries, was contributed by Ms.
Astor's son, Ted, a photographer and piano teacher.
Her husband of 40 years, Gerald Astor, a writer, said he also took part by discussing art history and esthetics with his wife.


Alison Pataky And Kevin Lee
Dr.
Alison Olivia Pataky, a daughter of Ruth A. Pataky of Riverdale, the Bronx, and the late Milton Pataky, is to be married in January to Dr.
Kevin Richard Lee, a son of Richard and Joyce Lee of Lapeer, Mich.
Dr.
Pataky, 33, is the director of the anesthesia pain management center at the Nassau County Medical Center in East Meadow, L.I., and an assistant professor of clinical anesthesiology at the State University at Stony Brook, L.I.
She graduated summa cum laude from City College and received her medical degree from the State University at Buffalo.


Clinton Puts a Foot In the Opening Door Of the Global Market
WHAT may be the biggest rethinking of American policy toward Asia since the days of Gen.
Douglas MacArthur is finally under way, and President Clinton began to outline it last week just inside a giant airplane hangar at the Boeing Company.
Boeing is, after all, the country's largest exporter, and as Mr.
Clinton told a cheering throng, its booming Asian business is a model for companies across America.
China alone now buys one of every six of its planes; Asian airlines own half of all the 747's ever made.
But there is a less-discussed price.
The fuselage of Boeing's newest jet, still 18 months from delivery, isn't built by Boeing, but by Mitsubishi Heavy Industries at the plant in Nagoya, Japan, that spit out Zeros for World War II.
Just as America insisted in the 1980's that Japan build its cars in America, the rest of the world has caught on to the concept of "local content." So Boeing has announced 28,000 layoffs here while some of its Pacific partners are hiring.
To keep its opportunities for growth alive, there is no other choice.
Such are the realities that Bill Clinton and his economic strategists have begun to acknowledge in a new vision of American relations with Asia -- a vision that Mr.
Clinton spelled out forcefully at the meeting of Pacific leaders that concluded here this weekend.
It is a vision that implies tradeoffs and job displacements far more wrenching than any posed by the North American Free Trade Agreement, which the House approved last week after a Herculean display of Presidential persuasion.


'A Bridge To a New Land'
To the Editor:
In my salad days, as a brand-new actor, I was given an appointment to read for a new play.
The script was available only at the reading downtown.
All very hush-hush.
I did not make the cuts then, but was asked later to join the national company of "The Boys in the Band" and, after that, the New York cast.
I learned a lot from Mart Crowley's words, from Robert Moore's direction and from the remarkable men who peopled the cast of that play.


MAGAZINE REDESIGN
I do not understand why, with the aging of America (including your readers) and the concomitant nearsightedness that goes with it, you chose such small print for the new typeface.


North Korea's Opening
Nervous commentators fear that North Korea is about to develop nuclear weapons, leading them to urge immediate sanctions or even bombing raids to take out the regime's nuclear facilities.
But President Clinton is adopting a sound diplomatic strategy for coaxing North Korea to give up its nuclear ambitions.
The U.S. and South Korea will cancel the provocative Team Spirit military exercises they conduct annually if North Korea opens its nuclear sites to regular inspection and resumes talks with South Korea.
That could set the stage for trading U.S. diplomatic recognition for a verifiable end to North Korea's nuclear program -- which in turn could lead to aid and investment from abroad.


Lewis Thomas
Lewis Thomas, the physician and biologist, is widely known as the author of "The Lives of a Cell," "The Medusa and the Snail," "The Fragile Species" and "Late Night Thoughts on Listening to Mahler's Ninth Symphony." On one level, these books are treatises on biology as philosophy, the works of a scrupulously observant, appreciative, self-deprecating and dryly funny mind.
On another level, the one that has earned the author the grateful affection of hundreds of thousands of readers, they are unsentimental, informed testimonies to the value of life.
Now he is dying.
His wheelchair stands collapsed behind the purplish wing chair he sits in much of the day, his feet propped up on a stool with a floral-pattern cushion.
Within his reach are his unfiltered Camels (he is not quite a chain-smoker), an ashtray with a built-in fan to dissipate the smoke, a cellular phone, a remote for the television and two dictionaries under the table beside his chair.
Dictionaries are essential to one of Thomas's three principal interests -- the study of etymology.
The others, of course, are cells and people.


Timberland Works to Preserve Urban Youth as Well as Trees
To the Editor:
The subheading of "Out of the Woods" (Styles of The Times, Nov. 7) asks "Does Timberland love the inner city?" After you raised this provocative question, you had a choice: Tell the truth about our beliefs and our actions, or ignore our track record and leave readers with a very distorted portrait of our company.
Clearly, hype won out over hope.
It's almost as if you thought no one would believe a company that makes boots, shoes and apparel designed for use in the great outdoors could care -- should care -- about the urban environment as well as the natural environment.
We do.
Deeply, and before the inner city started caring about us.
Let me share a few facts.


Heather Furlong, James Kirby
Heather Vaughn Furlong, a daughter of Mrs.
John F. Arndt Jr. of Gladwyne, Pa., and Stewart S. Furlong of Sellersville, Pa., was married yesterday to James Harrington Kirby, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Kirby Jr. of Alpharetta, Ga.
The Rev.
William H. Wood 3d performed the ceremony at St.
Christopher's Episcopal Church in Gladwyn.
Mrs.
Kirby, 25, is an investment associate at Brown Brothers Harriman &amp; Company, the private bank in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Georgetown University.
Her father is the president of the book publishing division of the WWF Paper Corporation in Bala Cynwyd, Pa.
Her mother, who is retired, was a manager of the Opera Company of Philadelphia.


Editorial Notebook; When Only Monsters Are Real
Never forget Edmund Perry, the black Phillips Exeter graduate who seemed destined for Wall Street or Congress until he was shot to death trying to rob an undercover cop.
Edmund Perry did not come from a stereotypical underclass family.
His mother was a teacher and president of the P.T.A.
His older brother attended an Ivy League college.
Growing up in Harlem, Edmund had been a bright Bible school student who quizzed the minister about God.
But when he arrived at Exeter, Edmund shed his middle-classness and donned the mask of the angry urban thug.
He played the role so well that other black students were encouraged to be like him.
And playing tough ended his life.


BOYCOTT IN ORDER, MALAYSIAN SAYS
As President Clinton played host this weekend to Government leaders from across Asia, one Prime Minister who declined his invitation to Seattle, Mahathir Mohamad of Malaysia, was pleased that he stayed home.
Prime Minister Mahathir, who is known here for his caustic anti-Western oratory and for his well-honed sense of political theater, insisted again today that he made the right decision in boycotting the summit meeting.


Jane Danahy, Gregory Michaud
Dr.
Jane Fitzgerald Danahy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Danahy of Weston, Mass., and Dr.
Gregory Francis Michaud, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Owen F. Michaud of Towson, Md., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Cornelius M. McRae performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Julia Church in Weston.
Dr.
Danahy, 28, is keeping her name.
She is in her second year of residency in internal medicine at the New England Medical Center in Boston.
She graduated from Harvard University and received her medical degree from Boston University.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Monday
Treasury statement, Oct., change in billions
$8.3
$41.5
Wednesday
Durable-goods orders, Oct., pct. change
0.7
1.5
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
338
340
10-day auto sales, millions, annual rate
7.0
6.9
Monday
Two-year Treasury note auction
Tuesday
OPEC meeting in Vienna
Five-year Treasury note auction
Thursday
Thanksgiving Day holiday
Friday
Leftovers


Q and A
Cruise Line Services
Q.
Which cruise lines or ships carry a Catholic priest as chaplain so that passengers can go to Mass on board each Sunday? -- R. Villani, Mount Kisco, N.Y.


Marginal Intelligence
To the Editor:
May I add an additional piece of information to supplement Christopher Gray's article "Recreating 'The Age of Innocence' in Brick and Paint"  [ Oct. 24 ] .
This first-hand intelligence comes from a book of no intrinsic literary merit but one that provides the key to many of those doors guarding the sealed mansions of New York society in the 1870's.


DAVID GERGEN, MASTER OF THE GAME
Michael Kelly reveals what we have long suspected about Washington: image is everything.
Fortunately, there is an antidote for the spin-doctors' poison: Believe only what they do and nothing of what they say.
Every voter should read this article.
HENRY S. CLIFFORD Wainscott, L.I.


Great Bowls of Fire
During the late 1970's, when I was running a restaurant in Boston, the languages spoken in the kitchen were Spanish (the Argentine dishwashers), French (the Caribbean, French and Vietnamese prep cooks), English (the American and Italian sous-chefs) and three dialects of Chinese, courtesy of the Laotians, Cambodians and Vietnamese working the salad station.
I walked around muttering "English, goddammit" with such regularity that I became known as Chef English Goddammit in a variety of accents, though I never succeeded in establishing a single-language kitchen.
Instead, I developed an abiding affection for the meals that Dang Han Chien, formerly a physician in Vietnam, and Dao Kim Son, a 22-year-old refugee, would make for the restaurant staff from leftovers.


Concerts for Children Highlighting the Week
THE pre-Thanksgiving concert rush is on with a full array of options suited for children and their families.
At the Tarrytown Music Hall, Ballet Theater of Westchester is offering a Sugar Plum Party today at 1 P.M., followed by a performance of Tchaikovsky's "Nutcracker" ballet at 2:30.
For more details, the number to call is 631-3390.
Among other events of interest to younger people, Robert Tree Cody, an American Indian flutist, dancer and actor, will introduce his audiences to a variety of tribal lore and legend today at 3 P.M.
The program is appropriate for ages 5 to 11 and is part of the Familyfare Series at the State University of New York at Purchase.
More information is available by calling 251-6200.


A 'Cinderella' Plan On the East River
To the Editor:
Your report of the near completion of the East 60th Street Pavilion does not mention that the site, originally slated for an 18-story hotel, would not have become an extraordinary public space without advocacy of the Parks Council, support from the Greenacre Foundation, and creative design work by Quennell Rothschild Associates.


The Executive Computer; Multimedia (Especially the X-Rated) Stars at Comdex
FOR all the hullabaloo about faster computers, smarter software and wireless widgets, the real excitement at last week's Comdex/ Fall trade show occurred in an annex where the so-called multimedia computer companies were quarantined.
Multimedia products -- sound cards, CD-ROM drives and other things you add to a computer for high-quality sound and flashy graphics, including video -- came in loud and clear as the favorite among the more than 100,000 Comdex visitors.
With so many stereo speakers blaring music, sound effects and digitized voices, the show organizers decided to segregate the multimedia companies from other PC companies, even though multimedia features will soon be incorporated into most new PC's.


Westernizers, Statists and Bolsheviks
THE RISE OF RUSSIA AND THE FALL OF THE SOVIET EMPIRE By John B. Dunlop. 360 pp.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. $29.95.


Nets Are Rejected and Dejected: 15 Blocks by O'Neal; Coleman Hurt
On one of his visits to the Meadowlands last season, Orlando center Shaquille O'Neal provided the highlight footage for a host of television sports shows by breaking down the backboard.
Orlando's 7-foot-1-inch center out of LSU provided more highlights again tonight, by breaking the backs of the Nets and then the hearts of the crowd of 20,049, the first New Jersey home sellout of the season, with his first career triple-double of 24 points, 28 rebounds and 15 blocked shots in an 87-85 Magic victory.


Swagger Was the Key to Life
IN HISTORY'S SHADOW An American Odyssey.
By John Connally with Mickey Herskowitz.
Illustrated. 386 pp.
New York: Hyperion. $24.95.


An AIDS House Quietly Opens
A stretch of 17th Street between First and Second Avenues was recently renamed Dvorak Place, in tribute to Antonin Dvorak.
But No. 327, the brick town house where the Czech composer lived from 1892 to 1895, has been razed.
In its place is an AIDS residence, which opened without fanfare last month.
Last week city officials and neighborhood representatives were given their first tour of the Robert Mapplethorpe Residence, a $5 million, six-story town house that will eventually house 28 people with advanced AIDS.
When the City Council denied landmark status to Dvorak's home in 1991, there was considerable opposition, including appeals from world figures like Vaclav Havel, then the President of Czechoslovakia.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York Senate
1.
Abortion Clinics: Vote on passage of a bill that would prohibit bombings, arson and blockades of abortion clinics.
Approved 69 to 30, Nov. 16.
2.
Assault Weapons: Vote on an amendment to a major anti-crime bill that would ban the manufacture, sale and possession of 19 semiautomatic assault weapons.
Approved 56 to 43, Nov. 17.
3.
Death Penalty: Vote on an amendment to a major anti-crime bill that would apply the death penalty to individuals who lead criminal enterprises that distribute, manufacture or import large amounts of narcotics.
Approved 74 to 25, Nov. 17.
4.
Independent Counsel: Vote on passage of a bill to re-enact legislation authorizing independent prosecutors to investigate Administration officials.
Approved 76 to 21, Nov. 18.
5.
Anti-crime Bill: Vote on passage of a broad anti-crime package costing $23 billion over five years.
Approved 95 to 4, Nov. 19.
6.
Gun Control: Vote to cut off debate and proceed to a vote on passage of a bill that would require a five-day waiting period for the purchase of handguns.
Failed, with 57 in favor and 41 opposed (three short of the 60 needed), Nov. 10 Connecticut  Dodd (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y  Lieberman (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y  New Jersey  Bradley (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y  New Jersey (cont'd) Lautenberg (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y  New York  D'Amato (R) . . .
N . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
N  Moynihan (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.
Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
House
1.
Nafta: Vote on legislation to put the North American Free Trade Agreement into effect starting Jan. 1, 1994, and to abolish gradually nearly all trade barriers between the United States, Mexico and Canada.
Approved 234 to 200, Nov. 17.
2.
Mining: Vote to kill a bill that would limit use of public lands for mining.
Rejected 270 to 148, Nov. 18.
3.
Mining: Vote on passage of a bill that would limit the use of public lands for mining and for the first time, would charge royalties on the riches extracted from public lands.
Approved 316 to 108, Nov. 18.
4.
Abortion Clinics: Vote to kill a bill cracking down on abortion clinic violence.
Rejected 246 to 182, Nov. 18.
The bill was approved later by a voice vote.
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . . N . . . N . . . Y . . . N
2. Gejdenson (D) . . . N . . . N . . . Y . . . N
3. DeLauro (D) . . . N . . . N . . . Y . . . N
4. Shays (R) . . . Y . . . N . . . Y . . . N
5. Franks (R) . . . Y . . . N . . . Y . . . N
6.
Johnson (R) . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
A New Jersey  1.
Andrews (D) . . .
N . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
A
2. Hughes (D) . . . N . . . N . . . Y . . . N
3. Saxton (R) . . . N . . . N . . . Y . . . Y
4. Smith (R) . . . N . . . N . . . Y . . . Y
5. Roukema (R) . . . Y . . . N . . . Y . . . N
6. Pallone (D) . . . N . . . N . . . Y . . . N
7. Franks (R) . . . Y . . . N . . . Y . . . N
8. Klein (D) . . . N . . . N . . . Y . . . N
9.
Torricelli (D) . . .
N . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N  10.
Payne (D) . . .
N . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N  11.
Gallo (R) . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N  12.
Zimmer (R) . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N  13.
Menendez (D) . . .
N . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . . N . . . N . . . Y . . . N
2. Lazio (R) . . . Y . . . Y . . . Y . . . N
3. King (R) . . . Y . . . Y . . . Y . . . Y
4. Levy (R) . . . Y . . . Y . . . Y . . . Y
5. Ackerman (D) . . . N . . . N . . . Y . . . N
6. Flake (D) . . . Y . . . N . . . Y . . . N
7. Manton (D) . . . N . . . N . . . Y . . . Y
8. Nadler (D) . . . N . . . N . . . Y . . . N
9.
Schumer (D) . . .
N . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N  10.
Towns (D) . . .
N . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N  11.
Owens (D) . . .
N . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N  12.
Velazquez (D) . . .
N . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N  13.
Molinari (R) . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
N . . .
N  14.
Maloney (D) . . .
N . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N  15.
Rangel (D) . . .
N . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N  16.
Serrano (D) . . .
N . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N  17.
Engel (D) . . .
N . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N  18.
Lowey (D) . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N  19.
Fish (R) . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
Y  20.
Gilman (R) . . .
N . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N  21.
McNulty (D) . . .
N . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
Y  22.
Solomon (R) . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y  23.
Boehlert (R) . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N  24.
McHugh (R) . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y  25.
Walsh (R) . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y  26.
Hinchey (D) . . .
N . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N  27.
Paxon (R) . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y  28.
Slaughter (D) . . .
N . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N  29.
LaFalce (D) . . .
N . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
Y  30.
Quinn (R) . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y  31.
Houghton (R) . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
N  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


DAVID GERGEN, MASTER OF THE GAME
While those of us "outside the Beltway" may not be aware of every detail of the technique, we are painfully aware of how routine a part of the "news process" manipulation is.
This has fueled a growing cynicism about what, if anything, government is capable of delivering.
No doubt the "form over substance" problem keeps many talented people from even considering participation in government.
They stick to activities and professions where they can work toward substantive goals.
BARRY TUCH Port Washington, L.I.


Honors For a Sculptor


On Top and Looking Up
WITH a racing program tucked under his right arm, Walter Case Jr. walked out of a cold rain and into the warmth of the paddock area at Yonkers Raceway recently.
Nervously scanning the room with his blue eyes and shaking the rain out of his short blond hair, Mr.
Case looked more like a college intern delivering a newspaper than the youngest harness driver in North America to reach 6,000 victories -- which he achieved last year at the age of 31.


One Street, Four Precincts, Three Council Districts. . .
"It gets real crazy right here," said Robert W. Walsh, executive director of the local business improvement district, as he stood the other day at the southeast corner of 14th Street and Fourth Avenue.
"This corner is in Community Board 3, but that corner is in Board 2." He pointed to the southwest corner.
Nodding north, he added, "But across the street is Board 5, and half a block east, that's Board 6." He didn't bother to mention that three blocks west is Community Board 4.
For reasons that are probably coincidental, 14th Street has become what may be New York's most divided cross street.


THE CULT OF LEE ATWATER
Back in the days when ketchup was a vegetable and Ed Meese was taken seriously, I interviewed Lee Atwater over dinner at a cheesy Filipino resuaurant in Georgetown he chose because his consulting firm was representing cronies of Ferdinand Marcos.
In his raspy drawl, he talked about what he had learned from MTV: "We've got a bunch of very confused kids out there." He insisted that the Democrats would never be cool enough to appeal to the Big Chill generation: "They're only appealing to a tiny elite of trendy-left disco-Democrats and Porsche populists." As I paid the bill, he rifled through his wallet and played one last angle: "What do I see here? Two tickets for the Georgetown Hot Tubs."


Ellen Sabin And Herb Subin
Ellen Jane Sabin, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stanley Sabin of Weston, Mass., was married last evening to Herb Subin, a son of Florence Subin of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Bert W. Subin.
Rabbi Howard Kasofski officiated at the Harvard Club in Boston.
Mrs.
Subin, 29, works in Manhattan as the director of planning and development for the New York Regional Transplant Program, which obtains and distributes organ donations.
She graduated from Emory University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received master's degrees in public administration from New York University and in public health from Harvard University.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a letter to the editor last week about the origin of the name of the channel separating the northern tip of Manhattan from the Bronx incorrectly rendered the historian Reginald Pelham Bolton's translation of the Dutch name Spuyten Duyvil.
It should have read "spouting meadow," not "sprouting meadow."


Mail-Order America
Growing up in Pittsburgh, I had an uncle who never obtained a passport because he had made up his mind that he was never going to need one: he had no intention of ever leaving the country.
For that matter, he had never left the state of Pennsylvania, except for one brief foray into Ohio, which, he realized in retrospect, had been a mistake.
For a soul so utterly lacking in wanderlust, however, he was full of curiosity.
In the pages of National Geographic, he visited the steppes of Russia and the Pyramids and the Great Wall, and on those rare occasions when bona fide travelers happened to cross his path, he could converse with them about the average rainfall in the month of August or the mathematical basis of the architecture or the worsening condition of the mortar, as if he'd not only gone on a tour but guided it.
I remember regarding this knowledge as somehow illegitimate, acquired rather than earned.
And with all the superiority of youth, I viewed him as lazy and complacent for not having gone out and seen the world for himself.
Now, however, I confess that the older I get, the more I'm inclined to follow his example, in my way.
Late at night, when the stores are closed, or on a Saturday afternoon, while weary women with swollen feet and cranky children are competing for an overworked salesman's attention, I'm at home with a stack of mail-order catalogues, redecorating my apartment and browsing for Christmas presents and planning what I'll wear next season.
With time, I find, the best catalogues come to seem familiar: you recognize their tone of voice, their quirks, the faces that appear over and over again in their pages.
Leafing through one recent arrival, a friend shook his head at the sight of so many models who for years now have been turning up in his mailbox on a regular basis.
"I feel like I know these people better than the people I know," he said.


DAVID GERGEN, MASTER OF THE GAME
The report of David Gergen avoiding the Bush campaign in 1980 until after Bush had won the Iowa caucuses, then jumping ship for the Reagan campaign after Reagan won New Hampshire, sums up the Gergen "character." He has done for courage what Madonna has done for chastity.
DOUG GAMBLE Manhattan Beach, Calif.


Shining a Light on the Other de Kooning
"THAT such a great consciousness should cease to exist," Mercedes Matter said as she left the bedside of her friend Elaine de Kooning.
For many artists the luster of the art world dimmed when Ms. de Kooning died at 71 in Southampton Hospital in 1989.
To the public she was known as the wife of Willem de Kooning, who has lived in East Hampton since 1961.
To colleagues and those whose lives she affected, however, Ms. de Kooning was a gifted painter, articulate critic, inspirational teacher and bon vivant.


Fetish or Fashion?
IT is easy to pinpoint the moment when body piercing went mainstream.
Christy Turlington came out at a London fashion show, her midriff bared between two slices of creamy knit.
And there in the middle of her navel was a ring.
The next day, Naomi Campbell was tugging at the waistband of her Vivienne Westwood micro-mini kilt to show the world that anything Christy could do, so could she.
A gold ring set with a small pearl pierced her navel.
And then at Isaac Mizrahi's show the two came out together, navels bared and be-ringed between cropped sweaters and ball skirts: body piercing as a supermodel totem.


On Sunday; News, News And More For the Irish
All have denied the charge of being found in possession of bags of the stolen fortune, let alone actually stealing it.
But with the great playwright O'Casey dead and buried there's no witty way to be imagined out of all this, only the plodding process of criminal justice.


Schools Encourage 'Prosocial Behavior'
I read "Can Schools Curb Rising Bias Incidents?"  [ Oct. 17 ]  with great interest.
Since you have begun to tell the story of how schools are working to reduce prejudice in our society, you need to recognize that some schools have been proactive by having serious prejudice-reduction programs before unpleasant incident actually occur.
Our school shares a border with the Commack School District.
Six years ago we became aware of some insensitive comments and attitudes of students in our school.
Our staff received some sensitivity training, and we have had an active committee of faculty members who have continually sought to educate students, promote tolerance and encourage prosocial behavior.
Although the activities and appropriate learnings are reinforced daily, we have been highlighting our prejudice-reduction goal in an annual Share Day.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Junior's Cheesecake Heads For Starring Role in Kiosks
Junior's Restaurant, the Brooklyn institution known for its intensely rich cheesecake, is taking its show on the road.
The cheesecakes, already available by mail order, will be sold at kiosks in Brooklyn, and there are plans for franchises in malls around the country.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 Staff Sgt.
Allen X. Johnson's mission is to meet, greet and deliver the message.
The message: Be all you can be.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 Need a copy of "Love Thy Neighbor as Thyself but Leave His Wife Alone"?
The Music Exchange has all the scores.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 14 Hopi stories in Greenwich Village; Baldwin's "Amen Corner" in St.
Albans.
MOVIE CLOCK 15 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
GOOD EATING 20 A cross-cultural stew in Chelsea: soba noodles or fusilli at Lola Bowla, Moo Shu Mex at the Bright Food Shop.
SOAPBOX 23 How well would you drive a taxi in Delhi?
In defense of the immigrant cabbie.
Plus, letters and "Eye of the Beholder."


Some Fume as State Seeks a Smoking Room in Nursing Home
The State Health Department wants people to stop smoking -- usually.
But it is going to court here next week to argue that a local nursing home should provide a place for its residents to smoke.
"We find ourselves a little bit conflicted, I must admit," said Peter Slocum, a Department of Health spokesman, who called the case a first for his agency.
"We take a back seat to no one when it comes to beating the drums for smoking restrictions. In this case, we feel that issue collides with an individual's right to make choices."


There's Something for (Almost) Everybody at World Cup
The first World Cup in the United States will be an amalgamation of 24 countries, some with rich soccer traditions and others with poorer ones.
Some will have large contingents dancing in the stands here and others won't.
But all of the play is likely to be inspired.
The tournament that will kick off in nine American cities in June will also have a number of marquee names that are adored in the world's most popular sport.
Names such as Diego Armando Maradona of Argentina, Romario of Brazil, Lothar Mattheus of Germany, Roberto Baggio of Italy and Dennis Bergkamp of the Netherlands.


In Slovenia, Pen Is the Mighty Form of Protest
The letters mostly begin, "Respected Mr. President," and go on to raise questions on issues of the environment, state-financed architecture, contemporary history and, recently, the possible involvement of the Government in arms smuggling.
The addressee is Milan Kucan, the President of Slovenia, who has taken a page from the former Yugoslavia and has turned the so-called "open letters" used by the old Communist Party press as a new form of public dialogue here.


Lizette Colon, Henry Ramos
Lizette Colon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Santiago Colon of Brooklyn, was married there yesterday to Henry Ramos, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ramon Ramos of Arden Heights, S.I.
The Rev.
Angel L. Roman performed the ceremony at the Pentecostal Assembly Church.
Mrs.
Ramos is a quality control assistant at the Omega Textile Corporation, a fabrics distributor in New York.
A graduate of the New York City Technical College, she is a student at the Fashion Institute of Technology.


Smooth Running Without a Governor
Pennsylvania has run on automatic pilot for five months without a Governor or Legislature.
Some citizens say that no news is good news from Harrisburg, the state capital, where Gov.
Robert P. Casey is recuperating in the Governor's Mansion from a life-saving heart and liver transplant in mid-June.


Kennedy Memories Linger, Some Still At 1960's Prices
For countless people around the world, John F. Kennedy's assassination and the days that followed are endlessly lingering memories: the televised accounts of the events in Dallas, the swearing in of Lyndon Johnson aboard Air Force One, the funeral cortege with a riderless black horse.
Yet 30 years later, despite the high drama of the Kennedy Presidency, memorabilia from the era -- manuscripts, photographs, campaign buttons and the like -- are not in great demand at auctions and in galleries.
Further, prices for Kennedy material, which skyrocketed in the years after his death, are not particularly impressive, with the exception of those for some rare autographs.


Setting Out on a Nautical Course
FOR a fraction of the cost of a cruise, Long Islanders can dine at Waves restaurant in Port Washington and experience the ambiance of a luxury liner's first-class dining room.
The shiny wood-planked floors, brass railings and sharp metal-trimmed columns all say nautical, though nary a fish net, stuffed sailfish or lobster pot is in sight.


Corrections
A picture caption in The Times Magazine on Nov. 7, with an article about Christmas gifts, misstated the price of the Roy Lichtenstein engagement calendar.
It is $12.95, not $29.95.


Ms. Langdon, Mr. Cranley
Christina Francis Langdon, a daughter of Iris O. Langdon of Ho-Ho-Kus, N.J., and Theodore P. Langdon of Mahwah, N.J., is engaged to John Joseph Cranley 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Cranley Jr. of Short Hills, N.J.
A January wedding is planned.
Ms.
Langdon, 28, works in New York as the marketing manager for Martha Stewart Living, a Time Warner magazine.
She graduated from the University of Delaware.


Nicole L'Heureux, James Feingold
Nicole Seton L'Heureux, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. L'Heureux of Harrison, N.Y., was married yesterday to James Wilson Feingold, a son of Seymour Feingold of Scotch Plains, N.J., and Susan Konray of Westfield, N.J.
The Rev.
Brian Brennan performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York.


Making the Yard Tidy Before Winter
THIS is the time of year when everyone likes to make their yards neat and tidy.
Sometimes this is a good thing.
In the good category: The leaves most certainly should be off the lawn.
The grass underneath them needs air, and the new shoots that are coming up need room to spread.
In many yards, the grass has never looked greener in spite of the summer drought.
The fall rains and the mild weather that accompanied it surely helped.


In Defense of U.S. Tariffs on Apparel
To the Editor:
We must take exception to James Bovard's insistence that there be major reductions in United States tariffs on apparel as part of the Uruguay Round ("Drop Textile Tariffs, for GATT's Sake," Viewpoints, Nov. 7).


Alexes Hazen And David Boyum
Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Hazen of Brooklyn have announced the engagement of their daughter Alexes Hazen to David Anders Boyum, the son of Asmund and Joy G. Boyum of Brooklyn.
A January wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hazen, 27, graduated from Brown University and is a second-year medical student there.
Her father is a managing director of J. &amp; W. Seligman &amp; Company, an investment management firm in New York.


Regina Impastato, Andrew Goldsmith
Regina Marie Impastato, a daughter of Anna Impastato of Carmichael, Calif., and the late Savio Impastato, was married last evening to Andrew Lubin Goldsmith, a son of Barbara Goldsmith of New York and C. Gerald Goldsmith of Palm Beach, Fla.
Rabbi Donald Singer performed the ceremony at the Hotel Bel-Air in Los Angeles.
Mrs.
Goldsmith, 30, is a fashion stylist in Los Angeles.
Her father owned auto repair shops in San Francisco and San Leandro, Calif.
Her mother retired as a design engineer in Sterling Heights, Mich., for the General Dynamics Corporation.


The View From Mitteleuropa
EXIT INTO HISTORY A Journey Through the New Eastern Europe.
By Eva Hoffman. 410 pp.
New York: Viking. $23.


. . . While Team 2 Works to Reform 'Ren and Stimpy'
The message doesn't get much clearer than it did in a recent cartoon in The New Yorker.
Two teen-agers are strolling past a schoolyard, and one says to the other, "I suppose Beavis and Butt-head are the Ren and Stimpy of our time." Their expressions are solemn as they presumably contemplate the evanescence of fame and the vagaries of television fashion.
These are the very issues, coincidentally, being mulled by "The Ren and Stimpy Show," the ground-breaking deranged cartoon series, ostensibly for children, that began its third season last night on the Nickelodeon cable network.
After a year of discord, Ren and Stimpy are starting fresh on at 9 on Saturday nights with a new wave of producers and animators.
They also have, some critics say, sanitized creative guidelines that threaten to remove the teeth from a show that has been attacked by parents and lauded in both counterculture and mainstream publications.


From Blueprint to Imprint: Winners of Architectural Awards
LONG ISLAND has long been noted for its architectural designs, from the stately mansions of the Gold Coast to the avant-garde designs on the North Fork, the South Fork and Fire Island.
For the 27th year the Long Island chapter of the American Institute of Architects has chosen several distinctively designed commercial and residential buildings for its Archi awards and commendations.


Church, Told Of Its Doom, Delivers Itself
When they were told last Sunday that their parish would be dissolved, the members of St.
Paul's Catholic Church flooded archdiocese officials with faxes, talked of hunger strikes and civil disobedience, threatened to become Protestants, considered going to Rome to beg the Pope for money and, of course, prayed.
Which tactic worked is now the topic of giddy debates at parties featuring wine, punch, cheese and crackers.
Archbishop John R. Quinn announced on Friday that St.
Paul's, a tourist attraction since it was featured in the 1992 movie "Sister Act," was to be spared in the diocese's plan to eliminate one out of every five Catholic parishes in the city.


Deena Cohen, Adam L. Shiff
Rabbi and Mrs.
Jack S. Cohen of Los Angeles have announced the engagement of their daughter Deena Cohen to Adam L. Shiff, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel Shiff of Lawrence, L.I.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Cohen, 22, is the assistant director of admissions at Yeshiva University in New York, where she graduated cum laude.
She is also a doctoral student in public administration at New York University.
Her father is the rabbi at Congregation Shaarei Tefilah in Los Angeles.


Boston College Knocks the Smile Off the Irish
They were lying on the grass.
There was nowhere else to go, nothing else to do and no time left to try.
The Fighting Irish of Notre Dame suddenly had reason to think that their game of the century was last week.
They thought their desperate comeback today, which had caused Boston College's 21-point fourth-quarter deficit to vanish in the tumult of Notre Dame Stadium, would keep their season perfect all the way to New Year's Day, and maybe forever.
But in the end, the final, gripping comeback did not belong to them.
The moment belonged to David Gordon, the Boston College kicker, whose career-best 41-yard field goal as time expired gave the Eagles a shocking 41-39 victory that ended Notre Dame's hope of taking a No. 1 ranking into a bowl game.


Devils Spot Wings One Goal, and One Period, Too Many
The Devils started without any enthusiasm for the second consecutive Saturday afternoon and fell behind by three goals.
This time they recovered with a three-goal rally, but succumbed in overtime, 4-3, to the Detroit Red Wings.
Vyacheslav Kozlov's second goal of the afternoon, 29 seconds into the overtime, meant a defeat in the first overtime game of the season for the Devils, who fell behind by three goals to San Jose a week ago before losing by 4-2.


Move Over, Tootsie, It's Mrs. Doubtfire
So how does it feel to be, at last, a fullfigured gal?
Robin Williams offers a prim look, assuming the character of the lovable, scampish British nanny, 65-year-old Euphegenia Doubtfire, and answers with her soft Scottish burr:


Recast as Mural, Graffiti Salutes Life and Respect
On a retaining wall across from Bushwick High School, the words "Livin' In" hover over the image of a long-faced, unsmiling man in a floppy hat and hooded jacket who supplies the end of the phrase by flashing the peace sign.
On the same wall, near a basketball court and bleachers at Woodbine Street and Knickerbocker Avenue, is a painting of a young Hispanic woman spray-painting phoenixes rising out of a burning Bushwick, a reminder of the fiery riots in 1977 that left much of the area in ruins.


Around U.S., Citizens Fight to Take Streets Back
Never has the Rev.
Michael Pfleger seen so much heartbreak and violence in the inner-city neighborhood around his Roman Catholic church here.
But he and his parish are not waiting for the police or the government or the cavalry to come to their rescue.
If they were to wait for help to arrive, Father Pfleger says, the young thugs on the corner might be old men with little thugs of their own.


A Thousand Days and 30 Years; From Man to Martyr to Myth
THIRTY years after John Fitzgerald Kennedy's murder in Dallas on Nov. 22, 1963, Americans continue to hold the 35th President in improbably high regard -- not just as a man of star quality, whose life was cut short in a moment whose origins are still debated, but as a national leader ranked in some polls with or above Abraham Lincoln and Franklin D. Roosevelt.
Yet John Kennedy's "Thousand Days" in the Presidency were marked less by historic achievements than by continual crises -- the Bay of Pigs fiasco; Berlin; the world's first nuclear confrontation; the beginnings of the war in Vietnam; the heated collisions of white authority and black civil rights demonstrators in the Southern states.
Nor were Kennedy's responses always sure.


Stacy Berman, Thomas Birnbach
Stacy Gwen Berman, the president and a co-owner of Health Search International Inc. in Rockville, Md., an executive search company in the health-care field, was married last evening to Thomas Glenn Birnbach, an assistant vice president at the Fred Ezra Company, a commercial real estate concern in Bethesda, Md.
Rabbi Stuart Weinblatt officiated at the Woodmont Country Club in Rockville.
Mrs.
Birnbach and her husband, both 27, graduated from the University of Maryland.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey S. Berman of Dix Hills, L.I.
Her father is a division manager at Underwriters Laboratories Inc., the testing concern in Melville, L.I.
Her mother, Cindy Berman, is a teacher at West Babylon (L.I.) High School.


Letters to the Westchester Editor; Why Can't Buses Serve County Airport?
The Sept. 5 article  [ "In Debate Over Airport, Focus on Parking Plans" ]  on the County Airport's parking situation quotes the chairman of the County Board of Legislators as saying that the airport needs mass-transit service by the year 2010.
Why must we wait 17 years for something that could be running by the end of this year at no cost to taxpayers?
Right now, the Westchester County Bee-Line Route 12 goes right past the airport entrance, but provides no service within 2,000 feet of the terminal.
Why doesn't this bus actually enter the airport and stop at the terminal building? (This route makes similar off-road detours at Pepsico, Manhattanville College and SUNY Purchase.)


GIVE AND TAKE
I am familiar with much of the current literature on child sexual abuse and realize that it is more common than was formerly thought.
I also believe that it has become a national hysteria.
Many so-called flashbacks cannot be documented and small children can be made to believe that they have been abused.


Reading the Road: 3 for the Holidays
O.K., boys and girls, remember study hall?
Remember tablets and yellow Dixon pencils and how we spent the time sketching dream cars?
Some of us were going to be designers and work in Detroit and flesh out those drawings.
Show them.
Or at least, if you were like me, you were going to be a commercial artist, maybe the successor to Fred Harmon, who drew Red Ryder and Little Beaver.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about a Missouri death row inmate, Lloyd Schlup, misstated a statistic on executions in the United States.
If he is executed, he will be the second white man to have been put to death in the killing of a black man since 1944, out of more than 1,000 executions in that period.


Perennial


Laura S. Kohl, Ethan A. Brecher
Laura Shana Kohl and Ethan Andrew Brecher, graduates of the New York University School of Law who practice in Manhattan, were married last evening in Boston.
Rabbi Samuel Chiel officiated at the Copley Plaza Hotel.
Mrs.
Brecher, 28, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph A. Kohl of Newton, Mass., and a magna cum laude graduate of Harvard University.
She is an associate at Dewey Ballantine.
Her father is the lead project manager at Lincoln Laboratories, a research division of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, in Lexington, Mass.
Her mother, Marcia G. Kohl, is an owner of Marcia &amp; Bea, an antiques store in Newton.


A Coach's Own Race: Returning To School
THE former Greenwich High School water polo player Chris Morin calls Coach Terry Lowe a rock and an iron horse.
The team's captain, Todd Peters, calls Coach Lowe "fit as a fiddle." They use these words to describe a man who would lift weights alongside his team three days a week, bike and swim.
Mr.
Lowe looks far younger than his 51 years.
So it came as a total surprise to Mr.
Morin, Mr.
Peters and this year's team when they were told Coach Lowe was in Westchester County Medical Center in Valhalla, N.Y., for transluminal angioplasty last September.
The angioplasty failed, and Mr.
Lowe underwent triple bypass surgery on Tuesday.


Challenges With Ready-to-Assemble Kits
READY-TO-ASSEMBLE furniture has gained considerable popularity owing to its reasonable price, easy shipping and supposedly easy assembly.
But buyers of large complicated pieces like entertainment centers or desks with drawers and shelves can find challenges from the parts and hardware.
First, arrange sufficient space to work.
Large heavy furniture is best assembled near its intended location.
Where necessary, shift other furniture out of the way.
Provide abundant light.


Letters to the Westchester Editor; Program for Mothers Makes a Difference
We at the Southern Westchester Board of Cooperative Educational Services are appreciative of the several informative articles about education that have appeared in the Westchester section in the past couple of years.
We take great pride in knowing that our neighbors are becoming aware of some of the ways in which school programs are making a difference in many ways to young people and adults with varied needs.


What Say, Bozo?
To the Editor:
John J. O'Connor rightly bemoans the demise of talk on today's talk shows  [ "Who Took the Talk Out of the Talk Shows?," Oct. 31 ] .
But he overlooked the rise of the laugh quota that has made intelligent conversation a talk-show casualty.
It seems that 15 seconds is the maximum any of these programs feels secure in going without some sort of a snicker.
No such restrictions exist in civilized discourse.


Schools Battle Wide Disparity In Curriculums
Maria Lugo's switch this fall from a Brooklyn elementary school to one in Manhattan was not easy.
Not because of bureaucratic snarls.
Not because of trouble making friends.
"It was this," said the 11-year-old, thrusting her little hands out over an imaginary computer keyboard.
At her old school, Maria said, computer skills meant using a single finger to hunt and peck over a keyboard as a teacher offered simple instructions.
But at Public School 116 in Manhattan, Maria's first computer class proved somewhat traumatic, starting with the moment her sixth-grade classmates put both hands over their keyboards and began typing strange computer commands and sentences.


SUNDAY, November 21, 1993; Reinventing the Condom
Having successfully exported cars, computers and consumer electronics, Japan has now turned its technical and commercial expertise to condoms.
That's right, condoms.
According to connoisseurs, the Japanese make them stronger and thinner, for greater sensitivity.
They are also colorful and have names like Peace and Sound, and Beyond Seven.
Sagami Rubber Industries has cornered the condom market in Switzerland and two-thirds of the market in France and Scandinavia.
The London Rubber Company, determined to keep its control of the British market, is working intensely to fend off Japanese brands with an even thinner, stronger polyurethane model.


Heather Foster, Terry Maltese
Heather Foster, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond A. Foster of Stony Brook, L.I., was married there yesterday to Terry Anthony Maltese, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony J. Maltese of Old Bridge, N.J.
The Rev.
Thomas J. Harris, a Reformed Church in America minister, officiated at Christ Community Church. .
Mrs.
Maltese, 27, is the sales manager for Passepartout Inc., a skin-care products company in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Lehigh University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.


Despite Nasdaq, Penny Stocks Still Flourish
PENNY stocks have an unfortunate reputation, and brokerage houses that specialize in them are often suspected of market manipulation.
That's why Congress voted to impose stiff rules to assure that penny stock buyers understood the risks.
Unfortunately for the suckers who get entrapped by such operators, the Securities and Exchange Commission all but gutted the law by exempting from it any securities listed on the Nasdaq small-capitalization market.
Since that is the favored listing place for such stocks, there was chuckling in the industry about meaningless rules.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
DINOSAUR ATTRACTIONS
If there were an award for Animal of the Year, in 1993 it would have to be the dinosaur.
And keeping up with prehistory in Connecticut this week are some artists, a museum and a gallery offering the dinosaur in various modes -- imaginative and as authentic as modern paleontology permits.


'Simply Not a Star'
To the Editor:
I don't believe that John Browning's career has suffered because of Van Cliburn.
Whether or not it meant to, Barbara Jepson's article "Stepping Out of the Shadow of Cliburn"  [ Oct. 24 ]  demonstrated that Mr.
Browning has enjoyed a major career by any standard by which such things are judged.
He is simply not a star, and no competition could have transformed him into one.


Making the Yard Tidy Before Winter
THIS is the time of year when everyone likes to make their yards neat and tidy.
Sometimes this is a good thing.
In the good category: The leaves most certainly should be off the lawn.
The grass underneath them needs air, and the new shoots that are coming up need room to spread.
In many yards, the grass has never looked greener in spite of the summer drought.
The fall rains and the mild weather that accompanied it surely helped.


Hey, Kids, Let's Put on a Show!
WHORES OF LOST ATLANTIS By Charles Busch. 290 pp. New York: Hyperion. $21.95.


Corrections
Two photographs of children on page 30 of the Arts and Leisure section today, with an article about "The Nutcracker," are reversed.
Zina Bethune is at the far left and Katherine Healey is second from the left.


Anne Talley, Brian McDermott
Mr. and Mrs.
James N. Talley of Springfield, Va., have announced the engagement of their daughter Anne Bernadette Talley to Brian Andrew McDermott, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard J. McDermott of the Bronx.
A January wedding is planned.
Miss Talley, 27, graduated with honors from Duke University and is studying at Columbia University for a master's degree in international affairs and an M.B.A.


Latin America Finds Harmony in Convergence
ON the face of it, the North American Free Trade Agreement approved by the House of Representatives last week after a long and acrimonious debate is a document narrow in scope, affecting only commercial relations with Mexico and Canada.
But its passage was greeted with relief and excitement throughout Latin America and the Caribbean, where there is similar movement toward a closer relationship with the United States -- movement that would likely have been derailed had the trade pact been rejected.
Just a decade ago, it would have been difficult to imagine Latin American leaders, with Mexico in the lead, clamoring for closer economic, political and cultural ties with the Colossus of the North, their historical nemesis.
But a new breed of pragmatic reformer has emerged in country after country in recent years to put into practice the twin virtues of democracy and open markets that Washington had long been preaching.
To them, Nafta was a test of both the sincerity and reliability of the United States.


The Boys On the Screen
To the Editor:
Mart Crowley mentions that Vito Russo "got the whole hideous pop culture thing, the whole homophobia thing . . . years before anyone else did." Actually, Parker Tyler got it years before Russo (10 to be precise) with the publication in 1972 of his study "Screening the Sexes: Homosexuality in the Movies." Full of wit and insight, "Screening" was the first attempt to analyze the representation of homosexuality in films.
ROBERT HILFERTY  New York


Being Fair to Mr. Giuliani
The scrapping between Mayor David Dinkins and Mayor-elect Rudolph Giuliani threatens the healing comity the two men achieved after their bitter campaign.
More to the point, it threatens to burden the city with a disorderly transition and a rash of last-gasp policy making.
Mr.
Giuliani is right to request a moratorium on unfinished business that will have long-term consequences for the city, and Mr.
Dinkins should retreat from his plan to ram through contracts and a number of appointments that will give him a kind of ghostly reach into the new administration.


50 YEARS OF FASHION
I loved every page of your Oct. 24 issue, particularly the Gus Peterson photograph of Twiggy in the black zipper 60's dress.
Unfortunately, the creator of the dress was left out, and, even more unfortunately, it was me.
DON SIMONELLI New York, N.Y.


Jackhammers, Car Alarms, Glass Pickers, Saws . . .
To the Editor:
Here's a 12-hour noise log for Tuesday, Nov. 16, two days after "Turn Down the Volume!" appeared.
A writer, I live and work in a fourth-floor apartment on the West Side.
12:05 A.M.: Jackhammers begin tearing up a patch of Broadway about 100 yards from my window.


Seven Decades of the Duke
THE DUKE ELLINGTON READER Edited by Mark Tucker. 536 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $30.
BEYOND CATEGORY The Life and Genius of Duke Ellington.
By John Edward Hasse.
Illustrated. 479 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.


Marlies Hohmann and Michael Winter
Marlies Eva Hohmann, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Hohmann of Port Washington, L.I., was married yesterday to Michael Joseph Winter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George H. Winter 3d of East Northport, L.I.
The Rev.
Thomas Edamattam performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Huntington, L.I.
Mrs.
Winter, 30, is a senior editor at Edelman Medical Communications, a public relations company in New York.
She graduated from Princeton University, as did the bridegroom, and received a master's degree in biology from the University of New Mexico.
Her father is the manager of scientific services for the international pharmaceuticals group of Pfizer Inc., the drug and health-care company in New York.
Her mother, who retired as a mathematics teacher at Benjamin Cardozo High School in Bayside, Queens, has a private social-work practice in Port Washington.


Trade Pact Offers Chance to Export Our Ideals; Why I Voted Against It
To the Editor:
Now that the contentious vote on the North American Free Trade Agreement is complete, it is time to assess the intentions of its proponents.
You strongly implied in "Running Scared From Nafta" (editorial, Nov. 15) that local opponents of the trade agreement, such as myself, were driven by concerns over the wrath of organized labor.
The implication was an insult to the serious issues and the intelligence of members of Congress who studied the pact and decided to vote against it.


Karyn R. Webb, B. K. Campbell
February wedding plans have been announced by Jack and Ann Webb of New Canaan, Conn., for their daughter Karyn Rogers Webb and Benjamin Klopp Campbell, a son of Hazard and Virginia Campbell of Buffalo.
Miss Webb, 35, is a first vice president and the manager of the Boston office of Morgan Keegan &amp; Company, a securities brokerage.
She graduated from Wellesley College.
Her father is a retired vice president of Citicorp in New York.
Her mother is the owner of the Light Touch, a lamp store in Greenwich, Conn.


Now It's Japan's Turn to Play Catch-Up
LAST month, Takenori Kanzaki, head of Japan's Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications, summoned top executives from about 100 communications companies to an early morning meeting and showed them a videotape prepared by his agency.
The tape opened with President Clinton and Vice President Gore in Silicon Valley, talking about plans for the so-called information superhighway.
It then showed American scientists working on an interactive television project.
There were glimpses as well of the installation of optical fibers to increase capacity of an American cable TV system and of an American service that delivers personalized electronic newspapers to computer users.
"America is again aiming to gain world leadership with the superhighway plan," the narrator intoned.


Challenged by Reporters, Ethics Panel Comes Cleaner
It might seem that the last state agency that should have a problem with open government would be an ethics commission, whose job, after all, is to enforce laws involving financial disclosure, conflicts of interest and revolving-door lobbying.
But New York's Ethics Commission came under fire in recent weeks after reporters for Gannett News Service and The Associated Press learned that the commission rarely publicized its findings against state workers, including prominent officials.


The Coup at Harper's
To the Editor:
Lewis Lapham certainly knows how to carve a turkey.  JOE STERNE  Seattle


SUNDAY, November 21, 1993; TATTOO FLASHBACK
It's back, the old LSD tattoo hoax.
An ominous flier being faxed across state lines warns parents of temporary tattoos laced with LSD that children absorb unwittingly through the skin.
The tattoos are of a blue star or appealing cartoon characters, like Superman and Bart Simpson (well, not that appealing).
Someone, supposedly, wants to harm children, or get them as customers.
The official-sounding source: "J. O'Donnell, Danbury Hospital, Outpatient Chemical Dependency Treatment Service." Except that there is no J. O'Donnell.
Or, if there is, Danbury Hospital has never heard of him or her, or seen a blue star tattoo or any of the others described.
The hospital has, however, been fielding calls from as far away as Germany asking about the warning.
"It's turned into a chain letter, almost," says a spokesman.


SENATE APPROVES BRADY LEGISLATION AND TRADE ACCORD
The Senate passed the Brady gun control bill and the North American Free Trade Agreement tonight and finished its major work for the year.
That left the House still struggling to conclude the first session of the 103d Congress as it faced tough fights Sunday and Monday over campaign finance and lobbying legislation and a measure to impose $90 billion in further budget cuts.


Public Colleges Draw More Support As Vital to Train Local Work Force
The corporations that began moving to lower Fairfield County a generation ago are paying increasing attention to the quality of the area's public colleges as vital ingredients to the area's economic prosperity.
While New York, with the nation's greatest concentration of Fortune 500 headquarters, has Columbia and New York University among others, lower Fairfield County, which ranks third in Fortune 500 headquarters, has only a commuter branch of the University of Connecticut here and a two-year college, Norwalk Community-Technical College.


SURFACING
MUSIC
The post-modern duet: "Elton John Duets" arrives this week.
But coming after "Frank Sinatra Duets" it makes one wonder, Is this kind of album less a celebration of a fruitful career than a fruitless stretch past its prime?


Education in a Store, Museum or Library?
Education used to be the primary focus of our school system.
There was a time when learning was the purpose of school-related activities such as field trips.
However, this seems to have changed.
When did learning take a back seat to useless entertainment?
Why do we as parents tolerate this abuse of our children's time?
And what kind of leaders will such an educational system produce?
I read the "Elementary Shopping" item in "Long Island Journal"  [ Oct. 17 ] .
Apparently the fourth-, fifth- and sixth-grade classes of Winthrop Avenue Elementary School in Bellmore were taken on a field trip to King Kullen Supermarket.


If You're Allergic to Smoke, Jury Duty Is a Nightmare
To the Editor:
Regarding your article "When Jury Duty Calls," Oct. 10: In my experience, jury duty is a nightmare.
First of all, if you don't work for a corporation, you are deprived of the right to earn your living.
To add insult to injury, the places where you are forced to spend endless hours are exceedingly unpleasant.
The ladies' rooms are filthy and without soap and paper towels.
And for a person who is allergic to smoke, as I am, it is sheer hell to be forced to stay in a stinking atmosphere where you cannot breathe.
INEZ METZL Manhattan


Tear Out the Turf
To the Sports Editor:
It is time that the owners, Wellington Mara and Bob Tisch of the Giants and Leon Hess of the Jets, get together and rid Giants Stadium of artificial turf.
It is also time that the National Football League owners begin converting all stadiums to grass and not allow construction of any new stadiums unless they are equipped with grass fields.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: November 21, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
KEEPER OF THE HEART, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A woman flees yet yearns for a man chosen to be her mate on a distant planet.
2*
4
THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $6.50.) The investigation of the murder of an officer, a general's daughter.
3
47
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-American women and their mothers.
4
5
THE KILLER ANGELS, by Michael Shaara. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A 1974 novel about the Battle of Gettysburg.
5
4
INADMISSIBLE EVIDENCE, by Philip Friedman. (Ivy, $5.99.) A prosecutor struggles to convict a real estate tycoon of murder.
6
8
THE AGE OF INNOCENCE, by Edith Wharton. (Collier/Macmillan, $5.95.) The 1920 novel about New York society life in the 1870's.
7
1
MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) Three couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.
8
4
DEVIL'S WALTZ, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $6.50.) A psychologist-detective investigates a small child's strange illnesses.
9
3
AMERICAN STAR, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $6.50.) The vengeful wife of a Hollywood star menaces his romance with a celebrated model.
10*
3
THE COPPER BEECH, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $5.99.) The romances, plots and crimes that go on behind closed doors in an Irish village.
11
40
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court Justices.
12
13
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."
13
84
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
14
10
THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) "The Vampire Chronicles," continued.
15
8
MITIGATING CIRCUMSTANCES, by Nancy Taylor Rosenberg. (Signet, $5.99.) A woman's revenge after she and a daughter are attacked.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
3
RARE AIR, by Michael Jordan. (Collins, $25.) Photographs and observations.
2
10
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes, opinions.
3
524
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
4
7
THE PRESIDENT'S HEALTH SECURITY PLAN. (Times Books/Random House, $8.) The Clinton Administration's health care proposals.
5
4
SUBMARINE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $14.95.) A tour through a nuclear warship.
6
40
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) Memoir.
7
4
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $10.95.) A forest fire.
8
110
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
9
8
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Bantam, $6.99.) The autobiography of the general.
10*
14
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on life's commonplaces.
11*
30
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
12
19
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $6.99.) The veterinarian's memoirs.
13
1
A CALL FOR REVOLUTION, by Martin L. Gross. (Ballantine, $8.99.) More examples of Government waste, and how to stop it.
14
131
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
15*
37
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
16*
9
SAVE YOUR JOB, SAVE OUR COUNTRY, by Ross Perot with Pat Choate. (Hyperion, $6.95.) Arguments against the ratification of Nafta.
17*
2
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Back Bay/Little, Brown, $11.95.) Government debt.
18*
12
PRINCESS, by Jean P. Sasson. (Avon, $5.50.) The life of a member of the Saudi royal family.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
8
THE DAYS ARE JUST PACKED, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A new collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
144
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
3
2
THE FAR SIDE GALLERY 4, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A new collection of cartoons.
4
4
BOTTOMS UP! by Joyce L. Vedral. (Warner, $12.99.) Exercises for women to achieve good health and fitness.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Nov. 6, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Snoop Dogg's Gentle Hip-Hop Growl
It's past midnight on a cool Friday in September, and a photo shoot for a beer ad is breaking up.
The photographer's lights still illuminate a small parking lot in West Hollywood, Calif., which is empty save for a few Mercedes-Benzes, Jeeps and low-riders and a handful of young black men.
At the center of the group, looming over all, is the shoot's subject, a thin, dark-skinned 6-foot-4 rapper with sunken cheeks and a razor-sharp nose.
He leans at what appears a 45-degree angle, surveying the scene around him out of the corners of his eyes.
Hours ago he had turned himself in to the police on the charge of murder and was released on $1 million bail; in minutes he will return to the studio to work on his debut album, "Doggy style," the most anticipated hip-hop album ever.
His name is Snoop Doggy Dogg.


UP AND COMING: Rob Schneider; Call Him Busy. He's the Smarminator.
On "Saturday Night Live," Rob Schneider has plays many characters: a sensitive naked man, a pothead Weed Guy, and, of course, the nickname-obsessed Copy Machine guy, Richard (Rich-meister) Layner.
But as a character actor in movies like "Demolition Man" and "The Beverly Hillbillies," this puckish 30-year-old plays the same character over and over.
Call him the Smarminator.
In 'The 'Beverly Hillbillies," he says, "I was a smarmy obsequious guy, whereas in 'Demolition Man' I got to stretch.
I was an obsequious smarmy guy."


Jennifer Heller, William Monness
Jennifer Lee Heller, the daughter of Billie Heller of New York and Harvey R. Heller of Orlando, Fla., was married last evening to William Andrew Monness, the son of Ellen Monness and Andrew J. Monness, both of New York.
Rabbi Larry Halpern officiated at the Hyatt Grand Cypress Hotel in Orlando.
Mrs.
Heller Monness, 26, is the director of communications at Housing Enterprise for the Less Privileged, a nonprofit organization in New York that provides housing and services to homeless families.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.


A la Carte; Extending a Hand on Thanksgiving
GIANCARLO COSTA, owner and manager of La Viola in Syosset, is serving free Thanksgiving dinners to those in need at 11:30 A.M. and 1 and 2 P.M. on Thursday.
Complete holiday dinners will be delivered free to those needy who live in the Syosset area but are unable to get to the restaurant at 41 Jackson Avenue.
Call 364-8383.
The Bryant &amp; Cooper Steak House in Roslyn is offering complete Thanksgiving Day meals to take out.
The meal, which serves 8 to 10 diners and costs $169.95, includes a loaf of menage bread, corn chowder, garden salad, turkey with chestnut stuffing and cranberry sauce, broccoli, candied sweet potatoes, pumpkin pie or apple-pear strudel and coffee or tea.
It can be ordered from the adjoining Bryant &amp; Cooper retail store at 2 Middleneck Road (627-7698).
A similar meal will be available throughout the entire holiday period.


Heather J. Smith, Jon D. Kline
Heather Janine Smith, a daughter of Dr.
Stanley B. Smith of Miami and the late Meredith J. Smith, was married last evening to Jon David Kline, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul S. Kline of East Lyme, Conn.
Rabbi Herbert M. Baumgard performed the ceremony at Temple Beth Am in Miami.
Mrs.
Kline, 27, is an associate at Carmody &amp; Collazo, a New York law firm.
She graduated from Emory University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received her law degree from Boston University.
The bride's father is the chief of pathology at Miami Children's Hospital.


Corrections
A listing of Caribbean hotels on Oct. 31 gave an outdated name for a resort in Aruba, and characterized its expansion incorrectly.
It is La Cabana All Suite Beach Resort and Casino, no longer La Cabana Beach Resort and Racket Club.
Next month the resort plans to open 362 suites, not 11 villas.


POSTINGS: 5 Stories in Flatbush; For Touro College, Its Own Home at Last
Although it is 22 years old, Touro College is only now constructing its first building from the ground up: the five-story Flatbush Center on Avenue J, between East 16th and 17th Streets, in Brooklyn.
Touro's other academic quarters have been in existing buildings.
"It's a very community-related school because it deals with the local population, so it is important that the building be a good neighbor," said Peter Samton of Gruzen Samton, the Manhattan architectural firm that is designing the Flatbush Center.
That consideration -- plus zoning -- dictated the gabled roof profile, which is meant to complement its residential surroundings, as is the use of red brick for the facade.


So Many Men . . .


Sally N. Ryan, Sandy Shaw
Sally Newbold Ryan, the senior development officer for corporate annual giving at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, and Alexander Agassiz Shaw 2d, a vice president in the real estate division of the Chemical Bank in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley performed the Episcopal ceremony at the home of the bride's father in Westhampton Beach, L.I.
Mrs.
Shaw, 35, is a daughter of Allan A. Ryan 3d of New York and the late Barbara Redmond Ryan.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
The bride's father is a senior managing director of municipal finance at Smith Barney Shearson, the investment banking firm in New York.


Susan Portman, Robert Price
Susan Jill Portman, a daughter of David and Stephanie Portman of Armonk, N.Y., was married last evening to Robert Lowell Price, a son of Lawrence and Helene Price of Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
Rabbi Stanley Urbas officiated at Temple Sholom in Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Price is a planning associate at Frederick P. Clark Associates in Rye, N.Y., a community-planning consulting firm for which her father is the president and her mother is the bookkeeper.
The bride and her husband graduated from Cornell University, where she also received a master's degree in regional planning.


Jennifer Kligfeld and David Jaeger
Jennifer Eve Kligfeld, the daughter of Michael and Caryl Kligfeld of Woodbridge, Conn., and David Alex Jaeger, the son of Elliot and Marion Jaeger of Farmingdale, L.I., were married yesterday evening.
Rabbi Bernard Kligfeld, the bride's grandfather, performed the ceremony at the Harrison (N.Y.) Jewish Center.
The bride, 24, graduated from Brandeis University.
She is a medical student at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine, as is her husband.
Her father, a child psychiatrist in Derby, Conn., is an assistant clinical professor of psychiatry at the Yale University School of Medicine.
Her mother is coordinator of the refugee resettlement program of the Jewish Federation of Greater New Haven.
The bridegroom, 24, graduated from Vassar College.
He is a doctoral candidate in neurobiology at Mount Sinai, as well as a medical student there.
His parents are independent commercial artists in New York.


Wall Street; Zero-Coupon Junk: Is It Really Worth the Risk?
IT takes confidence to lend to a company with dubious credit on terms that forgo receiving any interest for many years.
That investors have confidence can be seen from the strength of underwriting business for zero-coupon bonds, which pay no cash interest but instead are worth more at maturity, that are rated below investment grade.
If the company goes under in a few years, the bond holder could wind up with nothing to show for the investment.


THE PACIFIC SUMMIT: Reporter's Notebook; Among the Totem Poles, An Unusual Gathering
The White House wanted this summit conference, the first-ever gathering of the major nations of the Pacific, to look different -- something well beyond the usual guys-in-suits assemblies in formal settings.
What they got, on a raw Puget Sound day, was a cross between Twin Peaks and the Renaissance Weekend-cum-networking retreat that Bill Clinton used to attend on the other coast.


Late Glimmers of a Golden Age
Abiding interest in Gustav Mahler has cast a glow over the whole turn-of-the-century Viennese world in which he moved.
Composers have emerged from obscurity simply by virtue of their closeness to him.
The most surprising case is Hans Rott, a fellow student of Mahler's who left behind an uncannily Mahlerian Symphony in E. Alerted by sentences of praise in one of Mahler's letters, musicologists retrieved the score, and recordings followed from Hyperion and Bis.
More significant beneficiaries of the Viennese revival have been Franz Schmidt, Alexander von Zemlinsky and Franz Schreker, from the brilliant generation born in the 1870's.
Schreker's sumptuous Art Deco operas are appearing on the Marco Polo label, Zemlinsky's on Capriccio and Koch Schwann; Schmidt's four symphonies have been recorded by various ensembles.
The repertory is even showing up in American concert halls; this week the New York Philharmonic will perform Schmidt's Symphony No. 4, conducted by the Austrian Franz Welser-Most.


On Price Fixing, Let the Data See the Light of Day
To the Editor:
Gregory Werden's letter ("On Bid Rigging and Price Fixing," Oct. 31) intrigues, with particular reference to his use of the word "cannot." Assuming the validity of his representation that the antitrust division or some other part of the Department of Justice "commonly studies the price effects of conspiracies," why is it that such studies "normally cannot be made public"?


The Man Who Got Things Done in New York City
UNLIKE his father, he was never Mayor of New York, and unlike his grandfather, he was never a United States Senator.
In fact the highest elective office he ever reached was City Councilman, and if truth be known, he was to charisma what Ed Koch is to modesty.
So why is it that Robert F. Wagner Jr.'s death last week of a heart attack so shook New York?
Because Mr.
Wagner, who only lived to 49, was a politician who wasn't -- a rare combination of intellect, honesty and reserve.
Miscast in the political world into which he was born, Bobby, as friends called him, became the ultimate insider who could succeed where others failed because he didn't compete.
He couldn't: he was quiet, he didn't have a pretty face, he couldn't command public attention.
And he really didn't want it, which gained him the trust of ever-insecure power brokers, especially politicians.


The Coup at Harper's
To the Editor:
Hats off to Lewis Lapham!
For too long now we have been subjected to the fanciful reporting and half-baked opinions of the self-important "journalists" he cites -- people who would in truth be hard pressed to cover a two-alarm fire.
ROY METCALF  Hempstead, L.I.


DAVID GERGEN, MASTER OF THE GAME
In "The Game," you shattered all my political and patriotic illusions, delusions and fantasies.
Now what can you put in their place?
CAROL FICKER Ridgefield, Conn.


The Dining Game: 10 Inside Moves
ONE of the more competitive sports in New York City is played out not in Shea or Yankee Stadium, but rather at the tables of the city's better restaurants.
In a city where restaurants are the main arenas of social and business entertaining, you can't be blamed entirely if you begin to believe that you are where you eat.
Getting reservations, securing the right tables, receiving top-notch service, being treated as someone special -- all this is the helium that inflates our social balloons.
Oh, yes, food is important, too -- sometimes.


In America; 'If I Had Known'
Oh, she was beautiful.
No one questioned that.
She had that striking, standout kind of beauty you couldn't help but notice, the kind that can make you catch your breath.
Janet Sackman was 17 in 1949 and had already caught the attention of the big advertising agencies.
She was tall, almost 5 feet 10 inches, and had a radiant, healthy, outdoor look.
Besides being beautiful, she was exceptionally photogenic.
The camera was crazy about her.
She modeled clothes, including bathing suits, did cigarette ads, and posed for the covers of Life, Look and other magazines.


Patriot Missile's Success a Myth, Israeli Aides Say
Contradicting claims by the United States Army, Israeli officials say that Patriot missiles deployed to defend Israel from attacks by Iraqi Scud missile attacks in the Persian Gulf war intercepted next to none of the Scuds.
The United States Army has said that its Patriots intercepted about 40 percent of the Scud missiles that Iraq fired at Israel during the war in 1991.
That is a far more modest estimate than the one originally given by the military and by the Bush Administration.
In the gulf war, former President George Bush once said that the Patriot's record was nearly perfect.


Jill A. Cohen, Daniel Steinberg
Jill Andrea Cohen, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Howard Cohen of Woodmere, L.I., was married yesterday evening to Daniel J. Steinberg, a son of Joan Steinberg of New York and Martin Steinberg of Boca Raton, Fla.
Rabbi Eugene Lipsey performed the ceremony at the Fifth Avenue Ballroom in New York.
Mrs.
Steinberg is an associate with the law firm of Neal Forman in Brooklyn.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received her law degree from American University.
Her father is an inventor and an orthodontist in New York.
Her mother, Janice Cohen, manages her husband's dental office.


Kenneth Burke, Philosopher, 96, And New Criticism Founder, Dies
Kenneth Burke, a philosopher of language whose criticism and theories had a major impact on many American writers and thinkers in the mid-20th century, died on Friday at his farm in Andover, N.J.
He was 96.
The cause was heart failure, said his son Michael.


Challenges With Ready-to-Assemble Kits
READY-TO-ASSEMBLE furniture has gained considerable popularity owing to its reasonable price, easy shipping and supposedly easy assembly.
But buyers of large complicated pieces like entertainment centers or desks with drawers and shelves can find challenges from the parts and hardware.
First, arrange sufficient space to work.
Large heavy furniture is best assembled near its intended location.
Where necessary, shift other furniture out of the way.
Provide abundant light.


Feeding Hope


BEST SELLERS: November 21, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
3
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
2
2
67
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
3
3
6
NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.) Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.
4
4
8
LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching Hour."
5
7
13
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
6
6
4
THE FIRES OF HEAVEN, by Robert Jordan. (Tor/Doherty, $24.95.) The fifth volume of "The Wheel of Time," a fantasy saga.
7
9
4
DECIDER, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $22.95.) An architect-engineer gets caught between the warring factions of a clan that owns an English racecourse.
8
8
2
MR.
MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $23.95.) A mystery writer's happy family life is threatened by a madman determined to kill him and take his place.
9
5
5
A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A young student's mysterious drowning has repercussions in Victorian England's high society.
10
11
8
SACRED CLOWNS, by Tony Hillerman. (HarperCollins, $23.) Two Navajo tribal policemen undertake to unravel a web of politics and murder.
11
10
32
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
12
12
11
THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Concluding the "Griffin &amp; Sabine" trilogy, about an artist and his secret admirer.
13
13
36
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
14
1
HOTEL PASTIS, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $23.) An Englishman is harried by intrigues and machinations after he becomes an innkeeper in Provence.
15
1
MRS.
DE WINTER, by Susan Hill. (Morrow, $20.) Mr. and Mrs.
Maxim de Winter return to Cornwall; a sequel to Daphne du Maurier's "Rebecca."
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.
2
1
5
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
3
4
11
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life by the star of "Seinfeld."
4
2
13
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
5
3
28
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
6
5
7
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
7
14
2
THE DOWNING STREET YEARS, by Margaret Thatcher. (HarperCollins, $30.) The former British Prime Minister recalls her 11 1/2 years in power.
8
6
5
STAR TREK MEMORIES, by William Shatner with Chris Kreski. (HarperCollins, $22.) Reminiscences from the man who played Capt.
James Tiberius Kirk.
9
9
7
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem, relationships and spiritual growth.
10
7
7
A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ...
OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Reflections on 43 years of marriage.
11
8
67
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
12
11
19
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) Mood-changing medications and their effects.
13
1
RARE AIR, by Michael Jordan. (Collins, $50.) Photographs of and observations by the retired basketball superstar.
14
12
24
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
15
13
14
MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Inspirational essays.
16*
10
2
SECRETS OF A SPARROW, by Diana Ross. (Villard, $22.) The memoirs of the pop star.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
6
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological health and fitness.
2
2
27
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.
3
1
AND IF YOU PLAY GOLF, YOU'RE MY FRIEND, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) More tips and anecdotes from the golf instructor.
4
3
17
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Nov. 6, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear In Mind (Editors' choices of other books of particular interest) BUTTERFLY STORIES, by William T. Vollmann. (Grove, $21.) A novel in the form of linked short stories, mainly about prostitutes, narrated by a customer in a vivid prose that sometimes seems motivated by authorial aggression.
A DEMOCRACY AT WAR: America's Fight at Home and Abroad in World War II, by William L. O'Neill. (Free Press, $24.95.) This Rutgers historian assesses the national conduct during the war as small-minded and selfish; our immense resources, he thinks, guaranteed a victory beyond our moral deserts.
GENET: A Biography, by Edmund White. (Knopf, $35.) A monumental biography, meticulously researched, that places Genet's literary vision squarely in his homosexuality and confronts the mystery of how a man who left school at 12 became a great master of the French language.
A HISTORY OF WARFARE, by John Keegan. (Knopf, $27.50.) Mr.
Keegan, the most readable and original of military historians, argues that war is an omnipresent cultural ritual of mankind, from which the ruthless modern notion of disciplined total war was an aberration.
HONEY: Stories, by Elizabeth Tallent. (Knopf, $22.) In her third fine collection, set mainly in New Mexico, Ms.
Tallent's characters are tempered in the crucible of marriage while their creator revels in comely language and summons accurately the sensations of daily life.
IN SEARCH OF BERNABE, by Graciela Limon. (Arte Publico, paper, $9.50.) This stark, resonant first novel follows the lives of several characters, most notably a mother and her two sons (one a revolutionary, one a death squad commander), caught up in El Salvador's bloody civil war.
NEVER STOP RUNNING: Allard Lowenstein and the Struggle to Save American Liberalism, by William H. Chafe. (Basic Books, $28.) A historian captures the rootlessness and personal insecurity of an aggressive reform politician from New York who could accomplish almost anything except getting himself elected.
PRESIDENT KENNEDY: Profile of Power, by Richard Reeves. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A journalist's judicious appraisal that casts Kennedy as a pragmatic cold-war power broker and a manager of international confrontation.
THE ROBBER BRIDE, by Margaret Atwood. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $23.50.) Ms.
Atwood's funniest novel in years concerns three women who are friends and the mini-skirted Iago who worms her way into their lives.
WHAT IS FOUND THERE: Notebooks on Poetry and Politics, by Adrienne Rich. (Norton, $20.) A distinguished poet's reflections on the work of poetry, its social and cultural authority, its power to help us "invent what we desire." THE WINE-DARK SEA, by Patrick O'Brian. (Norton, $22.) The 16th irresistible volume in the continuing adventures of the bluff, violin-playing seaman Jack Aubrey and his great friend, the philosophical surgeon Stephen Maturin.


DAVID GERGEN, MASTER OF THE GAME
David Gergen is indeed a piece of work.
But what of the President who seeks out and benefits from this manipulation?
It is not unique to note that for many years we have elected officials who, by and large, know how to get elected, but not how to govern.
We now have media mavens who spend hours before the cameras and microphones in jejune interviews each week (as I wrote this letter, Governor Cuomo was on radio for nearly one hour with those paradigms of profundity, Curtis and Lisa Sliwa).
Who is watching the store while they blather away?
Can an official spend so much time in trivia and still have a genuine vision and focus?


Egos &amp; Ids; NOTES
Barneys New York has decided not to include mannequins that caricature celebrities in its holiday windows this year, but Macy's Herald Square will pick up the slack.
The store plans to unveil four vignettes tommorow with humorous scenes inspired by the Clinton White House.
"I'm not doing a bashing," said Sam Joseph, who joined the store last January as the visual director for windows.
"I've got Chelsea reading in bed. They are very careful about her, so I have in turn been very careful.


QVC Claims Financing for Its Paramount Bid
In a move intended to put pressure on the board of Paramount Communications to consider its takeover bid, QVC Network Inc. yesterday said it had obtained the necessary financing commitments for its $10.6 billion offer.
The board of Paramount has been refusing to consider QVC's offer, arguing that its bid has been conditioned on getting financing commitments for $3 billion in bank loans.
Now that it has those commitments, QVC yesterday sent a letter to the board of Paramount asking that it begin negotiations.


INSIDE
Strike Slows Air Travel
With Thanksgiving approaching, the strike by flight attendants at American Airlines continues to hobble travel throughout the country.
Page 32.
Fighting a Disease
Federal researchers made progress against a fatal illness that afflicted Indians in New Mexico.
Page 24.


SUSAN POWTER
The first time I heard the obnoxiously loud incantation "Stop the insanity!" I screamed back "Shut up!" and switched channels.
Before I knew it, though, I was watching the Susan Powter "show" all the way through, night after night, reciting along with her like some "Rocky Horror Show" ritual.


Deals and Discounts
FAMILY FARE TO POLAND -- LOT Polish Airlines has introduced a Family Discount program through March allowing family members to fly at half the fare paid by the "head of the family." Qualifying family members include spouses, children under 21 or full-time students under 26. (The lowest current round-trip midweek fare from New York to Warsaw is $599, with a 14-day advance purchase; it will be higher around Christmas.) Family members must depart together, but may return separately.
Call (800) 528-7208.
STARTING IN BELGIUM -- Sabena Airlines has Belgian Starter and European Starter packages for $599 a person, based on two people traveling together, to March 30.
The Belgian Starter offers round-trip air fare from New York to Brussels; three nights' accommodations at the Brussels or Antwerp Hilton International Hotels, and use of an Avis car on Friday to Sunday with unlimited mileage and V.A.T.
The European Starter substitutes a four-day Eurail Flexipass for the hotel and car.
Tickets must be purchased a week in advance.
The packages are not available around the Christmas holiday.
Call (800) 955-2000.


Jets Often at a Loss Against an All-Losing Foe
It seems as though each game the Jets have played in the last three weeks has had a history lesson tied to it.
With Miami, they were trying to live up to their history of success against the Dolphins.
Against the Colts, they were attempting to live down their shabby history of playing poorly and losing.
Leading up to this afternoon's game against the all-losing Bengals, Jets Coach Bruce Coslet was trying to teach his team another history lesson.
This one involved the Jets' recent record against teams without victories.
Coslet likes to point out that the Jets were the lone victims of the Colts in their 1-15 season in 1991 and that New England was 1-9 last season when it met New York and left the game 2-9 following a 24-3 victory.


Garden's Season Running Out
The DOME garden, a cherished part of 84th Street for more than 15 years, came closer to its final chapter last week as the city served its directors with an eviction notice.
The garden, which is run by the DOME project (Developing Opportunities through Meaningful Education), will have to vacate its spot between Amsterdam and Columbus Avenues by Dec. 31 to allow the New York City Housing Authority to begin construction on a 35-unit housing project on that site.


The Coup at Harper's
To the Editor:
Contradictory recollections should not be the issue.
The issue should be the contribution Willie Morris has made to journalism as the editor of Harper's and to an understanding of the 1960's in "New York Days."


For Film Exposure, Timing Is the Key
THE process of exposing film can be approached scientifically, with the film's light sensitivity plotted on a graph and the world divided into zones of gray.
The careful photographer can take light-meter readings of all the parts of a scene, match them to zones of gray and then figure out just which setting to expose the film for, taking into account the leeway that development can offer.
But I tend to think of exposure in terms that are a little more mundane: for me, it's like cooking.
Turn on the oven, stick in a chicken and a while later it's done.
So it is with exposure, at least in my mind.
Let the right amount of light fall on the negative, and in a little while (usually less time than it takes to cook a chicken), the negative is done.


Trade Pact Offers Chance to Export Our Ideals; F.D.R. and the Miners
To the Editor:
In President Clinton's clash with the leaders of organized labor over the North American Free Trade Agreement, he might take some comfort from history.
John L. Lewis, a giant of the labor movement, was enraged that Franklin Delano Roosevelt had forced an end to the coal miners' strike by seizing the mines.
He was most offended that F.D.R. said of labor as well as management, "A plague on both your houses." Lewis thundered, "It ill becomes one who has supped at labor's board."


All Mixed Up?
To the Editor:
I suppose you've received bags of letters from the ones in millions who have or have had the "disorder" of synesthesia.
Gosh, I didn't realize it was a bizarre medical mystery that enriched my own childhood.
I lost the gift sometime in grade school, and as an adult have only experienced it on the rare and unpleasant occasions of encountering a completely novel sensation.


Plan for Olympic Park Spurs Atlanta Protest
The Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games has announced plans to demolish the houses, small businesses and plants on 72 acres in a low-income part of the city to make way for a park that will serve as a gathering area for visitors to the Olympics.
William P. Payne, president of the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games said at a news conference on Friday that the bottom line was that the plan would change "very dramatically the environment that exists there today."


Library Privileges
The phrase "checking out" has a double meaning at the Hotel Vintage Park in Seattle.
Guests can borrow the hotel's library card to take out books at the Seattle Public Library across the street.
The hotel's front desk will also deliver specific books to a guest's room on request.
The service is free -- as long as you don't rack up overdue fines.
Double rooms start at $170; (800) 624-4433.


Sound Bytes; For Him, the Sound's the Thing
WHEN Paul Jain was a boy in India he rode in a rickshaw with his mother as she shopped for saris in the bustling market at Agra, near the Taj Mahal.
He was fascinated with the bright colors, sounds and movement of the market.
Over the years he has brought color, sound and animation to personal computers, first as a principal of such companies as Paradise Graphics and Video 7, and now as president and chief executive of Media Vision Inc. of Fremont, Calif., one of the leading makers of multimedia technology and software.
We caught up with Mr.
Jain (pronounced Jan) at the annual Comdex/Fall trade show in Las Vegas last week, where multimedia drew the largest crowds.
Question: You still sometimes describe yourself as a "poor, dumb immigrant," when obviously you're wealthy, very smart and now an American citizen.
Why?


Bug in the System
To the Sports Editor:
Does The New York Times use the same computer to the rank the top 25 college teams as the one it used for the poll showing that Gov.
Jim Florio led Christine Todd Whitman by two points just before Election Day?


Excerpts From Transcripts of Rollins's Testimony Before Democratic Party
Following are excerpts of a transcript of testimony Friday by Edward J. Rollins Jr. under questioning from Democratic Party lawyers, as provided by the Democratic National Committee.


A Hospital Giant Comes to Town, Bringing Change
WHEN Richard L. Scott rolled into town three years ago and bought two small, down-at-the-heels hospitals, he and his Columbia Healthcare Corporation made quite an impression on the local health care industry.
"Everybody thought they were crazy," said Dr.
Donald Huge, medical director for Sanus/New York Life Health Plan, one of Houston's largest health maintenance organizations.
"No one could figure out why they would want hospitals like that." Columbia was largely ignored.


Red-Shoe Specials


Neil Simon Opens A Door to the Past And Finds a Roomful Of Vying Jokesters
The resident genius: Sid Caesar.
The TV classics: "Your Show of Shows" (1950-54) and "Caesar's Hour" (1954-57).
The writers: Mel Brooks, Neil Simon, Larry Gelbart, Woody Allen, Lucille Kallen, Selma Diamond, Mel Tolkin and others.
The question: What is it about these legendary entertainments that has made them a veritable Source Perrier for comic spritzes?
Through the decades the shows have provided the raw materials for a nostalgic cottage industry, spawning a TV series, a film, a musical and now a Broadway play: "Laughter on the 23d Floor," Neil Simon's comic reprise of his years in "the room," as the writers' lair was called.
The show, directed by Jerry Zaks, opens tomorrow at the Richard Rodgers Theater.


Small Towns in the Big City
NEW YORK history buffs can indulge a range of interests with these geographically specific books.
They are available at New York Bound Bookshop (50 Rockefeller Plaza, 212-245-8503) and many may be found in other stores.
A HISTORY OF THE CITY OF BROOKLYN by Henry R. Stiles (Heritage Press).


Little Sympathy or Surprise; After Gang Rape, Many in East New York Just Shrug It Off
There is little public outrage in East New York, even though it's only days since a 31-year-old woman returning from a store was raped and sodomized by what the police said was a gang of six teen-agers, toting a toy gun, who sauntered away from the attack to shoot baskets and boast of their conquest.
There is no outcry among the residents of the housing projects off Sutter Avenue where the youths live and were arrested, only weary warnings that the woman should have known better than to walk alone through the dark streets.
Nor is there surprise that two of those arrested were 13 years old, only an "anything's possible" attitude in a neighborhood where some youths pack more deadly force than the police.


Time Runs Out On Restic At Harvard
Twenty-five years ago, Harvard scored 16 points in the last 42 seconds at Cambridge to tie Yale, 29-29, in an epic battle between two undefeated teams.
Today, in a battle between two often-defeated teams, Yale held off the Crimson near the end to win, 33-31.
The point total was the highest ever in this 118-year-old series, of which this was the 110th game.
It was the last one for the retiring Harvard coach of 23 years, Joe Restic, but not one that he would wish to remember because of many Crimson mistakes and missed opportunities.
But his players made it exciting by scoring three touchdowns in the fourth quarter.


NEWS ABOUT THE MAGAZINE
With the puzzles in today's Magazine, Will Shortz begins his tenure as the fourth puzzle editor of The New York Times.
The traditional crossword today is paired with a novelty crossword.
Other novelty puzzles will appear occasionally in addition to the usual crostics, puns and anagrams and cryptic and diagramless puzzles.
Mr.
Shortz is, at 41 years old, considerably the youngest member of an informal association of puzzle constructors and editors who meet periodically at a midtown Manhattan restaurant.
He is a former editor of Games magazine and the founder, in 1978, of the American Crossword Puzzle Tournament.
He sold his first puzzle at the age of 14 to a Sunday school magazine; since then his puzzles have appeared in The Times and many other publications.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LITERARY SYMPOSIUM
The authors of three books that inspired today's literary symposium at Westchester Community College in Valhalla will be present to discuss their theses from 2:30 to 4:30 P.M. in the Academic Arts Building.
Charlie Rose, the PBS talk-show host, will serve as moderator of the program, titled "Political Power: Past to Present."
The author-panelists will be Blanche Wiesen Cook, whose book "Eleanor Roosevelt: Vol. 1, 1884-1933" was published in 1992 by Viking and as a 1993 Penguin paperback.
Walter Isaacson's "Kissinger: A Biography" was published in 1992 by Simon &amp; Schuster and is available as a Touchstone paperback, and Richard Reeves is the author of "President Kennedy: A Profile of Power," published by Simon &amp; Schuster last month.


Carrie Berman, Ronald Apter
Dr. and Mrs.
Martin M. Berman of Bloomfield, Conn., have announced January wedding plans for their daughter Carrie Beth Berman and Ronald Scott Apter, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Apter of Manchester, Conn.
Ms.
Berman, 30, graduated from Bates College and received a master's degree in education from Columbia University in New York.
She is a social studies teacher at the High School of Art and Design in Manhattan.
Her father is the director of anatomic pathology at Hartford Hospital.
Her mother, Irene Berman, is president of Accent, a foreign-language translation agency in Hartford.


Fishing for Trout on Stillwater of Golden New England Ponds
Lakes and ponds are little noted in the voluminous centuries-old literature devoted to fly fishing for trout, but they offer first-rate angling that is every bit as fascinating as that experienced on moving water.
I became a devotee of stillwater trout fishing nearly four decades ago when I lived in west-central New Hampshire.
There was only one decent good-sized trout river within 25 miles, but excellent trout ponds abounded, many of them in wilderness settings that could be reached only by hiking.


BENEFITS
Music for a Library
TODAY -- Makanda Ken McIntyre and his quartet will raise funds for the Harlem Branch Library in a concert sponsored by the Mount Morris Park Community Improvement Association.
The performance at the library, 9 West 124th Street, will be from 3 to 6 P.M.
Tickets, $10, or $5 for children 6 to 12 years old, from (212) 289-7051.
St. Clare's Gala
MONDAY -- Annette Funicello will be honored at a dinner to benefit St.
Clare's Hospital.
Jeanne White-Ginder, the head of the Ryan White Foundation, and City Harvest will also receive awards.
The event at the Marriott Marquis begins at 6:30 P.M. with a cocktail reception.
After dinner and the award presentations, Bobby Rydell, Lee Roy Reams, Jeanne Lehman and Steve Ross will perform.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 459-8627.
Harbor Arts
MONDAY -- A one-act comedy that brings together six of Shakespeare's notable women will kick off a series of five Monday-evening events to raise money for the Harbor Performing Arts Center.
The 7:15 P.M. performance of "When Shakespeare's Ladies Meet," written by Charles George, will be preceded at 6 by a cocktail hour, all at the center's Theater 3, 1 East 104th Street.
Tickets, $20, from (212) 427-2244, extension 573.
Hope and H.I.V.
MONDAY -- An evening of preview screenings of "Living Proof: H.I.V. and the Pursuit of Happiness," a documentary by Kermit Cole about people living with the AIDS virus, will benefit the People With AIDS Coalition of New York and Body Positive, organizations for people with H.I.V. and AIDS.
The screenings are at 5, 7 and 9 P.M. at the Loews Festival theater, 6 West 57th Street.
Tickets, $25, from (212) 647-1415 or at the door.
Amfar Disco Ball
MONDAY -- Robert Rauschenberg, Jenny Holzer and Francesco Clemente are among a group of contemporary artists collaborating with manufacturers and designers to produce limited-edition retail objects to benefit the American Foundation for AIDS Research.
Barneys New York will sell the designs in their stores across the country.
The prototypes and renderings will be auctioned at the store on Madison Avenue and 61st Street, at a reception beginning at 6:30 P.M.
A party with performers including the Village People, the Trammps and Gloria Gaynor follows at a location that won't be divulged until the night of the event.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 682-7440, ext. 155.
Blood Donors
MONDAY -- Ruth Ann Swenson, the Metropolitan Opera soprano, will perform at a dinner-dance for the New York Blood Center.
Alfred C. DeCrane Jr., the chairman and chief executive of Texaco and outgoing chairman of the center's Leadership Blood Donor Campaign, will be honored.
The event, at the Waldorf-Astoria, begins with cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 888-7003.
New York City Ballet
TUESDAY -- New York City Ballet's opening-night benefit at Lincoln Center's New York State Theater will usher in the company's 99th New York season.
A 6:15 P.M. cocktail reception is to precede the 7:30 performance, which will salute the era of Jerome Kern, Fred Astaire and George Gershwin.
A champagne supper ball follows on the theater's promenade, with dancing to the Kit McClure Big Band.
Black tie.
Tickets, $650, or $12 for the reception and performance alone, from (212) 870-5585.
A Living Memorial
TUESDAY -- The Pierre Hotel will be the setting for an evening to raise funds for the Museum of Jewish Heritage.
The event, sponsored by the museum's associates division, will begin with cocktails at 6 P.M. and a viewing of the model of the museum's building, scheduled to begin construction next year at Battery Park City.
Helene Kener Gray, a chairwoman of the division and a daughter of Holocaust survivors, will speak, along with District Attorney Robert Morgenthau of Manhattan and Lieut.
Gov.
Stan Lundine of New York.
Dinner and entertainment follows.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 687-9141.
Jamaican Benefit
TUESDAY -- An auction of artworks by Cecil Cooper, Ernest Crichlow and Judy MacMillan, among others, will benefit Heartbeats of Jamaica.
The organization seeks to improve the health, education and welfare of children in that country and is to provide grants in 1994 to the St.
Luke's Hospital Sickle Cell Program and to Expressions, the performing arm of the Harlem Vocal Arts Ensemble.
The event, at Christie's East, 219 East 67th Street, begins with cocktails, hors d'oeuvres and a steel band at 6 P.M.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 477-2848 or (212) 473-6904.
Women's Rights
NOV. 29 -- The NOW Legal Defense and Education Fund will hold its Equal Opportunity Awards Dinner at the New York Hilton.
Vernon E. Jordan Jr.; Deryck C. Maughan, the chairman and chief executive of Salomon Brothers; Elizabeth Tilberis, the editor in chief of Harper's Bazaar, and Myron E. Ullman 3d, the chairman and chief executive of R. H. Macy &amp; Company, will be honored.
The evening begins at 6 P.M. with a cocktail reception.
Andrea Marcovicci will perform after dinner.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 997-0100.
Actors' Aid
NOV. 29 -- A walk-on part in a Sidney Lumet film, an outing with Shirley MacLaine, a day of sailing with Walter Cronkite and a dinner date with Whoopi Goldberg are among the items to be auctioned to benefit the Actors' Fund of America, a financial assistance and social services organization for entertainment professionals.
Charles Kuralt will preside at the Waldorf-Astoria over the evening of cocktails, dinner and dancing to the Peter Duchin Orchestra, beginning at 7 P.M.
Robert C. Woolley of Sotheby's will be the auctioneer at the live auction to accompany a silent auction.
Tickets, $500, from (212)221-7301, extension 124.
East Side Elderly
NOV. 29 -- An evening of dinner and dancing to the George Young Orchestra will benefit the Burden Center for the Aging, which provides counseling and referrals to residents of the Upper East Side.
Brooke Astor, A. J. C. Smith, the chairman of Marsh &amp; McLennan, and his wife, Margaret Smith, will be honored.
The event, at the Rainbow Room, begins with cocktails at 7 P.M.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 921-9070.
Community Action
NOV. 29 -- Calvin Trillin and Al Roker will be the masters of ceremonies at a cabaret fund-raiser for Community Access Inc., which provides housing and services for the homeless and mentally ill.
Steve Ross, Priscilla Baskerville and Jason Brown will perform.
The evening, which honors Chemical Bank, will include an auction of restaurant meals, cooking-school lessons and weekend trips.
Cocktails and a buffet at 6 P.M. will precede the show at the Supper Club, 240 West 47th Street.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 420-1594.


Who's the Greatest of Them All?
Muhammad Ali was, he himself told us, "the greatest, the fastest, the prettiest, the dancin'est heavyweight boxer in the world" -- and, he might have added, the most photogenic.
As his dear friend Howard L. Bingham, a photographer, has said: "He was born for the camera. . . . No one in the world has a face like Ali." For MUHAMMAD ALI: A Thirty-Year Journey (Simon &amp; Schuster, $32.50), Mr.
Bingham has selected nearly 200 black-and-white photographs from the one million pictures he has taken of Ali since 1962.
The book, like its subject, is exceptional.
It includes a fair number of ringside photos, but we also see Ali hanging out in Harlem with Sugar Ray Robinson and Roy Campanella; having his snapshot taken by Malcolm X and his ear bent by Jesse Jackson; playfully sneaking up on the ferocious Sonny Liston in a Miami bar in 1963 (even Elijah Muhammad picked Liston to win their fight the following year); and just generally having a good time, with folks sublime (Duke Ellington, Sam Cooke) and ridiculous (Sonny Bono, Don Knotts).
When Wilfrid Sheed was writing the text for a picture book on Ali two decades ago, he pored over thousands of photographs and never came upon a single nasty one.
Ali looks angry only once in Mr.
Bingham's book, on the day in 1967 when he was indicted for refusing induction into the armed forces.
Yet the man who had no quarrel with the Vietcong never seemed to hold a grudge against anybody, not even the bigots and boobs who kept him out of boxing for three and a half years and made sure that no one would see the athlete of the century at his peak.
In the private, quiet moments depicted here, past and present, Ali comes across as too nice, too gentle, for bitterness.
He used to brag that he could hospitalize a brick.
He could probably get one to crack a smile too.
DAVID KELLY


It Started in 1884: B.U. Finally Unbeaten
Boston University 24, James Madison 21
Boston University, which played its first college football game in 1884, finally has its first undefeated season.
Backup quarterback Greg Moore threw for two touchdowns, ran for a third and completed a crucial pass to set up the winning score yesterday as the Terriers beat James Madison, 24-21, in a Yankee Conference game in Harrisonburg, Va.


Jill Posternack and Leon Kavaler
Dr.
Jill Ann Posternack, the daughter of Diane R. Posternack of Villanova, Pa., and the late Dr.
Melwyn L. Posternack, was married last evening to Dr.
Leon Kavaler, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Max Kavaler of Cedarhurst, L.I.
Rabbi Alan D. Fuchs officiated at the College of Physicians in Philadelphia.
The bride, 28, is a resident in anesthesiology at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
She received undergraduate and medical degrees from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father was the medical director of the Philadelphia Office of Mental Health and Mental Retardation.
Her mother is the director of human resources at Jewish Employment and Vocational Services in Philadelphia.


Egos &amp; Ids; Now, Like Any Other Executive in the World?
NAME: Marvin Traub.
IDENTITY: Retired chairman of Bloomingdale's; 68-year-old president of Marvin Traub Associates, a consulting and retailing company.
NEW BOOK: "Like No Other Store . . . The Bloomingdale's Legend and the Evolution in American Marketing," (Times Books, $25).
The final chapters are devoted to Bloomingdale's period of bankruptcy after Robert Campeau took over its parent, Federated Department Stores, in 1988.
CURRENT CLIENTS: Ralph Lauren, American Express and Saks Fifth Avenue.
Marvin Traub Associates also owns Conran's Habitat, the chain of home furnishing stores.
Q.  Do you still shop at Bloomingdale's?
A.  I was there about 10 days ago. I was in the men's store and I ordered some shirts.
Q.  But you don't have to be loyal anymore, do you?
A.
I also shop at Saks as well as Paul Stuart.
When I was at Bloomingdale's, 90 percent of my purchases were there, as were Mrs.
Traub's.
I had a rule: she could shop anyplace she wanted as long as she bought at Bloomingdale's.
Q.  What have you been up to since leaving in 1991?
A.
I've worked with QVC.
I originally took Diane Von Furstenburg to QVC, as I say in the book, and through Diane, Barry Diller became very much involved.
I've brought a number of different projects to them, including Barbara Taylor Bradford.
When it was a great success, the folks at QVC said, "Marvin, when your book comes out, we'll work together with you on it."
Q.  So you're planning to go on the air to sell it?
A.  Yes. It will probably happen sometime in early December.
Q.  Hasn't QVC had too much hype though?
A.
It's interesting to think that the total volume of QVC, Home Shopping Network and all the infomercials that are made is a little more than 15 percent of J. C. Penney's sales.
It is a very tiny business, but it will grow.
It will not replace people going into department stores or shopping centers.
Q.  What else are you doing?
A.
We started a business with Elizabeth Taylor for costume jewelry, which Avon is making.
It's being launched this month.
We have another company we started up with Iman, the model.
We are doing a line of cosmetics and skin care for women of color.
Q.  What do you think of the direction of Bloomingdale's since you left?
A.
I think I have made it plain in the book that I have a concern that Bloomingdale's maintain a level of uniqueness that excited people to shop there.
I know there's an enormous profit pressure that makes it hard to do either a country promotion or some major new idea.
Q.  What do you mean "concern"?
A.
The emphasis is on other things.
I'm being very measured because I really don't want to seem like sour grapes.
Q.
You do say in the book that you didn't like Michael Gould, your successor as chairman.
A.
Mike was not my first choice for the job, but Mike does have the job, so I'd like him to be successful.
For the sake of all the people there and everything we've built.
Q.
You don't mince words about Robert Campeau either.
You even imply that he cheats at golf.
A.
He was just driven to win at most any cost.
He had some sound ideas and some excesses.
Q.
Having once tried to lead a management buyout of Bloomingdale's, are you disappointedthat you don't own the store?
A.
No.
I loved running Bloomingdale's, but with this new second career I am as busy as I've ever been.


DAVID GERGEN, MASTER OF THE GAME
After being apprised in your article of David Gergen's influence with President Nixon "at that point in time," I wonder, again, why Nixon or his manipulators never appealed to the American public with truth, an apology and humility.
It was so obviously the way out . . . with grace.
BABS MARCUS Carmel, Calif.


Dreams of Stone and Glass
NO PLACE LIKE UTOPIA Modern Architecture and the Company We Kept.
By Peter Blake.
Illustrated. 347 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $27.50.


Keoghs, Rubber Chicken and All
A few tax-planning considerations can help reduce future payments.
If you have any self-employment income, open a Keogh retirement account before Dec. 31.
You can contribute a portion of your income from consulting work, directors' fees or any other work not generated as an employee.


If You're Thinking of Living in/Highland Park; Well-Established, but Unpretentious
THE tiny Middlesex County borough of Highland Park has its traffic problems, and its business district could use a facelift.
But those who live there find it comfortable and unpretentious, and it is a thriving community.
Its downtown -- Raritan Avenue -- is part of Route 27, one of New Jersey's most congested highways, and traffic there slows to a crawl in the rush hours.
The Raritan Avenue business district, which is mainly turn-of-the-century, is within 10 miles of three major shopping centers, Menlo Park in Edison, Woodbridge Center in Woodbridge and the Brunswick Square Mall in East Brunswick.
Yet it remains a prosperous business street with few empty stores.


Conversations/Tommy Wade; A Salesman, Gray, Remembers The Game He Won Long Ago
TOMMY WADE has more reason than most people to wax sentimental when the leaves fall and the college football season winds down.
In a Thanksgiving Day game 30 years ago, as the graying insurance agent from Texas recalled the other day, "I got to live every little boy's dream." Or, he might have added, every bench-warmer's.
Tommy Wade was second-string quarterback for the University of Texas Longhorns.
He had a decent arm, one that might have served him better in baseball (more about that in a minute) than on a football team whose coach, Darrell Royal, didn't much care for the passing game.
Recalling an oft-quoted Royalism of yesteryear, Wade said, "You throw the ball, and three things can happen. Two of them are bad."


Proposed M31 Would Be Boon to Upper East Side
To the Editor:
I would like to add my small voice in support of Arline Bronzaft's accurate account of bus service in New York.
As a senior citizen, I am forced to use buses from time to time rather than subways or walking.
I cannot count the number of times I ended up walking instead of waiting for a bus that never seemed to come. (Taxis are very expensive!)


How Do I Join?
Monday.
I am thinking of becoming a member of the New York glitterati.
According to The London Daily Mail, Martin Amis has left his wife of 10 years, and the woman he has fallen in love with "is one of the New York glitterati." She's also the cousin of a good friend of mine, and I find, after hearing this news, that I am fiercely jealous.
The most scandalous event in my family was when my cousin Andy turned down Harvard for Duke.
Tuesday A.M.
If I joined the New York glitterati, would I have to date Martin Amis?
While it's true he is quite attractive, a very funny, intelligent novelist and approximately the right age, I am married; anyway, I have read those very funny, intelligent novels, and they do not suggest a world view of sufficient sympathy toward the female gender.


Power Authority Head Quits After Months of Criticism
Richard M. Flynn submitted his resignation as chairman of the New York State Power Authority yesterday after months of criticism over his use of a state airplane, allegations of poor management at the authority's two nuclear power plants and questionable spending practices by his agency.
The power authority, the nation's largest non-Federal public utility, owns 11 power plants and supplies one fourth of the state's electricity, selling it wholesale to seven investor-owned utilities that pass it on, without profit, to their customers.
It also supplies low-cost power to New York City for public agencies, hospitals, museums, street lights and subway and commuter trains.


Habitats/TriBeCa Rowhouses; A Sale on Harrison St.
THEY'VE always looked incongruous -- stalwart foes of relentless progress, dwarfed by the massive Independence Plaza housing complex in TriBeCa.
A row of fine Federal town houses on Harrison Street, off Greenwich Street, the nine two-and-a-half story houses look new -- almost like Williamsburgh reproductions.


Midwest Works to Halt Floods' Chill on Tourism
IN the months since record flooding immobilized much of the Midwest, fear and misperception have done nearly as much damage to tourism as the flooding itself.
Like stalled barge traffic along the Mississippi River, tourist traffic came almost to a halt during the floods in July and August as many roads and bridges were impassable and people assumed the St.
Louis Gateway Arch was under water like the farms and houses they saw on the evening news.
But because many historic towns were built on the bluffs and the big cities that draw the majority of tourists were fortified by flood walls, the rivers that consumed the bottomlands left most of the region's major tourist sites -- including the Mall of America outside Minneapolis and the Gateway Arch and the Anheuser-Busch brewery in St.
Louis -- virtually untouched.


Hurt? Cheated? Get Mad, and Then Let the Government Get Even
Here are many common annoyances of life in New York, and whom to call in city, state and Federal Government to complain.
ADVERTISING  Misleading or deceptive ads Department of Consumer Affairs . . . (212) 487-4398 Federal Trade Commission  . . . (212) 264-1207 AIRLINES  Delays, overbooking, rudeness U.S.
Department of Transportation, Office of Intergovernmental Affairs  . . . (202) 366-4000 Lost luggage  Federal Aviation Administration Public Affairs . . . (718) 553-2692
. . . (212) 967-3002 FOOD  Rotten, unwholesome or unsavory food sold in supermarkets State Department of Agriculture and Markets . . . (718) 260-2977 In restaurants or bakeries City Department of Health  . . . (212) 442-1999 Pricing violations Department of Consumer Affairs  . . . (212) 487-4398 Tampering or poisoning U.S.
Food and Drug Administration, Inspector General's line  . . . (800) 368-5779 F.B.I. . . . (212) 335-2700  GARBAGE  Non-pickup and other complaints City Sanitation Department  . . . (212) 219-8090 HOSPITALS  Complaints on municipal hospitals City Health and Hospitals Corporation . . . (212) 556-8100 Complaints about private hospitals City Department of Health, Hospital Unit . . . (212) 502-0855 HOUSING  City Department of Housing Preservation . . . (212) 960-4800
INSURANCE  State Department of Insurance  . . . (212) 602-0203 LAWYERS  Disciplinary Committee  . . . (212) 685-1000 MAIL  Mail fraud, obscene mail, service complaints U.S.
Postal Inspector . . . (212) 330-3844 Late delivery or nondelivery Postmaster, New York . . . (212) 330-3668 MOVING AND STORAGE  Overcharging, late delivery, damage, other problems Department of Consumer Affairs  . . . (212) 487-4398 PHARMACISTS  Improper activities, overcharging, other complaints State Department of Education, Office of Professional Discipline  . . . (212) 951-6400 For other complaint sources, refer to "Big Apple Street Smarts" (The Consultant Press: 1992).


An Offer of Help for the Tired Woodhaven Blvd. Station
When the Woodhaven Boulevard subway station was built in 1936, it was a rural outpost in New York City's subway system.
While the station has evolved into one of the busiest in the borough, it has withered with years of heavy use and neglect.
Last week the station finally received a promise of help, when the Metropolitan Transit Authority designated it as one of 70 stations that will undergo major restoration.
The Woodhaven project, to begin early next year at a cost of about $6 million, is part of the authority's four-year project to refurbish the city's entire subway system.


Baltimore Catcher Is Ohio Media Star
The other 899 residents of Wayne, Ohio, did not have to wait for the final statistics to know how the 900th resident performed this year.
"A lot of people around here bought satellite dishes, put in cable TV and subscribed to Baltimore newspapers," Chris Hoiles said, explaining the development in the mass-communication market in the tiny Ohio community.
Hoiles's performance with the Baltimore Orioles explained the reason for the phenomenon.


SUNDAY, November 21, 1993; PARTY ANIMAL
There is good news and then there is, well, other news.
The good news is that kudzu is useful.
A new study suggests that a root extract from the vine that invaded the South seems to reduce the desire for alcohol.
The other news is the Syrian golden hamster's enormous capacity to hold liquor.
The Syrian golden is a popular lab animal (no wonder) and the hero of this study.
Given an open bar, the rodent will drink (per ounce of body weight) 40 times as much as an average human alcoholic.


Thomas Roche, Isabel Marcal
Isabel Maria Guimaraes Marcal, who works in the electoral assistance unit of the United Nations' political affairs department, and Thomas Herbert Roche, an assistant United States Attorney and senior trial counsel in Brooklyn, were married last evening.
Judge Raymond J. Dearie of the Federal District Court in Brooklyn officiated at the Equitable Tower in Manhattan.
Ms.
Marcal graduated from the Escola do Magisterio Primario in Caldas da Rainha, Portugal.
She is a daughter of Maria Helena Tavares and a stepdaughter of Rogerio Tavares of Lisbon.
Her stepfather is a consulting mechanical engineer in Lisbon.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Out! Out, Debris!
Clean the garden of all debris, like spent zinnias and pepper plants, and put it all on the compost pile.
Turn manure and compost into the cleared beds, so they will be ready to use for early spring crops.
Test the soil, and add lime if needed, because it takes three to six months to be absorbed.
Fertilize the lawn only if it needs it, and keep mowing if the grass is growing.
The lawn should be no more than two inches high when winter arrives; longer grass is more prone to disease.
Keep watering newly seeded areas, if it hasn't rained.
Keep raking leaves, to allow grass plenty of light and air.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 24 about the Austrian part of the Danube River misstated the location of Artstetten castle in relation to Ybbs.
It is northeast, not south.
The article also misstated the year in which the followers of Richard the Lion-Hearted purchased his freedom from Durnstein fortress.
It was 1194, not 1193.


Treating Depression to Stem Suicide
THE aftermath of the suicide of former Yonkers mayor Nicholas C. Wasicsko had an eerily familiar ring to it.
The 34-year-old Mr.
Wasicsko shot himself the week before Election Day, three months after Vincent W. Foster, deputy White House counsel, killed himself the same way.
The headlines and news stories that followed had parallel themes.
As with Mr.
Foster, friends and colleagues of Mr.
Wasicsko first expressed shock about the suicide, observing that nothing seemed to be particularly amiss.
They described the former Mayor as being in a jovial mood at a Council meeting and said that he had made plans to attend a political dinner in the coming week.
Next came speculation about the professional pressures that might have led the politician to take his life.


Park and Shop . . . Literally
Manhattan's largest indoor flea market is about to open just around the corner from Manhattan's largest outdoor flea market.
The new second-hand bazaar, the Garage, is to operate weekends in a two-story parking garage (hence the name), with about 125 dealers filling 23,000 square feet.
Alan Boss, the entrepreneur behind the new enterprise at 112 West 25th Street, also runs the neighboring open-air Annex Antiques Fair and Flea Market, which stretches from 24th to 27th Street on the Avenue of the Americas.


Outings, Afoot, for Late Fall
The traditional walking tour season is drawing to a close, but here is a gleaning of New York City walks that are interesting, diverse and a little bit off the beaten path.
TODAY
GHOULISH GREENWICH VILLAGE Manhattan.
Featuring graveyards, hanging trees and murder sites.
Led by Joyce Gold, a history professor and guidebook author.
Meet at Washington Square Park under the arch. 6 P.M. $12. (212) 242-5762.
MEDICINALS Central Park, Manhattan.
Natural medicine and its sources are discussed.
For example, say the Urban Park Rangers, pine needles are a source of vitamin C, and willow trees produced the original source of aspirin.
Led by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meet at 100th Street and Central Park West. 11 A.M.
Free. (212) 427-4040.
RAPTORS, HUNTERS OF THE SKY Kissena Park, Queens.
Learn about the importance and beauty of raptors with a guest falconer and the Urban Park Rangers.
Meet at the Kissena Nature Center, Rose Avenue and Parsons Boulevard. 2 P.M.
Free.  (718) 699-4204.
NOV. 27
YE OLDE TAVERN TOUR Greenwich Village, Manhattan.
A tour of old and historic bars: Minetta Tavern on Macdougal Street, Chumley's on Bedford and the White Horse on Hudson.
Led by New York City historians and researchers.
Sponsored by Sidewalks of New York.
Meet in Washington Square Park under the arch. 6 P.M.
Drinks and tips not included. $10. (212) 517-0201.
FAMOUS MURDER SITES Manhattan.
Highlights include the old Park Sheraton Hotel barbershop where Albert Anastasia, the former chief of Murder Inc., was hit; John Lennon's murder site at the Dakota and a 72d Street apartment building where the "Looking For Mr. Goodbar" murder occurred.
Sponsored by Sidewalks of New York.
Meets at Seventh Avenue and 56th Street, in front of the Park Central Hotel. 2 P.M. (212) 517-0201.
NOV. 28
TOTAL ECLIPSE OF THE MOON Central Park, Manhattan.
On this night of a lunar eclipse, the Urban Park Rangers in conjunction with the Hayden Planetarium will explain its mechanics and share the lore and myths that surround it.
Meet at 81st Street and Central Park West, 11:30 P.M.
Free. (212) 427-4040 or (800) 201-7275 for reservations.
MOON MYSTERIES AND STAR STORIES Rockaway Park, Queens.
Bring binoculars and walk and discuss the lunar eclipse.
Meet at Beach 36th Street on the boardwalk. 8 P.M.
Free. (718) 699-4204.
DEC. 4
WINTER WISE, WINTER WAYS Pelham Bay Park, the Bronx.
Find out which animals and insects hibernate and which stay active throughout winter by finding them and their hiding places.
Meet at the Pelham Bay Park Visitor's Center, Bruckner Boulevard and Wilkinson Avenue. (718) 548-7070.
RADICAL WALKING TOUR of Wall Street and Battery Park, Manhattan.
Includes the New York Stock Exchange, where Abbie Hoffman proclaimed the death of money in 1967; Fort Amsterdam, site of Algonquin Indian massacres (now the Customs Building), and Maiden Lane, site of the first organized slave revolt in New York.
Led by Bruce Kayton, "radical historian." Meets on the steps of the Customs Building, across from 2 Broadway. 1 P.M. $6. (718) 492-0069.
DEC. 5
ECO-SHOPPER'S BEST BUYS Central Park, Manhattan.
The Urban Park Rangers lead a walk through Central Park to explain ecological relationships and consumer choices.
Meet at North Meadow Nature Center, north of the 97th Street transverse, mid-park.
Free. 2 P.M. (212) 427-4040.
MOVEMENT LIKE ANIMALS Prospect Park, Brooklyn.
Find out how and why some martial arts mimic the behavior of animals.
Led by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meet at the Boathouse; enter on Lincoln Road and Ocean Avenue.
Free. 2 P.M. (718) 287-3400.
DEC. 12
RADICAL WALKING TOUR of Greenwich Village, Manhattan.
Sites include Grove Street where the draft riots of 1863 occurred, the Rosenbergs' apartment and Chumley's on Bedford Street, a former speakeasy and a radical union headquarters in the 1910's.
Led by Bruce Kayton.
Meets at Sheridan Square, Christopher Street and Seventh Avenue. 1 P.M. $6. (212) 492-0069.
DECEMBER 18
FROM NAPLES TO BIALYSTOK TO BEIJING A multiethnic eating tour.
Manhattan.
Sponsored by Big Onion Walking Tours.
Led by Ed O'Donnell, urban history doctoral student.
A historic and gastronomic tour of the Jewish East Side, Chinatown and Little Italy.
Bialys, dim sum to cannoli.
Southeast corner of Essex and Delancey Streets.
Noon. $9, $7 students and the elderly. (212)439-1090.
I'LL NEVER GO THERE ANYMORE: THE BOWERY Manhattan.
Sponsored by Big Onion Walking Tours, led by Seth Kamil, doctoral candidate in urban history.
Discover Big Tim Sullivan's Headquarters, P. T. Barnum's Circus, McGuirk's Suicide Hall, dance halls and Handkerchief Girls.
Meet at the cube in Astor Place: Lafayette, Astor Place and Fourth Avenues.
Noon. $9, $7 students and the elderly. (212) 439-1090.
DECEMBER 19
IRISH NEW YORK Manhattan.
Through the former "Little Ireland" district, which was between City Hall and Houston Street.
Highlights include Old St.
Patrick's Cathedral on Mulberry Street, St.
James Church on James Street, the founding site of the Ancient Order of Hibernians and Five Points Slum (now Foley Square, but once a notorious slum).
Led by Ed O'Donnell of Big Onion Walking Tours.
Meets on the steps of City Hall. 1 P.M. $9, $7 students and the elderly. (212) 439-1090.
WINTER FOREST ECOLOGY Pelham Bay Park, the Bronx.
Walk with the Urban Park Rangers on Hunter Island to examine the season's effect on flora and fauna.
Meet at the Pelham Bay Park Environmental Center, Orchard Beach, Section 2. 2 P.M.
Free. (718) 548-7070.


POSTINGS: Gold Street Purchase; 655,000 Square Feet For City's Agencies
At nine stories, 100 Gold Street scarcely scrapes the sky.
But with floors that are each more than an acre and a half, it is a very large building indeed.
And now it is a public building.
The New York City General Services Department bought it on Nov. 4 for $37 million from the Travellers Insurance Company, holders of the second mortgage.
The previous owner, a partnership based in a Chicago suburb, had filed for bankruptcy.


Defenders of Sex Shops Should Walk Along 8th Ave.


Advancing the Cause of Music Education
ON a brilliant fall morning in his sunny kitchen here, Elmar Oliveira sliced open a bagel, showing little concern for his world-renowned fingers, and spoke about his life as a concert violinist.
Back only a few days from a performance in San Jose, Calif., and scheduled to leave the next morning for a concert in Memphis, Mr.
Oliveira seemed at ease with the hopscotch schedule that takes him far from his hilltop home most weeks of the year.
Mr.
Oliveira is the only American violinist ever to win a Gold Medal in the Tchaikovsky Competition, which is held in Moscow every four years -- a prize that he said changed his life in 1978 with its immediate offers of concert and recording dates.


NOV. 14-20: Recriminations in the U.S.; In the Demjanjuk Case, Bitterness Begets Bitterness
John Demjanjuk has been saying for years that the special unit of Nazi hunters at the Justice Department improperly withheld critical evidence that would help him refute charges that he was one of the most brutal figures of the Holocaust.
Last week a Federal appeals panel in Cincinnati said he was right.
In a rare and embarrassing rebuke, the three judges said the prosecutors had fraudulently withheld evidence that could have helped to disprove accusations of Holocaust survivors who said he was "Ivan the Terrible," the sadistic Treblinka guard who tortured his prisoners before operating the gas chambers in which they perished.


Trade Pact Offers Chance to Export Our Ideals; A Bleak Future Looms
To the Editor:
As a very longtime reader, I do not believe I have ever seen you use such a tone as that in "Running Scared From Nafta" (editorial, Nov. 16).
I regret, however, that you have never discussed the real issue underlying the North American Free Trade Agreement and, more important, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
The conventional wisdom demands unquestioning acceptance of the proposition that the free market is never blind or goes off track, that government is always incompetent and in the way of the conquering feats of entrepreneurs, notwithstanding that Japan and the East Asian tigers have successfully experimented with a model that is different from ours.


The Mississippi Transformed -- A special report; A River Returns to Work After a Summerlong Binge
Unlike a hurricane that strikes swiftly and moves on or an earthquake from a distant epicenter or fires with no name or permanent residence, the source of a flood is usually a relative with whom one must make peace after the temper tantrum is over.
For the Midwest, emerging from the worst flooding in the country's history, that means relearning and coming to terms with the Mississippi River, a rowdy uncle who gives freely in good times and breaks the furniture in bad and pretends not to notice after the damage has been done.


Going Back 300 Years In the County
IN a newly published and free booklet that is available through the County Historian's office, residents can learn how government in Westchester grew during a 300-year period from a unit consisting of only a high sheriff and a few justices of the peace to the complex structure it is today.
"For many people, county government is a mystery," said Susan Swanson, Westchester's historian.
"They ignore it unless they need it or it gets in their way, even though they have a pretty good understanding of the history of the nation and even the state."


Thea A. Diserio, Robert B. Ross
Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene A. Diserio of New Canaan, Conn., have announced January wedding plans for their daughter Thea Ann Diserio to Robert Briesenick Ross, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert B. Ross of Ridgewood, N.J.
Miss Diserio, who graduated from St.
Lawrence University, is the senior vice president in charge of international distribution at New World Entertainment, a television production and distribution company, in New York.
Her father is a founding partner of Diserio Martin O'Connor &amp; Castiglioni, a law firm in Stamford, Conn.


Subject the Form-Makers to a Few Forms
To the Editor:
Regarding paperwork in the "health care system" -- the quotation marks required since it is not very systematic, and both health and care appear to be concerns subsidiary to access, financing and other mechanical ideas:


MAGAZINE REDESIGN
I got a big bang out of your revised Magazine (Oct. 31).
You have taken the first step to real, un-Gergenized change.
MARIETTA L. WILHELM Port Ludlow, Wash.


An Antidote to Bach? No, Just an Alternative
BACH: YOU REMEMBER him.
He sold music books in Leipzig, Germany, two and a half centuries ago.
In 1729, he offered a useful study of composition, Johann David Heinichen's "General-Bass in der Composition," which had been published the year before.
Selling books was, of course, a sideline for Bach.
He was also a seemingly tireless paterfamilias, a teacher of Latin and music, a church cantor and organist and, yes, a composer without peer.
So what kind of composer must Heinichen have been that Bach was willing to endorse his views and methods, at least on a mercenary level?
And this although, as Piero Weiss and Richard Taruskin have pointed out ("Music in the Western World"), Heinichen's text contained "an incipient hostility" toward "learned" music like Bach's.


In the Far West
CHELSEA CENTRAL ** (212) 620-0230; 227 10th Avenue, at 23d Street; $$; AE, MC, V


Challenges With Ready-to-Assemble Kits
READY-TO-ASSEMBLE furniture has gained considerable popularity owing to its reasonable price, easy shipping and supposedly easy assembly.
But buyers of large complicated pieces like entertainment centers or desks with drawers and shelves can find challenges from the parts and hardware.
First, arrange sufficient space to work.
Large heavy furniture is best assembled near its intended location.
Where necessary, shift other furniture out of the way.
Provide abundant light.


LOOK WHO'S SAVING THE ELM
If the New York City Parks Department knows of a cure for Dutch elm disease, I wish it would tell the rest of us ("Look Who's Saving the Elm," by Michael Pollan, Oct. 31).
I resent the implication that the loss of elms is due to a lack of "civic-mindedness."
When we lived in Iowa in the 1960's and 70's, we had a dozen elm trees on our property and did everything to save them.
We consulted all the experts and were told that there was no cure.
Optimists, we tried everything in the way of prevention, including trenching around the trees to prevent root grafts and injecting with bidrin, an experimental preventive.
Nothing worked.
Eventually, we lost all 12 trees.


Data Bank/November 21, 1993


Jo Ann Fuerst, K. D. Beckerman
Jo Ann Fuerst, a daughter of Norma Fuerst of Scotch Plains, N.J., and the late Dr.
Lawrence E. Fuerst, was married last evening to Kenneth David Beckerman, a son of Stephen and Nancy Beckerman of Livingston, N.J.
Rabbi Steven M. Dworken performed the ceremony at the Fair Lawn (N.J.) Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Beckerman, 28, is an account executive at Magali Collection, a women's clothing manufacturer in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University, as did the bridegroom.
The bride's mother is the national sales manager for Shofar Kosher Foods in Newark.
Her father was an orthodontist in Linden, N.J.


Ellen Greenberg, Corey B. Multer
Ellen Terri Greenberg, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Greenberg of East Meadow, L.I., was married last evening to Corey Blaine Multer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Multer of Old Bethpage, L.I.
Rabbi Ronald Androphy officiated at the Merrick (L.I.) Jewish Centre.
Mrs.
Multer, 29, is a registered nurse at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
She graduated from Adelphi University.


Night-Owl Option
To the Editor:
John J. O'Connor failed to note the one, true talk show on network television, "Later With Bob Costas." Perhaps Mr.
O'Connor doesn't stay awake past 1:30 A.M (only 12:30 A.M. for Central Time denizens like myself) or has dismissed Mr.
Costas as a sportscaster.
Yet the program features informed questions and intelligent talk with a single guest for at least 30 minutes (some guests return for a second show or even a third).
The conversation generally covers the guest's entire career, not just a current endeavor.


For Many, The Party's Over
To the Editor:
Speaking of the later life of the characters in his "Boys in the Band," the playwright Mart Crowley speculated that "some of them would have got lost in the night or died. Probably of AIDS."  [ "A Play of Words About a Play," Oct. 31 ] .
Indeed, of the original cast of nine actors, four are known to have died of AIDS.
Most recently, there was Kenneth Nelson, who died last month at age 63.
Frederick Combs died in 1992 at age 57.
Leonard Frey, who was 49, died in 1988.
And Robert La Tourneaux died two years earlier at 44.


Restrictions in Them Thar Hills
In the late 19th century, miners pouring into the West were drawn by the glint of the mining law signed by President Ulysses S. Grant in 1872.
It allowed them to extract rich lodes from Federal lands without paying royalties.
And to encourage the settlers to stay, it let them gain title to the land for just a few dollars an acre.
Environmentalism, of course, was unheard of.
And surprisingly little has changed in the 121 years since.
But last week the House of Representatives took the first step toward major changes, passing a bill that would charge an 8 percent royalty on revenue gained from mining on public lands in 12 Western states and eliminate the ability to take title.
It would also tighten environmental controls on miners and force them to repair any damage they do.


The Coup at Harper's
To the Editor:
Lewis Lapham describes "New York Days" as "a sentimental memoir" in which Willie Morris suggests that "all the writers at all the tables at Elaine's were the natural children of William Faulkner or Henry James."


After Clinton's Sermon Blacks Are Looking For Action, Not Amens
THE Temple Church of God in Christ in Memphis was hot and the 900 people in the pews were sweating.
Some 20,000 others were watching on closed circuit television at the downtown convention center.
Bill Clinton had come to speak.
The anticipation was almost palpable, and the President did not disappoint.
From the pulpit of the historic church where the Rev.
Martin Luther King Jr. delivered his last sermon, Mr.
Clinton -- a white man in a church full of black people -- decided to talk about black-on-black crime.


Refurbishing Pocantico Hills for the Public
FOR years, people have heard of the palatial Rockefeller estate in Pocantico Hills, in the village of North Tarrytown, but few probably thought they would see it.
Before he died in 1979, Nelson A. Rockefeller, former Vice President and New York Governor, bequeathed the 40-room Colonial Revival mansion and 87 acres of lush countryside in Westchester County to the National Trust for Historic Preservation.
Since then, the agency has worked with the Rockefeller family on a program to open the property for public viewing.
That effort will bear fruit on May 4, when tours begin.


Bouncer Is Found Guilty In Two Shooting Deaths
A bouncer in a Queens bar who killed an off-duty housing police officer and another man by shooting them in their heads at point-blank range was found guilty yesterday in State Supreme Court on two counts of second-degree murder.
The jury convicted Patrick Bannon, 26, for the shooting spree on Bell Boulevard in Bayside, Queens, on July 18, 1992, that left two men dead and a third injured.
Mr.
Bannon was apparently seeking revenge after being hit in the head with a bottle about an hour earlier in a brawl in the bar where he worked as a bouncer.


On the Testing Of Drunken Drivers
The lawyers defending drivers whose blood-alcohol concentrationregisters at or above .10 percent, and other legal scholars, fear the erosion of their clients' constitutional rights ("Do Drunken Drivers Get Railroaded?," Nov. 7).


Mary Nolan, Peter Daytz
Mary Martha Nolan, a vice president in New York with the capital-markets subsidiary of Banque Nationale de Paris, was married yesterday to Peter Stuart Daytz, who until recently was the director of foreign exchange at RJR Nabisco Inc. in New York.
The Rev.
Lawrence O'Leary performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer in New York.
Mrs.
Daytz graduated from Cornell University, from which she also received an M.B.A.
She is a daughter of David and Martha Nolan of Palatine Bridge, N.Y.


No. 1 in First Bowl, Wagner Turns the Tables on Iona
On a somewhat unusual afternoon today at Iona's Mazzella Field, Wagner avenged an upset loss to the Gaels earlier in the season by drubbing them, 32-0, to win the inaugural Eastern College Athletic Conference Bowl.
When the game began at noon under mostly cloudy skies, it promised to be a tightly played rematch of Iona's 30-23 upset victory over the Seahawks on Oct. 2.


Limousine Driver Robbed and Slain Near Airport
A 49-year-old limousine driver who was sitting in the back of his car talking with another driver was robbed and fatally shot early yesterday morning in the East Elmhurst section of Queens, the police said.
The man, a driver for Skyline Credit Ride, a limousine service based in Long Island City, Queens, is the 40th professional driver killed in New York City this year.
Six medallion taxi drivers and 33 livery cab drivers have also been shot and killed while on the job.


DAVID GERGEN, MASTER OF THE GAME
Bill Clinton's touting of a "comprehensive package of benefits that can never be taken away" is characterized by Michael Kelly as "a promise of such largesse as to give God pause." I would suggest that these United States are as godly as any nation on earth and that our citizens deserve adequate health care fully as much as any Canadian, Frenchman or Swede.
And if it takes a little salesmanship, then bring on the spin.
JOSEPH DEVLIN New York, N.Y.


Cocktails at Cartier's


First-Time Mayors Go to School to Prepare for Job
There was a demanding admission requirement for the forum at the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University: each participant had to be elected mayor.
With 44 first-time Mayors elected this year in large and mid-sized cities, there was an unusually large field of candidates for the "Seminar on Transition and Leadership for Newly Elected Mayors." The newcomers who will lead Detroit, Boston, Pittsburgh and 15 other cities came here this week for four days of forums, meals and receptions.


Burundi After Mutiny: Horror Stories Everywhere
The young woman, shot in the chest, had made her way down the steepest part of the hill, leaving a trail of blood and scattered pieces of children's clothing.
The trail led across the dirt road and stopped where she died, curled up on the grass under the shade of the trees, a small sweater still in her hands.
Dozens of villagers, members of the Hutu ethnic group, died that morning in an attack by soldiers and other farmers in a cycle of ethnic violence that has killed thousands in Burundi and driven hundreds of thousands from their homes since the President of this tiny African country was assassinated on Oct. 21.


Outlook for Cuba Grim, Study for State Dept. Says
A new report on Cuba paints a grim picture of the island's future, saying that attempts at economic reform now under way will probably lead to civil strife before the end of the decade.
The report, which was commissioned by the State Department, says President Fidel Castro and Cuba's Communist Party leadership are attempting limited free-market reforms modeled after those undertaken in China.
It concludes, however, that a number of factors, from Mr.
Castro's highly centralized rule to a reluctance by the Communist leadership to unleash market forces "will deny Cuba the economic benefits of the China scenario."


Giants Hoping They Can Borrow That Old 1986 Broom
The last time the Giants swept both the Washington Redskins and the Philadelphia Eagles in the regular season, Mark Bavaro was catching touchdown passes, Joe Morris was the running back, Jim Burt was knocking quarterbacks unconscious and Raul Allegre was doing the field goal kicking.
The deep threat wasn't Mike Sherrard, but Lionel Manuel.
How things have changed.
Instead of Bill Parcells's protruding belly roaming the sidelines, you have Dapper Dan Reeves.
The tight end is Howard Cross.
Running back David Meggett may be built like Morris, but big Rodney Hampton is the feature back.
Keith Hamilton is the big-time pass rusher and the Giants now have more kickers than the United States soccer team.
Deep threat?
He's on crutches, unfortunately for the Giants.


Shara Alexander and Tony Green
Shara Alexander, the daughter of Michelle Alexander of Portland, Ore., and David Carlson of Cary, N.C., was married on Wednesday to Ashbel S. Green, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ashbel Green of New York.
Judge Joseph Ceniceros of the Multnomah County Circuit Court officiated at the home of the bridegroom, in Portland.
Ms.
Alexander, who is 26, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Beloit College.
She is a contract archeologist, conducting archeological examinations at construction sites.


Flight Attendants Strike at American Airlines


TRADE VOTE EFFECT MAY EBB OVER TIME
Of all the politicians who President Clinton said had "put their political careers on the line" in voting for the North American Free Trade Agreement, Representative Sam Farr could have topped the list.
Mr.
Farr, a Democrat from Carmel, Calif., is a newcomer to Congress who barely made it in the first place.
He had to fight off more than two dozen rivals in a primary before winning a special election in June.


French Institution


Sports of The Times; Pierce and Capriati, Symbols and Symptoms
IT was hard to miss Mary Pierce, in the midst of a grueling match yesterday against Arantxa Sanchez Vicario at the Virginia Slims Championships, letting her trademark frown dissolve into a glorious smile.
The 18-year-old whose family life was stranger than soap fiction last summer even laughed at the worst of her mis-hits and once hit a return of an out ball with her head, soccer style.


SUNDAY, November 21, 1993; Foreign Policy? Don't Ask
The "Don't ask. Don't tell" compromise on gay soldiers has been a sticky one for President Clinton, and new revelations about the Reagan and Bush Administrations may suggest why.
It turns out that "Don't ask. Don't tell" was actually the basis of foreign policy in these two Administrations, and was never meant to be applied to domestic issues.
It worked like this: First, don't ask the C.I.A. what the Salvadoran military is doing.
Second, if the C.I.A. insists on telling you, don't tell anyone else, and tell them not to tell. (This policy is, of course, a modification of the earlier Nixonian doctrine of "Don't tell. Don't tell. Don't ever tell.")


DAVID GERGEN, MASTER OF THE GAME
One might think that Gergen has benefited from a conversion experience, but, apart from his own testimony, no anecdotes illustrate this evolved trait.
Gergen's generation-long professional experience limns the man.
Your final paragraphs brought to mind Lynn Martin's anthem from her speech at the 1992 Republican Convention: "You can't have one kind of man and another kind of President." LORRAINE E. GRANIERI Chicago


How Do You Get Around on L.I. If You're Afraid to Drive?
IT can start in rush-hour traffic or on a Sunday drive.
On a parkway, highway or byway.
Atop a bridge or in a tunnel.
For Jean F. of Bayville it started on Route 106, on a leisurely drive to the beach.
"I would go each night to watch the sunset," she said.
"On this trip I had gone only about one-eighth of a mile when I broke out in a sweat. I got to the traffic light. It was red. I felt so trapped. My heart was pounding. I started to feel disassociated. I thought, 'I've got to get out of this car.' I made a quick U-turn and went home."


A Fractured Fairy Tale: Cinderella Story Is Over
A pair of champions defeated a pair of debutantes yesterday afternoon at Madison Square Garden, where the fairy tales and upsets that have characterized the Virginia Slims Championships came to a halt in the semifinal round.
Arantxa Sanchez Vicario has still never been beaten by Mary Pierce, the teen-ager who used the championships as a personal declaration of independence from an abusive family history that threatened to upstage her tennis career.


Lorin Bernstein and Alan Litner
Lorin Bernstein, a daughter of Adrienne and Abraham Bernstein of Manhasset, L.I., was married last evening to Alan Litner, a son of Paul Litner of Great Neck, L.I., and Carol Good of Stowe, Vt.
The ceremony was performed by Rabbi Charles Davidson at the Pierre in New York.


Linda Kanarvogel and Robert Tepper
Dr.
Linda Ellen Kanarvogel, an attending physician and internist at the Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park, L.I., was married last evening to Dr.
Robert Eric Tepper, a gastroenterologist in Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Marc Disick performed the ceremony at the South Huntington Jewish Center in Huntington, L.I.
Dr.
Kanarvogel, 29, is keeping her name.
She graduated magna cum laude from Wellesley College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received her M.D. from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.


IN SHORT: FICTION
BIKER'S NIGHTMARE MY MOTHER: DEMONOLOGY By Kathy Acker. Pantheon, $22.


Sports of The Times; The Jets' Rearview Mirror
IN the hours before Super Bowl III, Weeb Ewbank finally solved the problem of which Jets unit to select for the pre-game introductions.
"If we win the toss, we'll receive," the coach announced.
"In that case, I want my quarterback warming up so we'll introduce the defense. If we lose the toss and kick off, we'll introduce the offense."


Giving Vegetables a Special Holiday Zing
THANKSGIVING is about tradition, so few people would want to dispense with turkey.
But sometimes I like to serve holiday vegetables in new and different ways.
Steaming is fine for the rest of the year, but this occasion is a good time to do something special.
Beets are superb baked and tossed with their greens in a balsamic and olive oil dressing with toasted pine nuts.
The best way to cook beets is in the oven in their skins.
This concentrates and brings out their flavor in the most remarkable way.
The cooked skins slip off easily, and the beets can then be diced and tossed in a dressing.
If the beets are sold with their greens, the greens can be sauteed with red Swiss chard and served as a bed for the beets.


Program Bias
To the Sports Editor:
It is evident that The Times's computer's consistently low ranking of Notre Dame results from Malcolm Moran's having written the program.
His biased coverage of the Notre Dame-Florida State game (The Times, Nov. 14) overemphasized the last drive culminating in Ward's throw, a drive that was significant only because of a faked injury and the previous score, a gift from a rebound in the end zone.


Keeping All the Scores, the Hits and the Flops
ASK Lillian Brown what she had for breakfast, and chances are she'll be hard pressed to come up with an answer.
Toast and coffee?
Could be.
Ask her about an obscure song -- try "Love Thy Neighbor as Thyself but Leave His Wife Alone" -- and her face breaks into a wide smile, her tongue tripping over itself with information.
Grace La Rue, she says.
That's the name of the performer on the cover of the sheet music.
Published when?
The brown eyes narrow in thought.
She settles on "maybe 75 years ago." Pretty close.
Actually, it was 1909.
And now for some real legerdemain.
Within two minutes, the music is in her hands, no mean feat in an inventory of more than 500,000 pieces of sheet music and scores.


Hot (N.F.)L. Baltimore: N.F.L. Owners Have New Expansion Favorite
Developments in the last few days have turned the National Football League's expansion situation around.
St.
Louis had seemed an off-the-board favorite for the remaining franchise and Baltimore had seemed an afterthought.
But now Baltimore, with a new bidder, appears to have caught up and even passed St.
Louis.
Three weeks ago, the owners of the N.F.L.'s 28 clubs met to award two expansion franchises for the 1995 season.
But they agreed only on Charlotte, N.C., and said they would choose the second team on Nov. 30.
The remaining candidates are St.
Louis, Baltimore, Memphis and Jacksonville, Fla.


Thrills and Chills
Moviegoers who were intrigued by the exploits of the Jamaican Olympic bobsled team in "Cool Runnings" can try the sport themselves at two public runs, one in the West and one in the East.
Vail, Colo., usually opens its run just before Christmas, and the price is expected to be $12 a person.
Call (303) 476-9090.
Lake Placid's bobsled run usually opens around Christmas and costs $25 a person.
For those who want to go it alone, Lake Placid has a luge, too.
Call (800) 447-5224.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Hamilton Grange Update; A Short Move, an Angry Dispute
At the center of the emotional neighborhood battle over Hamilton Grange, the 1802 home of Alexander Hamilton on Convent Avenue just north of 141st Street, is a larger issue: how best to preserve and honor the heritage of Harlem.
One side, backed by committees of Community Board 9, supports the National Park Service, which owns the building, in its plan to move the grange to St.
Nicholas Park.
The other side wants to restore the home where it now stands.


Cecily Hartmeyer, Peter Schneider
Cecily Byam Hartmeyer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph B. Hartmeyer of Easton, Md., was married yesterday to Peter Plum Schneider, the son of Hubert A. Schneider of Gaithersburg, Md., and the late Mary P. Schneider.
The Rev.
Charles G. Newberry performed the ceremony at St.
John's of Lattingtown Episcopal Church in Locust Valley, L.I.
Mrs.
Schneider graduated from Pine Manor Junior College and the University of Arizona.
Her father, now retired, was a senior vice president of Chemical Bank in New York.


Now It's Japan's Turn to Play Catch-Up
LAST month, Takenori Kanzaki, head of Japan's Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications, summoned top executives from about 100 communications companies to an early morning meeting and showed them a videotape prepared by his agency.
The tape opened with President Clinton and Vice President Gore in Silicon Valley, talking about plans for the so-called information superhighway.
It then showed American scientists working on an interactive television project.
There were glimpses as well of the installation of optical fibers to increase capacity of an American cable TV system and of an American service that delivers personalized electronic newspapers to computer users.
"America is again aiming to gain world leadership with the superhighway plan," the narrator intoned.


Technology; Courting a Deaf Movie Audience With Caption Devices
FOR many of the three-dozen people in the audience, a recent afternoon screening of Clint Eastwood's "In the Line of Fire" provided a rare chance to enjoy a first-run film at a movie theater.
Usually these people, like the estimated five million other Americans who are deaf, must wait for popular films to come out on closed-caption videocassettes.
But with the help of three technologies being tested that day, the deaf viewers were able to sit in the theater and see the movie's dialogue in captions that would not distract people in the audience who could hear.
Some of the test participants watched the movie through transparent plastic panels, with the captions reflected onto the panels from a moving-text display at the rear of the theater.
Others read the dialogue on small monitors attached to the seatbacks in front of them.
A third group wore special video glasses that made the captions appear to float at the bottom of the movie screen.


The Coup at Harper's
To the Editor:
If there is anything of interest in the relationship between Lewis Lapham and Willie Morris, it won't be found in Mr.
Lapham's tortured avoidance of direct response to Mr.
Morris's charges.
Instead, we get a long, questionable account of the recent history of journalism.


Commercial Property: The Doctor's Office; As Costs Soar, the Solo Practice Starts to Fade
LIKE many young New York doctors, Gary H. Goldman expected to wind up practicing in a small office on Park or Fifth Avenue.
So what if that kind of space cost more than $55 a square foot to rent -- and as much as $700 a foot to buy?
The prestige of the address would be worth it, and he always figured that any successful doctor could afford it.
Dr.
Goldman, who practices obstetrics and gynecology, thinks differently now.
Yes, he expects to move out of his space at 460 East 63d Street when his lease expires in a couple of years.
And yes, he still hopes to move to a more prestigious address.
But instead of looking for a small space for himself, Dr.
Goldman is canvassing for other physicians to take larger space with him.


'In No Uncertain Terms'
To the Editor:
Vincent Crapanzano's review of Helen Suzman's autobiography, "In No Uncertain Terms: A South African Memoir" (Oct. 31), recognizes the courage of this tireless fighter against apartheid and the real contributions she made to exposing many of the atrocities of the perverse political system.


Eliot Armstrong, Jonathan Foote Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas N. Armstrong 3d of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Eliot Saunders Armstrong to Jonathan Lipe Foote Jr., a son of Mr.
Foote of Livingston, Mont., and Annie B. W. Foote of Tiruvannamalai, India.
A January wedding is planned.
Ms.
Armstrong graduated from New York University and is studying for a master's degree in nutrition and public policy at Columbia University.
Her father is the director of the Andy Warhol Museum in Pittsburgh.


Brotherhood


Susan Martin and Tom Collins
SUSAN MARTIN, who worked for years as the design director at Kikit Maurice Sasson in New York, is preparing her own line of whimsical sports clothes and home furnishings -- everything from lamb's wool gloves with red-tipped fingers to bell-bottom ski-racing suits and dust ruffles that look like grass skirts.
Ms.
Martin, 31, met Tom Collins, a 29-year-old curly-haired architect and former downhill ski racer, at a wedding in Philadelphia, where he lives and she grew up.
Thinking he was both funny and handsome, she tried to phone him a few days later.


NOV. 14-20: The N.J. Campaign; Rollins Says He Was Just Trying to Get Carville's Goat
Edward J. Rollins Jr., the Republican strategist who touched off a political wildfire with assertions that Republicans had spent $500,000 to suppress the urban black vote in the New Jersey gubernatorial race, tried to douse the flames during appearances last week before two groups of investigators: a Federal grand jury in Newark and attorneys for the state's Democratic Party.
Under oath, Mr.
Rollins retracted the boasts he made to reporters in Washington on Nov. 9, calling his initial comments a flash of Beltway bravado and an attempt to needle his rival strategist in the Nov. 2 race, James Carville.


Campaign Begins to Preserve 100-Year-Old Moriches Estate
IT was the turn of the century, and almost every summer weekend lavish parties were the rule across the 200-acre waterfront mansion on the John W. Masury estate in Center Moriches.
Masury, who was born in 1820, made a fortune manufacturing paint.
He invented and patented a number of paint-industry innovations, including a water-cooled method of grinding pigments and the lip-closure on paint cans, still referred to as the dripless can.


Quakers Wake Up And Win The Title
Through two and a half quarters today, Pennyslvania's undefeated and untied season, along with the outright Ivy League championship, appeared destined to be shattered by lowly Cornell.
But after falling behind, 14-0, midway through the third period, the Quakers proceeded to rally for 17 late points for the second week in a row.
The final 3 points, on a 31-yard field goal by Marc Horowitz with 5 minutes 44 seconds left, proved to be the difference in a pulsating 17-14 victory before 22,618 fans at cold and blustery Franklin Field.


In the Region/Connecticut; Avalon (Nee Trammell Crow) Runs Into Opposition
AVALON PROPERTIES, known until last Thursday as a Trammell Crow regional partnership, is a $500 million company with 7,000 rental apartments in 22 East Coast complexes from Virginia to the Canadian border.
Since 1986 it has built 2,739 of them in Connecticut -- in Manchester, Middletown, Hamden, Shelton and Stamford.
On Thursday Avalon became a Real Estate Investment Trust, or REIT.
It continues to occupy its New Canaan offices as headquarters of the northeast region, but is newly listed on the New York Stock Exchange as Avalon Properties.


On Amtrak
To the Editor: A letter by Howard Stoller that appeared Oct. 17 ("Buses on a Roll") extolled the virtues of bus travel over train travel, mainly because he felt Amtrak employees were rude, the trains were not cleaned and no-smoking rules not enforced.
We must write to say that over the last several years we have taken more than a dozen trips on Amtrak and have found the employees polite and helpful, the trains more than reasonably clean and smoking rules well enforced.
These trips have ranged from trips on corridors in the New York area to a number of long trips on overnight coaches.
Amtrak does a good job and we wish to commend them.
MARY BIFFONI  STEVEN BIFFONI  Brooklyn


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Rockets Surge to 9-0 Start  Hakeem Olajuwon scored 22 points and grabbed 12 rebounds as the Houston Rockets sprinted to a big early lead and beat the Los Angeles Clippers, 108-86, last night for a club-record ninth straight victory.
The Rockets became the 10th team in National Basketball Association history to open the season with a 9-0 record.
Houston has held all nine of its opponents to less than 100 points this season.
Olajuwon had just 6 points at halftime, but helped blunt a third-quarter charge by the Clippers, who lost for the 15th straight time at the Summit. (AP)


To Each Museum, Its Own Most-Likely-to-Befall
The Getty Museum has a close brush with a wildfire that destroys swaths of Malibu.
The rising Mississippi bursts its levees near museums in Des Moines and St.
Louis.
A hurricane tears the roofs off dozens of buildings near the Bass Museum in Miami.
An earthquake sends statues and rare vases jitterbugging across shelves in museums in northern California.
After a string of recent natural calamities, curators are realizing that they have to protect their collections against threats that are bigger than thieves, fingerprints, flash cameras and shifts in humidity.
They must now think like civil defense experts who guard masterpieces as well as lives.


Manager's Profile
Bruce E. Behrens
Fund: Flag Investors Telephone Income A; $480 million in assets; 4.5% load.
Co-manager since 1984. (Sponsor: Alex. Brown &amp; Sons, Baltimore.)  Born: April 20, 1944; Cleveland.


Romance And Reality
To the Editor:
In "Without Illusions" (Nov. 7), a matrimonial lawyer comments that prenuptial agreements beget "simmering cynicism" that "poisons" a marriage.
I would suggest that romantic illusions are more threatening to the health of any relationship intended to endure.


A Portrait In Skin and Bone
AT noon today, more than 50 invited guests at the Sandra Gering Gallery in SoHo will put down their crudites and fix their eyes on an oversize television screen mounted on one of the gallery's cool white walls.
If all goes according to plan, they will witness the live performance of an operation, transmitted via satellite from an Upper East Side plastic surgeon's office.
What they will see is no ordinary face lift.
On the operating table, a wide-awake woman in a long black gown will read from a French psychoanalytic text, as the surgeon pauses in the delicate business of rearranging her face.
Nearby, a cameraman in sterile surgical garb will record the procedure for network television as electronic music plays in the background.


Now It's Japan's Turn to Play Catch-Up
LAST month, Takenori Kanzaki, head of Japan's Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications, summoned top executives from about 100 communications companies to an early morning meeting and showed them a videotape prepared by his agency.
The tape opened with President Clinton and Vice President Gore in Silicon Valley, talking about plans for the so-called information superhighway.
It then showed American scientists working on an interactive television project.
There were glimpses as well of the installation of optical fibers to increase capacity of an American cable TV system and of an American service that delivers personalized electronic newspapers to computer users.
"America is again aiming to gain world leadership with the superhighway plan," the narrator intoned.


SUSAN POWTER
Thank you for Alex Witchel's article on Susan Powter (Oct. 31).
She is one firecracker of a lady.
I remember watching her on some talk show and thinking, "Yeah, this woman gets it." There is no secret to weight loss.
It doesn't take a genius to understand that the most important thing is to move.
Walk, bike, swim, dance, play tennis, do yoga, hike.
Get the blood pumping.
Start releasing the endorphins.
Next, think about what you are putting into your body.
Keep it simple.
There is no secret formula.
Think, move, enjoy!
AMANDA DALE DWORSKI Venice, Calif.


DAVID GERGEN, MASTER OF THE GAME
Let Gergen be Gergen.
If common sense is his ideology, he is less likely to be buffeted by political winds and more likely to be of value to a President.
The only thing cynical about this "game" is Michael Kelly's play-by-play.
EDWARD M. LAMONT Greenwich, Conn.


A Leader's Lessons From Adversity Unite Town and Gown
THE president of Eastern Connecticut State University, David G. Carter, roams about the campus greeting students by name, usually accompanied by a little personal message or friendly banter.
"Did you ever clean up that spot on the carpet in your room? I'll drop some 'Miracle Clean' off and you can get to it." "You been hitting the books this week? Yeah, sure."


Without a Smoking Gun, Democrats Pursue Rollins
Edward J. Rollins Jr. has spoken.
But has Mr.
Rollins, the Republican political strategist, had the last word?
The answer, from New Jersey Democrats, is no.
Despite a seven-hour deposition in Washington on Friday that produced a transcript of almost 300 pages, Mr.
Rollins's assertions that he lied when he boasted about a scheme to suppress the black vote in this month's gubernatorial election did little to assuage Democrats' suspicions.


For U.F.O. Fans, Question Is Not 'If?' but 'How Was the Trip?'
Granville Angell denounced the way some people have begun to refer to visitors from outer space as "grays," though most of those sighted indeed seem to have been that color.
The psychological counselor from Lincolnton, N.C., said he spoke from experience, having been abducted himself by aliens a time or two.
He said it would be more sensitive to use terms like extraterrestrial biological entities, visitors, beings or occupants.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about a Missouri death row inmate, Lloyd Schlup, misstated a statistic on executions in the United States.
If he is executed, he will be the second white man to have been put to death in the killing of a black man since 1944, out of more than 1,000 executions in that period.


SUNDAY, November 21, 1993; MUM'S THE WORD
Never mind whether Julia Roberts is or will be pregnant and whether the kid will have Lyle Lovett's hair.
For Freudians, folklorists and parents of cartoon-age children, the burning Hollywood question is: Will Pocahontas have a mom when Disney finishes with her?
The reigning Disney minibabes -- Ariel, Jasmine and Belle -- are all motherless.
They live with doting, somewhat befuddled fathers until they nab or are nabbed by prince-husbands.
Thus the psychosexual tension of the Dad versus Prince conflict is undiluted.
And that's what sells tickets.


TODAY IN The City
THE DINING GAME: 10 INSIDE MOVES Eating out is serious sport in New York.
A serious eater offers some strategies to make restaurants work for you.
Page 1.
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT A debate over preservation in Harlem; the legacy of a drug crackdown in Brooklyn.
Pages 24 to 29.


In Guilford, a Realist Displays a Lighthearted Touch
ROBERT Vickrey attended Yale Art School, where he had Ken Davies for a classmate and the egg tempera specialist Lewis York for a teacher.
In those pre-Albers days (the late 1940's), the laborious renaissance technique was a required course.
Alfonso Ossorio took it and passed the information on to friends like Paul Cadmus and Jared French, presumably before he himself segued into Abstract Expressionist painting and assemblage.
With the exception of Ossorio, these artists, whether or not they stuck with egg tempera, pursued the Magic Realism to which the medium lent itself.
But in the marketplace, their art was soon eclipsed by Abstract Expressionism, the other child of Surrealism.
Not until the 1980's was there a revival of interest in this chilly style of painting and Mr.
Vickrey's show of recent work at the Greene Gallery in Guilford may be counted as a part of the revival.


DAVID GERGEN, MASTER OF THE GAME
I have no trouble with David Gergen's reality.
I know him well, as do thousands of us who watch "The MacNeil/ Lehrer Newshour," where the real David Gergen came through with dignity, intelligence, graciousness and good humor.
He's a good man.
JOAN ROSS RAFTER KEYES Sands Point, L.I.


Guare's 'Six Degrees' At the Schoolhouse
IT is a well-known tall tale, taken from truth.
A good-looking, slick, bright psychopath insinuates himself on some rich people, beguiles them with his repartee, social savvy and celebrity connections -- the son of Sidney Poitier is who he claims to be -- and he can cook, too.
Out of extraordinary deceptions, John Guare fashioned a stunning play, which opened in 1990.
"This is about connections," the audience was told before a performance of "Six Degrees of Separation," produced by Wordplay II at the Schoolhouse Theater here.
"We're not as far apart from each other as we may assume." Today's performance, which was to have been the last, is sold out.
Two more performances, on Dec. 3 and 5, have been added.


Giving Vegetables a Special Holiday Zing
THANKSGIVING is about tradition, so few people would want to dispense with turkey.
But sometimes I like to serve holiday vegetables in new and different ways.
Steaming is fine for the rest of the year, but this occasion is a good time to do something special.
Beets are superb baked and tossed with their greens in a balsamic and olive oil dressing with toasted pine nuts.
The best way to cook beets is in the oven in their skins.
This concentrates and brings out their flavor in the most remarkable way.
The cooked skins slip off easily, and the beets can then be diced and tossed in a dressing.
If the beets are sold with their greens, the greens can be sauteed with red Swiss chard and served as a bed for the beets.


Food Drives: Where to Share During the Holiday Season
As the holidays approach, some food programs for the needy are beginning their annual food drives while others are continuing their year-round efforts.
Here is a list of programs that accept donations: ALL BOROUGHS
CITY HARVEST AND THE FIRE DEPARTMENT More than 200 firehouses in the five boroughs are designated to receive packaged and canned foods.
No glass except for baby food.
No perishables.
No turkeys.
Through New Year.
For location of nearest firehouse: (212) 463-0456.


The French, Disneyed and Jurassick, Fear Erosion
FOR the French, the dinosaurs were the last straw.
First the Berlin Wall fell, and with it the relevance of the French "force de frappe," or nuclear bomb.
Then European unity, the cornerstone of French foreign policy for a decade, disintegrated amid currency turmoil, soaring unemployment and a shaming paralysis before the Balkan war.
Then came Mickey Mouse, prompting talk of a "cultural Chernobyl" at Euro Disney.
Next GATT -- the onomatepoetic acronym for talks on the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade -- turned horrible.
Finally, those "Jurassic Park" dinosaurs, peering from billboards and merchandised at the 279 McDonald's restaurants in France, rounded out a dim sense that French cultural, commercial and strategic anchors have come unstuck.


A Cry of Pain Rises From the Cradle Of Soviet Science
THIS city outside Novosibirsk, the capital of Siberia, represents one of the grandest dreams of Soviet science.
Begun in 1957, it is a purpose-built, park-like haven for some of the country's finest minds, who were to have the leisure and resources necessary to harness the natural sciences to tame the rich Siberian wilderness.
Today the dream is degraded, circumscribed by irony.
Like so many totemic establishments of Soviet pride and power, Akademgorodok and its 50-odd scientific institutes are scrambling for state resources and individual talent.
More important, perhaps, the scientists are struggling with a sharply reduced scale of pay, both financial and psychological.
Many of the best minds are leaving science to earn a living in businesses or banks; those who stay are learning how to sell themselves or produce for a market they don't understand.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
Perhaps only experienced pilots should write novels about flying.
Who could be better qualified?
But the trouble is that pilot-writers are so taken with their specialty that their prose tends to read like an electronics catalogue.
Thus in GHOSTRIDER ONE, by Gerry Carroll (Pocket Books, $22), we get acres of dialogue that goes as follows:
"Ghostrider 411, Hillsborough. Are you RESCAP capable?"


U.S. Wins First Gold In World Team Play
THE United States won the World Team Championship for the first time this month, scoring 22 1/2 points in 36 games to the silver medalist Ukraine's 21 points.
The United States sextet of Gata Kamsky, Joel Benjamin, Larry Christiansen, Gregory Kaidanov, Boris Gulko and Alex Yermolinsky , won five matches and drew four at the tournament, played Oct. 23 to Nov. 2 in Lucerne, Switzerland.


In a Video, Local Groups Tell How to Organize
To the Editor:
Regarding "Community Groups: Call the Roll," Nov. 7: the office of the Deputy Mayor for Public Safety has produced a 40-minute video, "Neighborhoods: A Source for Change," in which local groups tell their experiences organizing around community issues.
The video is available, on loan, free; (212) 788-6829.
BARBARA SHULMAN HARRIS Office of the Deputy Mayor


American Genesis
TUNKASHILA  From the Birth of Turtle Island to the Blood of Wounded Knee.
By Gerald Hausman.
Illustrated. 265 pp.
New York:  St.
Martin's Press. $22.95.


At Work; Getting Them There Is Half the Job
A FEW lines of text among thousands in the Clean Air Act of 1990 may have profound effects for employees who drive to work.
Buried toward the end of Title 1 is a section of the law that requires employers to help reduce pollution in certain heavily affected regions of the country.
The implementation of that section is picking up speed now that a key 1994 deadline is on the horizon.
Employers may offer employees a menu of incentives and disincentives, but the bottom line is that Uncle Sam would like you to change your driving behavior.
Isn't asking an American worker to give up that mind-clearing solo commute a little like asking a member of the National Rifle Association to voluntarily give up his assault weapon?
Didn't Thomas Jefferson write that all humans are entitled to life, liberty and the pursuit of mileage?
Is the Environmental Protection Agency where all the Communists went after the Soviet Union splintered?


No Headline
"I don't know if they are going to be holding hands and singing 'Kumbaya,' but this is just what the President had in mind. This is all about getting to know each other." -- LORRAINE VOLES, a White House spokeswoman, on the Asian leaders' meeting in an Indian long house.  [ 14:5. ]


Lisa Zaslow, David Segelman
Lisa Carlyn Zaslow, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Zaslow of Broomall, Pa., was married last evening in Philadelphia to David Paul Segelman, the son of Jack Segelman of Suffern, N.Y., and the late Esther Segelman.
Rabbi Barry Blum performed the ceremony at the Warwick Hotel.


Public &amp; Private; Birthday Girl
In the summer of '68 I was expelled from convent school.
Actually, the more ladylike term "asked to leave" was used, but the result was the same.
No renegade, I was devastated by the disgrace, but I came to realize that the nuns made the right call.
Outspoken, insatiably curious, inclined to go where I was not allowed and to test the limits of authority, I was not cut out for the place.
Of course, it is indisputable that those same qualities serve me well in the job I hold today.
What passes for a good girl makes for a very poor columnist.


Trade Pact Offers Chance to Export Our Ideals; Stereotype of Mexicans
To the Editor:
Your "Media Watch" analysis Nov. 10 of the television debate between Vice President Al Gore and Ross Perot applauded Mr.
Perot's line that the shack-dwelling Mexican worker's dream is "To someday have an outhouse." But the joke was lost on me and others who study and teach about Latin America and the Caribbean.
A substantial number of Americans still have a stereotyped view of Latin Americans as poor and primitive, if picturesque.
While there are great inequities in wealth across Latin America and the Caribbean, Latin Americans are also sophisticated consumers of United States goods -- perhaps too much so, given their large balance of payments deficits.


Dana Meyer, Edward Alvarez
Dana DeBard Meyer, a daughter of Beverly Barry Kessenich of New York and John DeBard Meyer of North Egremont, Mass., was married yesterday to Edward Daniel Alvarez, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Alvarez of West Bloomfield, Mich.
The Rev.
Richard D. Leonard performed the ceremony at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York.
Mrs.
Alvarez, 29, graduated from Rollins College.
She teaches the second grade at St.
David's School in Manhattan.
Her mother is the first vice president of Circle Line-Statue of Liberty Ferry Inc. in New York.
The company was founded by the bride's maternal grandfather, the late Francis J. Barry, who was also a board member of the Municipal Assistance Corporation.
The bride's father is the founder and chief executive of Berkshire Financial Advisers, a financial consulting firm in Egremont.
Mr.
Alvarez, 35, graduated from Amherst College and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
He trades institutional preferred stocks in the capital markets division of Merrill Lynch, the investment firm, in New York.
The bridegroom's father was in the international sales and marketing operations of the Ford Motor Company, in Detroit, when he retired.
The bridegroom's previous marriage ended in divorce.


NOV. 14-20: Somalia and Bosnia; Justice U.N.-Style Moves Onward, Half-Heartedly
It was a week of lost causes at the United Nations as the organization set up a Yugoslav war crimes tribunal that may never try anyone while calling off its manhunt for Mohammed Farah Aidid, the Somali warlord it couldn't catch.
In the Hague, judges began drawing up rules of procedure for the court, the first of its kind since Nuremburg and Tokyo tribunals tried World War II criminals arrested by the Allies, condemning many to death.


Nafta: The Whys And Wherefores
IT was one of the most emotional sessions in Congress in years.
Partisan loyalties and personal friendships went by the boards.
After 13 hours of debate and more than 250 speeches, the House of Representatives voted Wednesday, 234 to 200, to put the North American Free Trade Agreement into effect beginning Jan. 1.


Burnt Things
They have the tensile energy of a Giacometti sculpture, the languid whimsy of a Dali timepiece, the wicked solemnity of conceptual art.
But the objects that Stephen Wilkes has been photographing for almost a decade were not crafted by hand.
They were forged in the crucible of devastating fires.
Wilkes first came across fire's improbably surrealistic touch in Ozona, Tex., where he went to do a portrait of a firefighter.
When he suggested a burnt-out building for a backdrop, the firefighter took him to a row house that had had a gas explosion.
In the ruins, Wilkes saw an eight-track cassette player that had been transformed by the intense fire into a fluid piece of sculpture.
He also found a wooden puppet and an object that looked more like an atavistic dagger than a ballpoint pen (top row, left and center).


MAGAZINE REDESIGN
Now you've done it.
You have blown away the last vestiges of familiarity in this unstable world by changing the format of the Magazine.
PATRICIA ESCOBAR Los Angeles


Green Thumbs Tied in Red Tape
A new wrought-iron fence is the only thing that sets the large lot on Lexington Avenue near 100th Street apart from the scores of other lots that dot East Harlem.
That and the residents watching anxiously as the garbage piles up and the rats return.
The lot, a large L that turns the corner and opens onto 100th Street, has been leased by a development group run by several local churches.
With a little soil, some trees and a few benches it will become a small park designed by residents of the block and local gardeners in search of a place to wield their green thumbs.
But the city finances that the organizers are counting on are mired in bureaucratic reviews.
"I hope the city will loosen up the funds so we can go ahead," said the Rev.
Robert V. Lott, chairman of SFDS Development Corporation, which leased the lot.
"It seems like forever."
The group has been working with a nonprofit group that promotes green space, the Parks Council, which has lobbied the city to include money to help turn city-owned lots in low-income neighborhoods into pocket parks.
This year's city budget includes $1.25 million for such projects, but the Parks Council is one of several groups vying for the money.
And each site must go through the city's land-review process, including many public hearings, so the $40,000 to $50,000 that the garden is waiting for may not be available until spring, or even summer.
Karen Phillips, who works for the Abyssinian Development Corporation, which is involved in another planned garden, called the process frustrating but necessary.
"Unfortunately, it's slow, but it's set up so it's not business as usual, so people in the community have a say in what's done with the land," she said.
Depite the delay, Linda Davidoff, the executive director of the Parks Council, said she was optimistic that the money would be available.
"I think this is a perfect opening program for the Giuliani administration, because it takes an existing city resource and mixes it with a very tiny amount of city funding to make a substantial transformation in low-income communities," she said.
Neighbors on 100th Street try to match Ms.
Davidoff's enthusiasm, but it is hard.
The lot was cleared a few months ago, and the fence paid for with private money.
But the fence is not enough.
"Look at that garbage," said Charlotte Hodge, a longtime member of the Ebenezer Wesleyan Methodist Church, which is next to the lot.
"It wasn't here a few weeks ago. Why can't people respect it?" EMILY M. BERNSTEIN


Julia L. James, Adolph A. Paas
Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Pendleton James of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Julia Lynn James, to Adolph Aarne Paas, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Axel A. Paas of Beach Park, Ill.
A January wedding is planned.
Miss James is a vice president in corporate finance and her fiance is an associate in the real estate advisory group, both in the London office of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company.
She graduated from Williams College.
Her father, chairman of Pendleton James &amp; Company, an executive search firm in New York, served as a special assistant to President Richard M. Nixon and later as the director of presidential personnel for President Ronald Reagan.


Laura Patinkin, Mark L. Urken
Laura Ann Patinkin, the daughter of Deborah Singerman of Atlanta and Ronald Patinkin of Glenview, Ill., was married last evening to Dr.
Mark Lawrence Urken, the son of Dr.
Jerome Urken of Moorestown, N.J., and the late Gertrude Urken.
Rabbi Arnold Goodman performed the ceremony at the Ahavath Achim Synagogue in Atlanta.


Listen Up, Ready or Not
To the Editor:
"Warning of Disasters, Digitally" (Technology, Nov. 7) concerned technology that can empower government to deliver emergency messages on car radios, public address systems and even turned-off televisions.
This has bizarre implications for privacy.


American Airlines Says It's Trying To Relay Flight Data to Customers
With the busy Thanksgiving weekend less than a week away, the strike by flight attendants at American Airlines continues to hobble travel throughout the country, and no talks are scheduled to end the impasse.
American, the nation's largest domestic carrier, said that nearly half of its scheduled flights were leaving with passengers, a slight improvement from the first two days of the strike.
But union officials scoffed at the assertion, saying that far more than half of its 2,500 scheduled daily flights were leaving with no passengers, and that many others were carrying sharply reduced loads.
The airline usually carries about 200,000 passengers a day.


Q and A
Pigeon Droppings And Their Effect Q. Recently I have noticed many pigeons on the top of our brownstone building.
Would you tell me if they (and their droppings) can cause any damage to the brownstone?
And if so, please tell me how to get rid of them. . . .
Teruko Edmonds, Brooklyn


Patricia Van Buskirk, Steven Madsen
Mrs.
Daniel Van Buskirk of Peoria, Ill., has announced the engagement of her daughter Patricia Van Buskirk to Steven W. Madsen, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Elmer Madsen.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Van Buskirk, 35, is an associate with the New York law firm of Whitman Breed Abbott &amp; Morgan.
She graduated from Harvard University and received her law degree from Columbia University.
Her late father was the president of the Van Buskirk Construction Company in Peoria.
Her mother owns Brunswick House Ltd., an interior design company there.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the renovation of a Gold Coast mansion by 13 designers at the Bailey Arboretum in Locust Valley misstated the hours for public visits.
The rooms will be on view until Dec. 12 from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. daily, including Sundays.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
A CHORUS OF STONES: The Private Life of War By Susan Griffin.
Anchor/Doubleday, $12.95.
The author, a poet and feminist, looks across generations and national boundaries, arguing that the deceptions and rationalizations of wartime are actually mirror images of similar patterns in private life.
Last year our reviewer, Richard Restak, called the book "an act of creative imagination unlike anything I have ever read."


As Adviser, Dvorak Met A Dead End
When Dvorak was living in New York a century ago, he wrote in Harper's New Monthly Magazine of the feeling of "strangeness and bewildered astonishment" that filled Europeans on their arrival in the New World.
He referred to an immense American "capacity for enthusiasm" for all things new, the essence of "American push": "It is as if a boy wished to dive before he could swim." At first this characteristic bothered him in his pupils, but then he began to think that the best hopes for American music lay in this "eagerness to take up everything."
Now Dvorak's three-year American residence has inspired a similar enthusiasm in celebrations of its centenary.
Recently, the Bard Music Festival, which devoted two weekends to Dvorak in Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y., in August, followed up with another at Alice Tully Hall.
Two excellent books have recently been published: "Dvorak in America," edited by John C. Tibbetts and "Dvorak and His World," edited by Michael Beckerman.
And next January, the Brooklyn Academy of Music will offer a Dvorak weekend.


Cadets' Tour of Duties: Fixing and Painting
AT the United States Military Academy at West Point, the sense of duty and honor toward one's country is constantly stressed.
But for nearly 300 cadets on Veterans Day, that sense of responsibility extended beyond their military commitment and into communities that needed their help.
On that day -- a rare day off from classes -- several groups of cadets went to the four counties that surround West Point and volunteered their time and energy to help a variety of community-service organizations, primarily those that serve homeless and hungry people.


Auburn Finishes 11-0 And Season Is Finished
Auburn 22, Alabama 14
Auburn has done all it can do.
Now the Tigers must get some help to claim an improbable national championship.
With starting quarterback Stan White on the bench with an injured knee, Auburn completed its first 11-0 season yesterday with a 22-14 home victory over Alabama, the defending national champion.


Tours for Adventurers: 2 Ways to See Vietnam
Two unusual tours to Vietnam are available this winter.
One is for the physically fit; both are for the adventurous.
A 1,200-mile-long bicycle tour, sponsored by a company called Cycle Vietnam, will set out from Hanoi on Jan. 6 along the "Reunification Highway" to the Gulf of Tonkin.
It will then pass through Hue and Danang and into the Highlands and the resort city of Da Lat on the way to Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon.
It will arrive there on Jan. 28.
Beaches, mountains, rivers and historical sites that include the Hoa Lo Prison (the infamous "Hanoi Hilton"), the My Lai memorial, the former American Embassy and Presidential Palace in Ho Chi Minh City are all on the route.
The cost is $2,395 not including air fare.
Hotels, meals, bottled water, guided tours, the use of a support vehicle and the services of a doctor, who will travel with the group, are included.
There are two nights of camping.
Participants should be in good physical shape.
Information: Cycle Vietnam, (503) 282-8499, fax (503) 331-1458.


The Dining Game: 10 Inside Moves
ONE of the more competitive sports in New York City is played out not in Shea or Yankee Stadium, but rather at the tables of the city's better restaurants.
In a city where restaurants are the main arenas of social and business entertaining, you can't be blamed entirely if you begin to believe that you are where you eat.
Getting reservations, securing the right tables, receiving top-notch service, being treated as someone special -- all this is the helium that inflates our social balloons.
Oh, yes, food is important, too -- sometimes.


Elyse Goldberg, Jonathan Horn
Elyse Goldberg, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Fred Goldberg of Riverdale, the Bronx, was married yesterday evening to Jonathan Horn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Horn of New York.
Rabbi Stephen Franklin performed the ceremony at the New York Marriott Financial Center Hotel.
Mrs.
Horn, 25, is a sales assistant at NBC in New York.
She and her husband graduated from George Washington University.


Now It's Japan's Turn to Play Catch-Up
LAST month, Takenori Kanzaki, head of Japan's Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications, summoned top executives from about 100 communications companies to an early morning meeting and showed them a videotape prepared by his agency.
The tape opened with President Clinton and Vice President Gore in Silicon Valley, talking about plans for the so-called information superhighway.
It then showed American scientists working on an interactive television project.
There were glimpses as well of the installation of optical fibers to increase capacity of an American cable TV system and of an American service that delivers personalized electronic newspapers to computer users.
"America is again aiming to gain world leadership with the superhighway plan," the narrator intoned.


Profile: Grace Nichols; When Victoria's Secret Faltered, She Was Quick to Fix It
THE room is full of Type A personalities, most of them clad in gray suits, starched white shirts, red ties and wingtips, the standard-issue uniform of the male retail analyst.
Each is holding a wisp of a cotton panty between thumb and index finger as if it were a dead mouse and desperately trying to avoid his colleagues' eyes.
At the front of the room stands a woman, exhorting them to stretch the elastic, examine the seams, feel the fabric.
"These will stand up to 40 washings," she promises.


Man Is Accused of Stabbing Wife to Death
An 80-year-old woman was found stabbed to death in her Queens apartment yesterday and her 90-year-old husband was arrested, the police said.
The body of the victim, Stephenig Bednarczuk, was found lying face up, fully clothed, in the bathtub with several stab wounds in the chest, said Detective Kim Royster, a police spokeswoman.


Hamman Family Takes Early Lead in Bridge
The first day of play at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals here on Friday proved to be a triumph for the Hamman family.
At the end of qualifying play in the Life Master Open Pairs, Chris Hamman, a rising star at age 26, was in the lead, playing with his father, Bob Hamman, the top player in world rankings and a multiple world champion.
His mother, Barbara Hamman, was in second place, with another former world champion, Fred Hamilton, as partner.
The leaders, in order, were: Chris and Bob Hamman of Dallas, 810.02 match points; Barbara Hamman of Calabasas, Calif., and Fred Hamilton of Agoura Hills, Calif., 783.04; Eric Rodwell of Naperville, Ill., and Douglas Simson, 780.86; Steve Altus of Columbus, Ohio, and Albert Tom of Flushing, 780.06; William Whitesel of Coeur D'Alene, Idaho, and Gard Hays of Veradale, Wash., 775.5, and Larry Mori of Charlton, N.Y., and Henry Bethe of Ithaca, N.Y., 775.


Wry Musings on a Queen
In "Dreaming of The Queen," the Pet Shop Boys' evocation of the sexual mood in London, Neil Tennant, the duo's lead singer and lyricist, describes a dream in which he and a friend have tea with Queen Elizabeth and Princess Diana.
The Queen, commenting stuffily on the decline of traditional morality huffs: "I'm aghast/ Love never seems to last." Whereupon the princess, alluding to the toll of AIDS, explains to her mother-in-law: "There are no more lovers left alive/ And that's why love has died."


The Corcoran Gives New Meaning to 'Biennial'
Heading for this year's Corcoran Biennial, I couldn't help noticing how many people assumed that it would be something of a chore.
It was the name that had done the damage.
"Biennial" has become a bad-dream adjective, somewhere between "beastly" and "bubonic."
But the 43d Corcoran Biennial, which runs until Jan. 2, is not a chore.
It speaks for a new-style Corcoran that reaches out to the whole of Washington rather than to a fortunate minority.


Amid Dispute, Work to Start On Housing for Homeless
After three years of sharp local debate, crews will start construction this week on a 12-story apartment house for 94 homeless and low-income families on East 13th Street, along with an adjacent complex of retail shops on 14th Street.
The apartment project, Genesis II, will include medical care, day care, recreation, classes and counseling for its residents.
The sponsor is Housing Enterprise for the Less Privileged, a nonprofit organization founded by Andrew M. Cuomo, the son of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.


Pamela M. Post, David A. Moss
Pamela Michelle Post, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Post of Manhasset Hills, L.I., was married yesterday evening to David Adam Moss, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Steven Moss of Manhasset Hills.
Rabbi Myron Fenster officiated at Temple Judea in Manhasset.
Mrs.
Moss is the manager of creative services at Lear's magazine in New York.
She is a graduate of George Washington University.
Her father is the chairman of the department of obstetrics and gynecology at the New York Hospital Medical Center of Queens in Flushing.
Her mother, Marlene E. Post, is the national treasurer of Hadassah, in New York.


GIVE AND TAKE
My heart broke when I read Linda Katherine Cutting's story of abuse and incest.
She is a very, very brave woman.


Monteverdi at 350


Smashing America's Favorite Myths
Taking the exalted view of America, Lincoln spoke at Gettysburg of "a new nation, conceived in liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal." The playwright Robert Schenkkan, casting his sights lower, sees a country born of greed and deceit and single-mindedly devoted to the notion that all men are fleeceable.
In "The Kentucky Cycle," which is finally getting a Broadway hearing more than a year after winning the 1992 Pulitzer Prize for drama, he tallies the costs of our national duplicity.
They are enormous.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen108.50
105.68
124.38
per Dollar
German Mark1.7140
1.6944
1.6055
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar1.3268
1.3130
1.2839
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound1.4735
1.4925
1.5130
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold$378.00
$373.00
$335.25
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


World Markets; Mexico, Post-Nafta, Gets More Respect
DURING the first full trading session after the North American Free Trade Agreement was approved by the House of Representatives last Wednesday, reporters, photographers and television camera crews crammed into Mexico's stock exchange to record the expected euphoria.
They went away disappointed.
"It's just a normal day," Eduardo Martinez, an exchange official, told them.
The exchange index eked out a gain of 0.8 percent, or 17 points.


The Global View
A giant floor map of the United States, 24 by 17 feet, with features such as the Rockies in relief, is one of the high points of Geokids, a new geography exhibit at the Indianapolis International Airport.
Designed with the Children's Museum of Indianapolis, the display occupies 1,400 square feet and includes a six-foot globe, a computerized weather radar unit and a Geochron clock that shows the correct time around the world.
Targeted to children six to 10, the exhibit has also been drawing a considerably older crowd.


When We Are Good We Are Very, Very Good
THE CALL OF SERVICE A Witness to Idealism.
By Robert Coles. 306 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $22.95.


Why Are We in Vietnam?
Obviously the answer to the question "Why are we in Vietnam?" is different than it was 25 years ago, when the question was a mantra that distinguished the young from the not-so-young, hawks from doves, idealists from pragmatists.
Or, so thought the likes of me.
Now, scrolling through Compuserve, preparing for my first foray into Southeast Asia, I see that the old questions surrounding the war have something to do with Vietnam's current appeal.


Shara Alexander and Tony Green
Shara Alexander, the daughter of Michelle Alexander of Portland, Ore., and David Carlson of Cary, N.C., was married on Wednesday to Ashbel S. Green, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ashbel Green of New York.
Judge Joseph Ceniceros of the Multnomah County Circuit Court officiated at the home of the bridegroom, in Portland.
Ms.
Alexander, who is 26, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Beloit College.
She is a contract archeologist, conducting archeological examinations at construction sites.


N.Y.U. Student Falls to His Death in Apparent Suicide, Police Say
A student at New York University apparently committed suicide yesterday morning by leaping from a 16th-story dormitory window, the police said.
A police spokeswoman, Detective Kim Royster, said that what appeared to be a suicide note was found in the student's room, but she would not disclose its contents.
Detective Royster said the student fell from the window of Room 1621 in Hayden Hall, 33 Washington Square West, at 9:55 A.M.


Wall Street; Investment Advice -- or Libel?
LISTEN UP investors!
The initial public offering from John Doe Industries is a disaster.
The company is managed by a bunch of incompetents.
We are certain that it will only do worse in the coming months.
This newsletter strongly recommends that our subscribers stay away.
The above dollop of vitriol is pure fiction, but imagine if it had actually appeared in a newsletter dispensing investment advice.
Is it merely opinion, warranting protection by the First Amendment?
Or does the apocryphal John Doe Industries stand a good chance of winning a libel lawsuit?


MAGAZINE REDESIGN
Cheers to the revised composition.
Call it my Sunday morning languidness, but I found the task of tracking articles as they jumped pages throughout the Magazine vexing.
I look forward to the addition of new features as well as to my trusty favorites.
And, of course, the prospect of having to track only one article is a relief.
MIA MCNIECE Boston


Challenges With Ready-to-Assemble Kits
READY-TO-ASSEMBLE furniture has gained considerable popularity owing to its reasonable price, easy shipping and supposedly easy assembly.
But buyers of large complicated pieces like entertainment centers or desks with drawers and shelves can find challenges from the parts and hardware.
First, arrange sufficient space to work.
Large heavy furniture is best assembled near its intended location.
Where necessary, shift other furniture out of the way.
Provide abundant light.


For Elton John, One Voice Fits All Seasons
By far the strangest cut on "Duets," an album in which Elton John joins voices with everyone from Tammy Wynette to Little Richard, is a bizarre rendition of Ray Charles's 1962 hit "Born to Lose." Performing one of pop's most down-and-out ballads with Mr.
John is Leonard Cohen, who intones his part in a sepulchral singsong that turns the words into a sly burlesque of his own doomy lyrics.
Belting an octave above his partner, Mr.
John, who sounds chipper no matter what he's singing, supplies the gospel-blues fervor that Mr.
Cohen studiously subverts.
In its juxtaposition of two voices that sharply pull against each other, "Born to Lose" is similar to the Bono-Frank Sinatra teaming on Mr.
Sinatra's recent "Duets" album, a record with which Mr.
John's is bound to be compared.
But beyond the basic concept of having Mr.
John record with many different singers, the two albums are very dissimilar.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a sports article, picture caption and headline yesterday about the tennis player Mary Pierce misidentified her semifinal opponent in the Virginia Slims tournament in some copies.
She played Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, not Steffi Graf.


The Coup at Harper's
To the Editor:
Lewis H. Lapham's letter-cum-essay ("Advertisements for Themselves: A Letter From Lewis Lapham," Oct. 24) replying to "New York Days," Willie Morris's memoir of his tenure at Harper's Magazine, was disingenuous indeed.
So the journalists (Norman Mailer, David Halberstam, Gay Talese, et al.) whom Mr.
Morris used were bourgeois?
So they promoted themselves?
What's wrong with that?
They wrote for a magazine that gave them freedom and space, and they did so for relatively low wages.


Laurie Salzman, Richard Gersten
Laurie Jan Salzman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan H. Salzman of Rye Brook, N.Y., and Richard David Gersten, the son of Arlene Gersten of New York and the late Norman Horowitz, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Daniel S. Wolk officiated at the Fenway Golf Club, in Scarsdale, N.Y.


Take Our Park, Please
The small park on Roosevelt Avenue at 83d Street, beneath the shadows of an elevated subway line, opened five years ago as a tiny oasis of benches, trees, rosebushes and marigolds where people stopped to chat, rest their feet or simply while away the hours.
But in an unusual reversal, the residents of the neighborhood are urging the city to close the park.
They say that it has become a squalid and dangerous den of homeless people, prostitutes and drug dealers.


Idling Limos, Angry Residents
Some people say they are sick of the exhaust fumes.
Others complain that the noise and the litter are the worst parts of the problem.
But nearly everyone in East Elmhurst agrees on the solution: get rid of the limousines and other for-hire cars that have turned the neighborhood's streets into a huge pit stop.
"We don't want them in our community, period," said Florence Danois, the president of the Community Action Committee, a civic group.
"It's like our streets have become some kind of harbor for these cars."


Virus That Caused Deaths Among Navajos Is Isolated
The virus that causes a fatal illness that was first reported among Navajo Indians in New Mexico and was later found in other parts of the Western United States has been isolated and grown in a laboratory for the first time.
The development, by two teams of Federal researchers, improves prospects for developing a simple diagnostic test to detect infection of the Hantavirus, drug therapy and even a vaccine.
In the six months since the first cases of the illness were reported, the virus has produced flu-like symptoms in at least 45 people in 12 states.
Twenty-seven of those people died.
The virus struck many previously healthy young adults.


Garden's Season Running Out
The DOME garden, a cherished part of 84th Street for more than 15 years, came closer to its final chapter last week as the city served its directors with an eviction notice.
The garden, which is run by the DOME project (Developing Opportunities through Meaningful Education), will have to vacate its spot between Amsterdam and Columbus Avenues by Dec. 31 to allow the New York City Housing Authority to begin construction on a 35-unit housing project on that site.


When the Mail Matters
FAXES and phone calls notwithstanding, travelers often develop an abnormal attachment to the mail -- to their own letters sent and received, and to the customs and drama of the remarkably efficient international web of cooperating systems that links Kennebunkport to Katmandu in days.
The mail has its own magic, its own intriguing rhythms, especially when it arrives unaccountably in a distant place.
Hardly anything adds more mystery and importance to a trip than the alluring words Poste Restante, Postlagernd, or even General Delivery on an itinerary passed along to potential correspondents.
For trips a little closer to home, mail received at summer cottages near the sea or woodland resorts pleasantly interrupts the hot, lazy days, calls for a glass of iced tea on the porch and generates a tingle of excitement at the prospect of real letters -- from elderly aunts, or foreign friends, or kids at camp -- to be read and passed around.
And when a witty postcard reports on a giant fiberglass peach or chicken or other roadside oddity, even mere weekend jaunts become travel.


Denise S. Duhl, Jeffrey D. Hotch
Denise Sue Duhl, a daughter of Gloria Duhl of Bethany, Conn., and Paul Duhl of Woodbridge, Conn., was married last evening to Jeffrey David Hotch, a son of Marilyn Hotch of Owls Head, Me., and Robert Hotch of Tucson, Ariz.
Rabbi Kathy Cohen performed the ceremony at the Oak Lane Country Club in Woodbridge.


Brooke Douglass, Marc Graubart
Brooke Douglass, the daughter of Marylyn B. and Sam P. Douglass of Houston, was married there yesterday to Marc Alan Graubart, a son of Carol LaMarche and Donald M. Graubart, both of Houston.
Judge John Hutchison of the Harris County Probate Court in Houston, the Rev.
Lauren A. Hall and Rabbi James Kessler officiated at the chapel of the University of Houston.


Hong Kong Adds Two New Hotels
Two new luxury hotels and an addition to the venerable Peninsula are the latest developments in the continuing boom in Hong Kong accommodations.
Five years ago the territory had 65 hotels and 22,900 rooms, according to the Hong Kong Tourist Association.
By the end of last year the tourist association listed 86 hotels with 33,500 rooms.
By 1996 -- one year before it reverts to Chinese control -- Hong Kong is scheduled to have 96 hotels with 38,200 rooms.
Most Hong Kong hotels are clustered on the Kowloon peninsula, or near the Central business district.
But recently, developers have ranged across the colony.


Planting Tough Trees for a Tough City


NOV. 14-20: Mr. Hosokowa Goes to Seattle; Japan's Reformist Chief Wins a Timely Battle Against Dirty Money
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa came into office in August promising to resign if he could not pass legislation before the end of the year attacking corruption in Japanese politics.
But few expected his cobbled-together, seven-party coalition -- the first non-Liberal Democratic Government in 38 years -- to be up to the challenge.
Last week the understated reformer in the Italian-cut suits went a long way toward proving the skeptics wrong.
He won approval in the lower house of Parliament for electoral reform bills that would toughen campaign finance laws and change the rules for electing national legislators so that money -- or so it is hoped -- would be less likely to sully the process.
The bills still need approval in the upper house, but in clearing their major legislative hurdle they have accelerated the dizzying pace of change in Japanese politics.


How Norman Jaffee Saw Himself
Paul Goldberger in "Norman Jaffee Made a Mark on the Landscape of the East End"  [ Oct. 3 ]  wrote knowingly and sensitively of Jaffee's architecture, but Mr.
Goldberger created a misimpression about the architect.
Mr.
Goldberger stated that neither Jaffee nor his architecture were modest and that both occasionally "suffered from a bit of hubris."


Debra A. Franz, Richard Wooster
Debra A. Franz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard P. Franz of Santa Barbara, Calif., was married yesterday to Richard W. Wooster, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Wooster of Upper Montclair, N.J.
The Rev.
William Bryant officiated at the Green's Farms Congregational Church in Westport, Conn.
Mrs.
Wooster is an in-flight service coordinator in Hartford with Canadair Challenger, a Canadian aircraft manufacturer.


Recounting The Rage At AIDS
IN the middle of her junior year at the University of Florida, Kimberly Bergalis needed dental work.
That was in December 1987.
"Less than four years later, I'd be dead," announces Kim, the main character in "Patient A," the play Ms.
Bergalis's family engaged Lee Blessing to write.
After a brief run Off Off Broadway earlier this year, "Patient A" is having its first regional theater production at Theater Works in Hartford.
By the spring of 1989 Ms.
Bergalis said that she "started to feel sick." After various speculations and misdiagnoses -- diabetes, cancer, hepatitis -- and two inconclusive H.I.V. tests, a third came out positive.
Kimberly Bergalis died on Dec. 9, 1991 at 23.


Proposed M31 Would Be Boon to Upper East Side
To the Editor:
I heartily disagree with Arline L. Bronzaft's opinion of bus service ("Heading Down the Road to Extinction," Nov. 7).
I ride the buses almost every day and find them comfortable and convenient, especially the new limited-stop buses.
And one easy way to speed up service is simply to encourage more riders to exit through the rear door.


Trade Pact Offers Chance to Export Our Ideals
To the Editor:
"This country's greatness was not built on cheap labor," Representative Richard A. Gephardt stated in the waning hours of the debate on the North American Free Trade Agreement.
That statement does a disservice to the working people of this country and to history.
This country was most definitely built on cheap labor.
From African slave laborers to indentured servants, convicts, children, Chinese chain gangs, Irish labor camps, lofts of Eastern European Jews and more, the great expansion and consolidation of this country's land holdings and economy were built on the cheapest labor available and paid for by trading fear for hope and the workers' present for their children's future.


At the Armory, the Changing of the Guard
When the National Guard vacates the 14th Street Armory in March, it will leave behind a major building at a busy site served by six subway lines.
But there is no consensus on what to do with the cavernous structure at 125 West 14th Street -- except that the community has ruled out a homeless shelter, a use adopted at 10 other armories in the city.
Given the sagging real estate market and the building's peculiarities, said Ross Graham, chairwoman of Community Board 4, "I'm flummoxed about what should go there."


At Work; Getting Them There Is Half the Job
A FEW lines of text among thousands in the Clean Air Act of 1990 may have profound effects for employees who drive to work.
Buried toward the end of Title 1 is a section of the law that requires employers to help reduce pollution in certain heavily affected regions of the country.
The implementation of that section is picking up speed now that a key 1994 deadline is on the horizon.
Employers may offer employees a menu of incentives and disincentives, but the bottom line is that Uncle Sam would like you to change your driving behavior.
Isn't asking an American worker to give up that mind-clearing solo commute a little like asking a member of the National Rifle Association to voluntarily give up his assault weapon?
Didn't Thomas Jefferson write that all humans are entitled to life, liberty and the pursuit of mileage?
Is the Environmental Protection Agency where all the Communists went after the Soviet Union splintered?


Leaders at Summit Seek Strong Pacific Community
President Clinton played host to a Pacific Rim club meeting today, gathering 13 Asian-Pacific leaders in an Indian long house on a windswept island to preach the gospel of open markets and to secure America's foothold in the world's fastest growing economic community.
Mr.
Clinton said the free-flowing talks with his counterparts -- the largest such gathering ever of Asian leaders -- had laid the basis for an Asian-Pacific "community" that would play an "increasingly vital role for our nation and the world" by working together to expand trade, lower tariffs and create new high-tech jobs.


For Those Who Believe Flying Saucers Are Not Just a Myth


Streetscapes/The Macy's Notch; How a Thorn Got In the Lion's Paw
WHO put the strange little notch in the "World's Largest Department Store"?
Chances are no one will ask that question on Thursday as the store's Thanksgiving Day Parade makes its final turn, past the northwest corner of 34th and Broadway.
Most people will look no farther than the shiny new Macy's sign on the corner, which stands 70 feet high.
But Macy's has never owned the little corner building underneath its sign.
The building survives as a dramatic symbol of the holdout phenomenon in New York City development history.


The Most Durable Assassination Theory: Oswald Did It Alone
AROUND lunchtime 30 years ago tomorrow, I was browsing in the downstairs stacks of the public library in Cambridge, Mass., when a man appeared at the head of the stairs and announced, "The President's been shot."
It never crossed my mind that he could mean the President of the United States; my first thought was to wonder why anyone should have wanted to shoot the president of Oberlin College, from which I had recently been graduated.
I picked out a couple of books and went upstairs.
The news was being discussed in low, library tones around the checkout desk, and I managed to overhear only enough to understand that my college's president hadn't been involved after all.


Marie Strelecky, Scott Schwartz
Marie Anne Strelecky, a daughter of Katherine A. Strelecky of Pennsburg, Pa., and the late Richard J. Strelecky, was married yesterday to Scott Cooper Schwartz, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence S. Schwartz of Bernardsville, N.J.
Judge Joel A. Pisano of the Federal District Court in Newark officiated at the Hunterdon Art Center in Clinton, N.J.
Mrs.
Schwartz, 29, is an assistant editor for internal publications with NASA in Washington.
She graduated from Moravian College.


Garbage In . . .
To the Sports Editor:
The problem with having your computer do your thinking for you is the information you put into it.
If you are going to rank teams this way, you should include what the teams have done against each other.


Thronging The Aisles


Miss Rossomondo, Mr. Goebelbecker
Jeanne Alexandra Rossomondo, the daughter of Alexandra and John Rossomondo of Middletown, N.J., was married yesterday to Paul John Goebelbecker, a son of Jean and William Goebelbecker of Valhalla, N.Y.
The Rev.
Eugene Rebeck performed the ceremony at St.
Catharine's Roman Catholic Church in Holmdel, N.J.
Mrs.
Goebelbecker and her husband, both 24, graduated from Providence College.
She was until recently a personnel assistant at the Bank of New York in Manhattan.
Her father is a senior vice president and the national sales manager at Clinique Laboratories, a cosmetics manufacturer in New York.


A Strip Mall, New York Style
The remodeled building on Morris Park Avenue resembles a new strip mall.
But inside there are the kind of mom-and-pop operations found in most old New York City neighborhoods: a pizzeria, a bagel shop, a drugstore and a social club, called Bari's.
The re-emergence of the building this fall is a gamble for the owner, Louis Buonifante, who spent more that $1 million to convert the property into a niche for small neighborhood shops and stores.
The venture reflects his faith in the vitality of the neighborhood and of the small shops that are part of its character.
And, at a time when large retailers like Kmart and Home Depot are trying to stake a claim, he said he turned down offers from major retail chains to lease the building.


Timberland In the Cities
To the Editor:
"Out of the Woods" (Nov. 7) completely missed the real Timberland story.
Timberland demonstrates its commitment to the urban community on a daily basis.
It is the leading corporate investor in City Year, a national service program headquartered in Boston.
In 1992, at a time when Timberland's net profit was $8 million, the company made a $1 million commitment to City Year.
Timberland outfits every City Year corps with boots and clothes -- 12,000 items this year alone.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
GRAMERCY PARK  $155,500
60 Gramercy Park North  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 875-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, entry foyer, dining area, library, 3 exposures; maintenance $680, 54% tax-deductible, listed at $179,000, 8 weeks on market (Broker: M.P.R. Group Ltd.)


An Offer of Help for the Tired Woodhaven Blvd. Station
When the Woodhaven Boulevard subway station was built in 1936, it was a rural outpost in New York City's subway system.
While the station has evolved into one of the busiest in the borough, it has withered with years of heavy use and neglect.
Last week the station finally received a promise of help, when the Metropolitan Transit Authority designated it as one of 70 stations that will undergo major restoration.
The Woodhaven project, to begin early next year at a cost of about $6 million, is part of the authority's four-year project to refurbish the city's entire subway system.


21st Century Car Repair
To the Editor:
Regarding "Who Will Fix Tomorrow's Cars" (Nov. 7): Auto manufacturers will indeed make greater use of computer technology in tomorrow's cars.
Eventually, computer processors will execute, or run, programs that control all aspects of the conversion of fuel into power and power into motion.


Susan Lieberman Gary A. Smotrich
Susan Alfreda Lieberman, a daughter of Judith and Lester Lieberman of Harding Township, N.J., was married last evening to Dr.
Gary Alan Smotrich, a son of Dorothy Shain of Delray Beach, Fla., and the late Herman Smotrich.
Rabbi Dov Peretz Elkins officiated at the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
Smotrich, 33, is a lawyer in Princeton, N.J.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Massachusetts and received a law degree from Boston University.
Her father is a former chief executive, in New York, for Clarkson Industries, a manufacturing conglomerate now in Stamford, Conn.
He is now the chairman of Newark Beth Israel Medical Center and Irvington (N.J.) General Hospital.
Her mother is a learning-disabilities specialist in Harding Township.


3 Yards From Rose Bowl, U.S.C. Throws It Away
Tailback U. is in severe identity crisis.
Southern Cal, which brought the world O. J. Simpson, Charles White, Marcus Allen, et al, was 3 yards from the Rose Bowl today and could not pound the football in.
Two straight stacked-up running plays led to a desperate pass, and quarterback Rob Johnson made the mistake of his life: He threw into triple-coverage.
A trio of U.C.L.A. defenders could have intercepted the soft-as-a-pillow toss, but free safety Marvin Goodwin did the honors in the end zone with 50 seconds remaining.
The Trojans did not tackle Goodwin; his own teammates did.
The Bruins had the 27-21 victory in front of 93,458, they had the Rose Bowl berth and they had the tunnel to the Los Angeles Coliseum locker rooms all to themselves.
Brought to Their Knees
"I'm thinking, 'Can we have one more play?' " said Tyler Cashman, the tight end to whom Johnson threw.


Galleries That Are Neighbors
AT its waterfront end, First Street here is dour industrial territory.
But near the junction with Marin Boulevard there appears a low structure recently painted gray and optimistically titled the Trans Hudson Gallery.
It is the scene of a group show, "Forms of Life."
Diagonally opposite this is the old Lorillard Building at 111, with innumerable studios and the Art Center on First.
This is the gallery space that the building's owners accord to their tenants, whose shows follow one upon another like bats out of a cave.
The attraction here is "The Spirit of Nature/The Nature of Spirit."


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
SOHO  The Eastern Haunts Of a 'Western' Writer
The Mark Twain Association of New York will sponsor a two-hour walking tour of Mark Twain landmarks in lower Manhattan in celebration of the humorist's 158th birthday.
On the itinerary are the site of a publishing house Twain owned near Union Square, his homes in several parts of town, and the Fifth Avenue church where his funeral took place in 1910.
The tour will end with a birthday toast at Twain's turn-of-the-century home on West 10th Street.


SENATE CONFIRMS A SCIENCES CHIEF
Slipping in a vote between more fractious issues like gun control and trade treaties, the Senate early this morning confirmed Dr.
Harold E. Varmus, a Nobel laureate, as leader of the country's most prominent biomedical research organization, the National Institutes of Health.
Dr.
Varmus, a professor of microbiology and biochemistry at the University of California at San Francisco, is internationally renowned for his work on the genes that cause cancer, the devious mechanisms of viruses and other basic puzzles of biology.


Trade Pact Offers Chance to Export Our Ideals; Nothing for the Poor
To the Editor:
I am disappointed that your Nov. 16 editorial implied I would vote against the North American Free Trade Agreement because I am running scared.
It is hard to believe you could conclude that the approximately $60,000 I received from labor political action committees each election cycle, less than 25 percent of my contributions, would sway my decision.
Especially when my constituents have never given me less than 80 percent of their support in the last 20 years.


All Mixed Up?
To the Editor:
Michael Gazzaniga's peculiar review seethes with anger, aptly proving the good Dr.
Cytowic's point that humans are indeed more emotional than rational.
It would have been a tour de force had he been able to pull it off as subtle irony, but I fear he was just being a hothead.
PATRICIA HAWTHORN  Boca Raton, Fla.


Lauren Creskoff, Christopher Kline
Lauren Marie Creskoff, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard J. Creskoff of Philadelphia, was married there yesterday evening to Christopher Babcock Kline, the son of Dennis Kline of Lafayette Hill, Pa., and Wray Babcock of Palm City, Fla.
Rabbi Elliot Holin performed the ceremony at Congregation Rodeph Shalom.


The Culinary Stew That Is Chelsea
THE BALLROOM * (212) 244-3005; 253 West 28th Street; $$$; all major cards


French Cuisine in Experienced Hands
LE CHAMPIGNON, a new French restaurant in Stamford, joins Indian, Mexican, Austrian and Italian/Cajun restaurants, turning the short block of Summer Street between West Broad and Park into a veritable international restaurant row.
In spacious quarters formerly occupied by a nightclub, Le Champignon has been broken into several attractive areas, with smoking and nonsmoking sections.
The well-spaced, nicely napped tables (set with fresh flowers) are enhanced by soft lighting, creamy walls and dark wood wainscoting and pilasters.
Pictures of mushrooms on the walls are reminders of the restaurant name.


Brazilian Strength Almost Prevails
FOR nearly four decades, ending in 1987, the world team championship for the Bermuda Bowl was dominated by Italian and American teams: 24 victories out of a possible 26.
But the stars of the Italian Blue Team are all dead or retired, and the American teams are never quite as strong as they used to be -- or could be.
The reason is that nearly all the teams that challenge for the right to represent the United States include a playing sponsor, usually a player somewhat below the top rank who is willing to pay a large amount for a chance to win a world title.
As a result, in recent years there have been no clear favorites and several surprises: Brazil won in 1989, Iceland in 1991 and the Netherlands two months ago in Santiago, Chile.
The Brazilian team, cheered on by local enthusiasts hoping for a Latin American victory, came close in Santiago.
They were handicapped by the absence of Marcelo Branco, a multiple world champion who was forced to put work ahead of bridge, but they still reached the semifinal.


NOV. 14-20: Midshipman Prevails; Ruling Clouds Compromise On Homosexuals in Military
A Federal appeals court ruling last week reinforced doubts about President Clinton's new policy on homosexuals in the military.
The policy, a product of months of tense negotiations between the White House, the military and Congress, struck a compromise between the half-century-old ban on homosexuals and Mr.
Clinton's 1992 campaign pledge to eliminate it.
Under new regulations that are being drafted, the military would permit homosexuals to serve so long as they remain silent about their sexual orientation and do not engage in homosexual acts.


Breeders' Cup Leaves a Jumble in the Battle for Horse of the Year Prize
It was two weeks after he rode the French horse Arcangues for the first time and won the $3 million Breeders' Cup Classic at gold-rush odds of 133-1, and Jerry Bailey stood in the chill of the paddock at Aqueduct and said the race for Horse of the Year had not been decided at Santa Anita and still was too close to call.
"I don't think the Breeders' Cup settled any of the issues or rankings," he said.
"It will be a judgment call, and I think it'll be the closest voting they've ever had to name the Horse of the Year."


Jill Snyder and Robert Granader
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert N. Snyder of Washington have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jill Robin Snyder, to Robert Granader, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hadar Granader of Bloomfield Hills, Mich.
A January wedding is planned.
Ms.
Snyder, 25, is an associate at Schulman, Rogers, Gandal, Pordy &amp; Ecker, a law firm in Rockville, Md.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and she and her fiance received law degrees from George Washington University.
Her father is the chairman of Cambridge Information Group, a publishing company in Bethesda, Md.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15  PREACHING GOSPEL OF FREE TRADE
To 13 Asian-Pacific leaders, President Clinton preached the gospel of open markets in trying to secure America's access in their region.  1  CLINTON REACHES OUT TO ASIA
News analysis: President Clinton pictures himself as the godfather of new linkages in the Pacific in the aftermath of the cold war.  14  On Blake Island, the dress code was sweaters and plaid shirts.  14  Malaysia's Prime Minister was pleased that he stayed home.  15


Giving Vegetables a Special Holiday Zing
THANKSGIVING is about tradition, so few people would want to dispense with turkey.
But sometimes I like to serve holiday vegetables in new and different ways.
Steaming is fine for the rest of the year, but this occasion is a good time to do something special.
Beets are superb baked and tossed with their greens in a balsamic and olive oil dressing with toasted pine nuts.
The best way to cook beets is in the oven in their skins.
This concentrates and brings out their flavor in the most remarkable way.
The cooked skins slip off easily, and the beets can then be diced and tossed in a dressing.
If the beets are sold with their greens, the greens can be sauteed with red Swiss chard and served as a bed for the beets.


Egos &amp; Ids; Hold My Tiara. It Doesn't Go With Jeans.
Not many 19-year-old women dress like beauty queens, so why should Miss America have to all the time?
Kimberly Aiken, who won the title in September when she was 18, wore blue jeans, a black Banana Republic turtleneck and a DKNY cap for an interview on Tuesday at the Regency Hotel.
"Jeans are very much a part of my wardrobe," said Miss Aiken, who is from Columbia, S.C.
"I have to be comfortable."
She was in New York to speak at a gala benefit for the Partnership for the Homeless, which provides housing, furniture and emergency services for homeless people in New York City.
"Homelessness is breaking families up," Miss Aiken said.
"Even if I couldn't necessarily get any one person off the streets, at least I can provide awareness."
She admitted she's not up to date on the latest studies and policy ideas.
"I try to let people know that as Miss America, as a 19-year-old, I'm not an expert," she said.
"I can't really say what the priorities should be. But I think that children growing up into the homeless population is a tragedy."


For Guests With Two Feet or Four


Bless His Fat Little Head
THE FUNNY LITTLE MAN The Biography of a Graphic Image.
By Virginia Smith.
Illustrated. 182 pp.
New York:  Van Nostrand Reinhold. $34.95.


NEW YORK REGION EXPECTING TO GAIN IN JOBLESS RECOUNT
New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania stand to reap tens of millions of dollars from a revamping of the Government survey from which unemployment rates are calculated, according to Federal and state officials.
The extra money would result mainly from the states' greater share of Federal aid for job training, job placement and other programs tied to the severity of unemployment in a state or locality.
Since the total pool of aid is more or less fixed, other states, like California and Texas, would lose.


Review/Music; Jazz Bands And Soloists At Carnegie
Carnegie Hall's second jazz offering for the season, "The Classic Song," hit a fairly dull mood early on Thursday night and stayed there for the whole show.
The idea was straightforward enough: to bring the Carnegie Hall Jazz Band together with some soloists to perform works taken from the vast array of material churned out by pre-rock pop songwriters.
The choice of guests was less than inspired, the material they performed wasn't much better, and the performances themselves seemed dispirited.
In addition, the choice of soloists, particularly the 20-year-old trumpeter Ryan Kisor and the 12-year-old pianist Sergio Salvatore, both of whom have new records out, gave the impression that Carnegie Hall was putting the needs of record companies before the music they should be presenting.
Neither of the two have a voice yet, and that's being kind about it.


Review/Television; A Kinsey Report On Animals
Crabs do it.
Wasps do it.
Even penguins in Patagonia do it.
If you have any doubts about the matter, tune into "The Nature of Sex," a six-hour tour for upscale voyeurs that begins tonight as part of the "Nature" series.
This being public broadcasting, the scenes of concourse are accompanied by informative tidbits from George Page, who is to the animal kingdom what Alistair Cooke was to the British Empire.
You can learn many details of courtship and mating. (Those penguins are monogamous, males and females seeking each other out in the crowd after months of separation, but lionesses seem less particular.) The consequences in births and the care or lack of care of the young are also noted. (There are lots of single-parent families in the wild.)


Henry J. Opperman, Ex-TV Producer, 71
Henry J. Opperman, a former television producer and advertising executive who helped produce such early television shows as "Captain Video and His Space Rangers," died at his home in Raleigh, N.C., on Nov. 14.
He was 71.
The cause was cancer, said his son, Paul.


Eagles Stumble Through a Cold, Hollow Season
The losses ring up like numbers on a gasoline pump, each one costlier in terms of injury and self-assurance.
Today made six straight losses for the Philadelphia Eagles, arousing the ominous possibility that their season, which began with four victories, will end with 12 consecutive defeats.
How could any team in the National Football League lose 12 straight?
It's not difficult to imagine after Philadelphia's feckless display in today's 7-3 loss to the Giants.
Injuries further weakened a patchwork offensive line.
Players were confused, unsure when to come into the game and when to go out.
A juggling of quarterbacks only extended the futility.


Company Opposes Call for Mediation
American Airlines rejected a call yesterday by its striking flight attendants for a Presidential labor mediation board to help settle the walkout that began on Thursday.
The decision means travel through the Thanksgiving holiday will probably remain difficult for tens of thousands of passengers.
The flight attendants have said that they will return to work on Nov. 29 whether or not an agreement has been reached.


Officer Is 8th Suicide for New York Police in '93
An off-duty New York City police officer killed himself in an Atlantic City hotel on Saturday, becoming the eighth to commit suicide this year, the police said yesterday.
Officer Frank Astralla, 24 years old, a three-year veteran, died of an apparently self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head.
His body was discovered at 4:30 P.M.
Saturday by a maid in his hotel room in the Trump Regency Hotel, the police said.
He was assigned to the 104th Precinct, which takes in Woodside, Queens.


Let's Assume That All Children Can Achieve; Talented and Gifted
To the Editor:
The Federal study that concludes that public schools are failing our brightest students (news article, Nov. 5) did not observe my class of 31 inner-city fifth graders in a public school for talented and gifted students.
Each student in that class is excited about learning, is challenged and supported in the classroom and completes a minimum of an hour and a half of homework each night.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  GOOD NEWS ON UNEMPLOYMENT SPENDING
New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania stand to reap tens of millions of dollars from a revamping of the Government survey from which unemployment rates are calculated, according to Federal and state officials.
The extra money would result mainly from the states' greater share of the billions of Federal money spent on training, job placement and various other programs tied in some way to the severity of unemployment in a state or locality.
Since the total pool of aid is more or less fixed, other states would lose.
New York might also gain disproportionately from an extension of emergency unemployment benefits, which are triggered by rate of unemployment.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  CABDRIVER KILLINGS LEAVE EMPTINESS
Rene Rodriguez, who is 7 years old and proud of learning to rhyme words, insists that he does not keep going to the window to look for a father who never comes.
His 10-year-old sister says he does.
When the father died behind the wheel of his livery cab in central Harlem in March 1992, he left behind a wife and three children and not much else.
He was one of 186 cabdrivers killed in the last five years.
The fundamental equation is that $75, the average take in a livery cab robbery, is worth a driver's life to the ones who kill them.
But to the families of those slain, almost always poor immigrants, the loss is incalculable.
A1.
ANOTHER OFFICER COMMITS SUICIDE
An off-duty New York City police officer killed himself in an Atlantic City hotel, the eighth to commit suicide this year, the police said.
The dead officer, Frank Astralla, 24, was a three-year veteran assigned to the 104th Precinct in Woodside, Queens.
His suicide was the fourth by a uniformed member of the New York Police Department since Oct. 30, which has prompted Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly to call for increased suicide efforts.
B3.
GIULIANI GIVES SOME SUPPORT TO MAYOR
After a week of jousting between Mayor David N. Dinkins and his successor, Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Mayor-elect offered a bit of an olive branch to Mr.
Dinkins, saying that he was willing to support the Mayor "in any tough decisions" so long as "problems not be made worse." Mr.
Giuliani also gave his support to the Mollen Commission, formed to investigate police corruption.
But he reiterated his request for the Dinkins administration to refrain from making long-term deals before leaving office, referring specifically to contract talks with the city's sanitation workers.
B3.
Thirteen people, including Arthur Miller, head of the Dance Theater of Harlem, and the philanthropist Brooke Astor, will receive New York City's highest cultural honor.
B6.
The death of Robert F. Wagner Jr. deprives Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani of an important voice on urban issues.
Metro Matters, B3.
REGION  AIDE ATTACKS ROLLINS'S CLAIMS
The campaign aide responsible for building support for Gov.-elect Christine Todd Whitman among minority voters has vehemently denied Edward J. Rollins's account of a conversation they had about countering Democrats' efforts to gain the support of black ministers.
The aide, Lonna Hooks, said she was never told to offer the ministers any money or to suggest what they should say from the pulpit.
Instead, she said, her efforts to win black voters to Mrs.
Whitman involved bringing Mrs.
Whitman to meet black community leaders and ministers and arranging for her to talk with delegates to the annual meeting of the N.A.A.C.P.
During this time, she said, the Florio campaign was largely ignoring black voters and their concerns.
A1.
ADOPTIVE PARENTS SHARE EXPERIENCES
Six years ago, Lisa Kearney wrote down on a slip of paper the reasons why she could not keep her son, to remind herself in moments of weakness.
"I wasn't ready," she said.
Her child's adoptive parents could offer him many opportunities, she felt.
Such exchanges of curiosity and experience were the purpose of the 13th annual conference of the Adoptive Parents Committee, which drew 2,000 people to the State University of New York at Purchase.
Adoptive parents and those who thought they wanted to be shared their experiences and talked about the hardships and joys of the adoptive process.
B4.
Chronicle B6


PACKWOOD BALKED AFTER A SUBPOENA
Senate Republican leaders said today that Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon had been ready to resign on Friday rather than continue to defend himself against sexual-harassment charges in a Senate inquiry, but changed his mind when the Justice Department subpoenaed his diaries.
Mr.
Packwood, a Republican, was elected to a fifth term last November, but since the harassment charges surfaced shortly after the election, he has been the target of pickets at his home, demands for his resignation on some editorial pages and ostracism in the Senate, where many colleagues turn their backs when he walks onto the floor.


In India, Sikhs Vow To Continue Fight
To the Editor:
I take exception to the Indian Government's claim that the arrest of Sohan Singh has "broken the backbone" of the Sikh liberation struggle (news item, Nov. 5).
How could the Indian Government so belittle our freedom movement by asserting it rests on the shoulders of one man?


A Train to Fantasy and History


Stocks Drop 3.1% in Tokyo
The lack of a Government commitment to stimulate Japan's battered economy sent the stock market into yet another dive today, with the closely watched Nikkei index plunging more than 3 percent.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues closed today down 556.35 points, or 3.10 percent, at 17,384.84.
The Nikkei fell 225.13 points on Friday.


Heather Farr, Rising Golfer, 28; Pro Career Cut Short by Cancer
Heather Farr, the professional golfer whose four-and-a-half-year battle with cancer won her scores of admirers from inside and outside the golf world, died Saturday night in Scottsdale, Ariz.
She was 28.
Since being diagnosed with breast cancer in July 1989, Farr underwent more than 15 operations, ranging from a radical mastectomy to breast reconstruction to bone marrow transplants and spinal surgery.


Points, Rebounds, Assists, But 17 Missed Free Throws
A 23-point performance by Kevin Edwards and 21-point efforts by Derrick Coleman and Kenny Anderson helped the Nets defeat the Los Angeles Lakers, 105-102, tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
In overcoming a 30-point effort by the Lakers' Sedale Threatt, the Nets snapped a three-game losing streak.


Israeli Settlement Leaders Warn They Will Not Obey Palestinians
As details emerged about the shape of a nascent Palestinian police force, leaders of Israeli settlers in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip warned today that they would never obey the authorities of Palestinian self-rule, not even to accept a traffic ticket.
Settler leaders pledged "militant direct action" against the agreement on self-rule signed in September by Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization and scheduled to go into effect in three weeks in Gaza and the West Bank city of Jericho.


Manhattan Beats Lithuanian Team
Carey Edwards scored 10 points and Manhattan College took control late in the first half in defeating Lavera of Lithuania, 76-68, yesterday.
Manhattan scored 13 of the final 15 points in the first half to gain a 43-30 advantage.
Ted Ellis led the burst with 7 of his 9 points in the final 2:58 of the first half.


Head of Dance Group to Receive Cultural Honor
Mayor David N. Dinkins today will bestow New York City's highest cultural honor on Arthur Mitchell, the founder, artistic director and president of the Dance Theater of Harlem.
Mr.
Mitchell, 58, who is also to receive the Kennedy Center Honors on Dec. 5, is 1 of 13 people, including the playwright August Wilson and the philanthropist Brooke Astor, who will be recognized by the Mayor in an awards ceremony at Gracie Mansion.


TRANSACTIONS
WEEKEND Baseball  National League
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Sent Jeff Ballard and Rich Robertson, pitchers, and John Wehner, infielder, outright to Buffalo of the American Association.
Purchased the contracts of Rick White and Roberto Ramierez, pitchers; Angelo Encarcion, catcher, and Michael Brown, infielder, from Buffalo, and Jeff McCurry, pitcher, and Keith Osik, catcher, from Carolina of the Southern League.


Shira J. Agus, Eric M. Lewis
Shira Joy Agus, a daughter of Shoshana and Bertrand Agus of Great Neck, L.I., and Eric Michael Lewis, the son of Bobbi and Barry Lewis of New City, N.Y., were married yesterday.
Rabbi David H. Chanofsky performed the ceremony at the Great Neck Synagogue.
Mrs.
Lewis, 25, is a junior analyst in the equity research department of Lehman Brothers, the New York investment bank.
She graduated cum laude from Barnard College.
Her father, a rheumatologist in private practice in Manhattan, is an associate professor at New York University School of Medicine.
The bride's mother is the executive director of Young Israel of Great Neck, a synagogue.


Top Whitman Aide Contradicts Rollins On Election Inquiry
The campaign aide responsible for building support for Gov.-elect Christine Todd Whitman among minority voters today denied Edward J. Rollins's account of a conversation they had about countering Democrats' efforts to gain the support of black ministers.
Mr.
Rollins, who was Ms.
Whitman's campaign manager, said in a deposition that the aide, Lonna Hooks, had told him the Democrats were threatening to cut financing for day-care centers and drug-treatment programs if the ministers did not support Gov.
Jim Florio.
He said he then told her to offer the ministers help with their favorite charities and to "tell them if they don't go up to the pulpit and preach against us on Sunday, we'd be way ahead of the game."


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Advanced Technology Materials Inc., Danbury, Conn., an initial public offering of two million shares.
Needham &amp; Co.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 11 about the World Trade Center bombing trial misstated the location of the Fort Bragg military base, which was apparently the source of an instruction manual that prosecutors say one defendant was carrying.
Fort Bragg is in North Carolina, not Georgia.


Playing Without Smith, Cowboys Are Just Mortal
Falcons 27, Cowboys 14
With Emmitt Smith, the Dallas Cowboys didn't lose.
Without him yesterday, they didn't win.


No Headline
Most owners have already broken rules by installing their dishes without application.
Those that didn't listen to orders prohibiting installation, and then didn't listen to orders to disassemble, we will punish according to relevant laws. -- WEI DANGJUN of the Chinese Ministry of Radio, Film and Television.  [ A4:3. ]


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Protesters scoff as the fur industry begins a national campaign.
WINTER is coming.
If you cannot tell by the temperatures, check out all the magazines and television stations advertising fur coats.
Fur is flying everywhere, from the first national campaign ever produced by the Fur Information Council of America.
The $1.25 million campaign includes full-page, color presentations in a variety of national publications, including Vogue, Vanity Fair, Town &amp; Country, Harper's Bazaar, Essence and Newsweek, and television commercials in 70 cities.


Helene Curtis Parts Ways With Saatchi
Helene Curtis Industries Inc. and Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide said that after 10 years they had decided to part ways on four of the company's personal care products accounts.
As a result, the Finesse, Salon Selectives and Vibrance hair care brands and the Degree antiperspirant accounts in the United States, Australia and New Zealand, have been placed in review.
Combined billings were estimated at $80 million.
"We found that Helene Curtis and our other clients were on a collision course," Richard F. O'Brien, the vice chairman of Saatchi in New York, said on Friday.
"We had to choose which would be our hair care client, and regrettably we weren't able to stay with Helene Curtis."


Opening of a Regional Council in Somalia Adds to Hopes for Stability


Rise in Deaths Of Witnesses In Drug Cases
Some of the city's more violent drug gangs, particularly in upper Manhattan, are demonstrating a willingness to kill not only their rivals but also witnesses to their crimes, investigators say.
The trend, which sends an emphatic message that silence is survival, was illustrated in a Manhattan courtroom on Saturday, when a jury found the leader of a Harlem drug gang guilty of murdering a man who cooperated with prosecutors looking into the gang's activities.


Stich Reaches No. 2 Spot By Defeating the No. 1
It would have been the perfect ending, the light layer of powdered sugar on a big, fat piece of apple strudel.
But unfortunately for Pete Sampras, Michael Stich was not willing to follow the script.
Instead of the world's No. 1 player finishing off the finest season of his young career in style, it was a teary-eyed Stich who was left to experience the last big high of the ATP Tour year in a Fest- halle full of his fellow Germans.


Lions Hit a Roadblock In Their Easy Schedule
The Detroit Lions started miserably against the Green Bay Packers this afternoon before 55,119 spirited fans at County Stadium.
Green Bay took the opening kickoff and ripped the Lions, driving 80 yards for a touchdown.
Then the Lions finished with minus 4 yards on their first possession.
The Packers went from there to score a field goal.
That made it 10-0 late in the first quarter and the Packers led the Lions in yards by 117 to minus 4 and in plays by 15-3.


With Their Big Man in Doubt, Knicks Plan to Come Up Big
With or without Patrick Ewing, the Knicks hope to perform better tonight than they did Saturday against Utah.
New York (7-2) looked horrible offensively in an 86-72 loss to the Jazz (7-3) at the Garden.
As Ewing sat on the bench in street clothes nursing his strained neck, the Knicks produced a season-low point total and shot a season-low 32.6 percent from the field.


Review/Pop; Picture a Midnight Barroom And Some Mournful People
As the 1980's ended, country music was finding a new audience for old-fashioned honky-tonk, renamed "new traditionalism." Then along came Garth Brooks and his even more popular amalgam of country music and arena rock.
Mark Chesnutt, who performed on Thursday night at Tramps, tries a little of each.
His honey-cured baritone is at home in honky-tonk songs about drinking away the pain of a breakup or getting through the morning after the binge.
But he also dispenses sentimental ballads and Billy Joel-style bombast.
And even in traditionalist country and Cajun songs, his band members pose, swinging their guitars in synch, like video-trained arena rockers; they even brought strobe lights to Tramps.
The country side of Mr.
Chesnutt's repertory comes from Nashville's better song factories, turning phrases like "All my old flames have new names" and "My heart's too broke to pay attention." Like nearly every other cowboy-hatted young male country singer, Mr.
Chesnutt emulates George Jones and Merle Haggard.
He sounds appropriately mournful and rueful in songs of barroom self-pity, and his unaccompanied version of "I'm So Lonesome I Could Cry" captured the song's despondent longing.
But despite his considerable skills, and his band's rangy drive, Mr.
Chesnutt projects little individuality; he seems determined to cast himself as a simple, stereotyped, lovesick good old boy.


President Kennedy's Death Remembered


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: MONDAY  Detroit Edison Walt Disney Co Gap Inc San Diego Gas &amp; Elec United Illum Co Westcorp Inc TUESDAY  Becton Dickinson Bre Pptys Inc Century Tel Entrp Connecticut Energy Corp Connecticut Nat Gas Corp Cousins Pptys Inc Duty Free Intl Inc Loctite Corp New England Elec Sys Unifirst Corp Westvaco Corp WEDNESDAY  Merck &amp; Co Inc Pennsylvania Pwr &amp; Lt Philip Morris Cos Washington Natl Corp


U.S. Protesting Japan's Plan to Revise Software Protection
The United States is protesting what it views as a Japanese plan to weaken copyright protection for computer programs and help Japanese companies catch up in software, an industry that Americans have dominated.
The United States Government, as well as American computer companies, say a proposal under review by an advisory committee to Japan's Government would make it easier for companies to copy programs.


Michele Edelson, Stephen Older
Michele Stacey Edelson, a daughter of Ruth Saunders of Commack, L.I., and Jack B. Edelson of Mountain Lakes, N.J., was married yesterday to Stephen Edward Older, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack S. Older of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Richard Jacobs performed the ceremony at the Water's Edge restaurant in Long Island City, Queens.
The bride, 28, graduated with honors from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y., and is studying for a master's degree in elementary education at Hunter College.
Her mother and her stepfather, Stuart Saunders, own Antique Freaks of Northport, L.I.
The bride's father is the tax manager at Kelley Drye &amp; Warren, a law firm in New York.


Beijing Journal; CNN and MTV Hanging by a 'Heavenly Thread'
Ever since Prime Minister Li Peng signed State Council Proclamation No. 129 last month banning the purchase or possession of satellite dishes by ordinary Chinese, millions of people on the broadcasting and receiving ends of the television business in Asia have been trying to determine whether Mr.
Li will risk the draconian steps necessary to enforce the order.
So far, no police officers have been sent to start ripping dishes off rooftops, but the Government is talking tough.
Many in Beijing feel the Politburo has invested too much of its prestige to back down.


Nebraska Has a Secret of Success: Take a Game Day Off
As the political debate surrounding the selection of a college football champion approaches the intensity of New Year's Day, maybe the Nebraska Cornhuskers have discovered the most effective means of competing for the top spot in the polls.
Don't play.
That formula worked for the Huskers during the weekend when the season turned bizarre, and it may assist others as bowl-game matchups are settled in the next two weeks.


After Wagner's Death, A City's Hope Darkens
FRANK E. HORNSBY JR., deputy executive director of the San Antonio Housing Authority, explained the other day how programs begun under Senator Robert F. Wagner's New Deal legislation were being adapted to today's needs.
"At Alazan-Apache Courts, a 1,000-apartment project built in 1940, we've just begun a family self-sufficiency program," he said.
"To get in, people have to sign a five-year contract to get training or education to get a job. They pay rent up to 30 percent of their income. Eventually they own their own unit.


Why Small Powers Also Deserve Respect
To the Editor:
W.
Anthony Lake, the President's national security adviser, has appealed to opinion makers and Congress to keep making a distinction between the immediate and the important when dealing with the "less strategically significant questions" of small countries that are ripping themselves apart like Somalia and Haiti.
He might also include Angola, Armenia, Bosnia and others.


Let's Assume That All Children Can Achieve; A Theory Gone Astray
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen's focus on the bright-child syndrome in public schools in "Dumb About Smarts" (column, Nov. 7) is fuzzy with one-line solutions.
No, the public school system doesn't take care of its brightest students, but her random jabs at the problem don't solve it: More money.
Tracking.
Better role models.


Consumers Spur the Economy
Consumer spending has become the principal source of strength for the economy lately.
And even though it is a cautious sort of spending, coming mainly from people who had postponed big purchases since the 1980's, some economists say the "pent-up demand" is so large that satisfying it could bolster the economy into mid-decade.
Unlocking the demand has taken a while, in the face of continued layoffs and widespread uneasiness over job security.
But increasingly, consumers have ventured again into the marketplace, mainly to make big purchases: homes, cars, refrigerators and other appliances and furniture.


House Soundly Defeats a Proposal On District of Columbia Statehood
After years of often dispiriting struggle, supporters of statehood for the District of Columbia finally got a Congressional vote on the issue today -- and were soundly defeated.
But they immediately vowed to continue their fight after the House of Representatives, by 277 to 153, turned down a bill that would have transformed the District into the 51st state.


European Airlines End Talks
Just seven months after embarking on ambitious negotiations aimed at a merger, four European airlines called off their talks today, citing irreconcilable differences over what strategy to adopt in the United States.
The four international carriers -- Swissair, Scandinavian Airline Systems, KLM Royal Dutch Airlines and Austrian Airlines -- had sought to establish a jointly owned company to integrate their routes, eliminate overlapping sales forces and become more competitive in an increasingly difficult global airline market.


William Souder Jr., 82, Insurance Official
William F. Souder Jr., a former chairman of the board and chief executive of Marsh &amp; McLennan Companies, an insurance brokerage in New York, died on Friday at his home in Delray Beach, Fla.
He was 82.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Review/Television; It's 25 and Still Thinking Like a Child
Known as the longest street in the world, stretching in one form or another around the globe, "Sesame Street" celebrates its 25th birthday today with a characteristic eye on the future and a meandering stroll to a new playground that it calls "just around the corner." The Children's Television Workshop's pioneering blend of carefully researched education and quality entertainment has lost none of its imaginative freshness.
Hillary Rodham Clinton, flanked by Big Bird and Rosita, drops by today in a gesture of richly deserved tribute.
The survival of "Sesame Street" has involved struggle and occasional controversy.
In the 1970's, the BBC rejected the program, ostensibly because of its ultra-American, hard-sell teaching techniques; Britons were later allowed to watch the series, seemingly without ill effect.
When the project was conceived in the 1960's by Joan Ganz Cooney and Lloyd Morrisset, children's television was a generally sorry affair, with cartoons at one end and dull instructional classes at the other.
The Children's Television Workshop created something entirely new: an education program that was great fun to watch.


Ballet Theater Completes the Reorganization of Its Board
Just over a year ago, it looked as if the financially hard-pressed American Ballet Theater might be forced to disband.
But last month, the 54-year-old ballet troupe moved on to the second stage of its rebuilding effort with a reorganization of its board of trustees.
The event was celebrated informally last Monday with a fund-raising party at the Four Seasons, which included a preview of Ballet Theater's new production of "The Nutcracker," which has a libretto by the playwright Wendy Wasserstein.
In a time of declining public and private financial contributions, a membership on the board of a major American artistic institution, once largely an honorary position held indefinitely by some major donor, increasingly entails active, even aggressive participation.
Ballet Theater's board committees have been reduced for the time being to four, with fewer members and more frequent meetings.
The board has pledged to give $2 million in each of the next two years.


Advanced Nursing Practices Are Invading Doctors' Turf
When Margaret Manchester was training to be a nurse, she was taught to stand up whenever a doctor entered the room and to offer him her chair.
But nurses are no longer handmaidens to the medical profession.
Armed with advanced degrees and training, many like Ms.
Manchester are being certified as nurse practitioners, edging onto turf once reserved for doctors.
Some are even serving as the primary source of care for their patients.


Giants Get Portugal for Staff
The San Francisco Giants, the most aggressive club in this year's free-agent market, reached agreement yesterday with right-hander Mark Portugal, who produced the best performance of his seven-year career this year.
Portugal, who compiled an 18-4 record and a 2.77 earned run average for the Houston Astros, accepted a three-year contract for $11 million.
If an option for a fourth year vests, the contract would be worth $15 million.
Portugal earned $1,925,000 this year.


Review/Opera; A Rarely Performed Irish Work
Whenever melodic inspiration failed the Irish composer Michael William Balfe (1808-1870), he would put slips of paper labeled with note names into a bag and draw them out one by one, a form of melodic lottery.
But he certainly had no need of the bag when writing "The Bohemian Girl," which was given a 150th-anniversary concert performance at the Kaye Playhouse at Hunter College on Friday night.
The opera overflows with melodic invention, including lovely Irish-style ballads, most notably, "I Dreamt I Dwelt in Marble Halls." In fact, partly because of its melodies, its exuberance and its skillful use of genre cliches of opera, circa 1843, it was one of the most popular works of the 19th century.


Bengals Whistle in the Dark
Two penalties, two potential scoring opportunities lost.
No wonder Boomer Esiason is happy in New York.
Without those two key penalties this afternoon, the Cincinnati Bengals might have found a way to win.
Both the Jets and the Bengals were penalized for 50 yards, but Cincinnati's six penalties were costlier.
Two of them stood out dramatically in the fourth quarter of the Bengals' 17-12 loss to the Jets, and helped them remain the only team without a victory this season in the National Football League.


New Attendants' Training Focuses Solely on Safety
To replace its striking flight attendants, American Airlines has been training other employees and new recruits in a 10-day safety course.
American typically trains attendants for more than six weeks in a course that covers all areas of their jobs, like food service and safety procedures for five different jets.


Houdini, Right? No, Just Turgeon in Overtime
To capture their third consecutive victory, all on the road, the Islanders turned today to Pierre Turgeon, who opened his bag of tricks and pulled out a shot that was part Wayne Gretzky, part Mario Lemieux and part William Tell.
Following the play into the right corner after the face-off that began overtime at the Spectrum, Turgeon fished a loose puck out of a scrum, turned, surveyed the scene and saw Dominic Roussel, the Philadelphia goalie, covering the near goal post.
Roussel had it blocked almost totally.
The only opening was a little spot behind his slightly bent left knee.


Bands Across the Ocean: NPR Is Making Its Way to Europe
Call it International Public Radio.
"All Things Considered," "Morning Edition" and other programs of National Public Radio are now being offered to much of Europe, at a cost to NPR of roughly $25,000 a month.
The programming is carried on the Astra 1B satellite, whose signal is picked up by small dishes -- less than a foot in diameter -- that are mounted outside windows of homes, hotels and apartment buildings.
Only people with a satellite dish can receive the NPR programming.


Curbs on Political Donations To Cover Bond Consultants
The web of restrictions on political contributions and the municipal bond underwriting business seems to be growing.
As the staff and board of the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board continue to work on the final language of its new rule, an official involved in the process said the wording would make clear that the restrictions covered consultants hired by underwriting firms as well as the firms themselves.
The rulemaking board is the self-regulatory agency for municipal bond dealers.


Meeting Takes Up Adoption Issues
In a room filled with people who wanted to adopt a child, a woman sat and explained today why she had chosen to give her baby away.
Six years ago, Lisa Kearney told the group, she wrote her reasons down on a slip of paper, to remind herself during moments of weakness why she could not keep her son.
"I wasn't ready," she said.
Her child's adoptive parents could offer him many opportunities.
"As a 21-year-old girl, I had no job; I lived at home. That wasn't a possibility."


Corrections
The Market Place column in Business Day last Monday, about the rising stock price of La Quinta Inns, misidentified the owner of Hampton Inns.
It is the Promus Companies, not the Marriott Corporation.


Madeleine Goldman and Paul Berg
Madeleine Elise Goldman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard R. Goldman of Oceanside, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Paul Samuel Berg, a son of Philip and Rita Berg of Merrick, L.I.
Rabbi Sholom Stern performed the ceremony at Temple Beth El in Cedarhurst, L.I.
The bride, 30, is the nutritionist for the Samuels Planetree Model Hospital Unit, an experimental program that tries to make conditions more pleasant for patients at the Beth Israel Medical Center in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in nutrition from New York University.


When a $75 Holdup Equals a Cabby's Life
Rene Rodriguez, who is 7 years old and proud of learning to rhyme words, insists that he does not keep going to the window to look for a father who never comes.
He swears he does not keep wondering aloud what the man he was named for is doing.
"Yes, you do," interjected his older sister, Anna Marie, 10.
"You do. I hear you sometimes."


Corrections
An article in The Home Section on Oct. 28 about gasoline defined octane incorrectly.
Octane measures the ability to resist detonation; high-octane gas is harder to ignite than low-octane gas.
Octane does not measure volatility, which is the tendency of a liquid to turn into a gas or a vapor.


Betsy Garrison, Avery L. Krut
Betsy Garrison, a vice president for Lowe Direct, a New York-based advertising agency, and Avery L. Krut, a partner in Catalyst, a company that designs and manages economic redevelopment projects, were married yesterday.
Both work in Los Angeles.
Rabbi Harlan J. Wechsler performed the ceremony at the Manhattan Penthouse in New York.
Mrs.
Krut, 43, the daughter of Charles C. Garrison of Falls Church, Va., and the late Janice White Garrison, graduated from Roanoke College.
Her father is a senior accountant for the Student Loan Marketing Association, the Federal loan program known as Sallie Mae, in Washington.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-7 EUROPE WEIGHS SHORT WORK WEEK
France has become enthusiastic about a proposal to cut back the work week to four days, thus spreading the work around, and other European countries with high unemployment are also interested.
A1


Rolling Stone Parent Takes A New Name
Straight Arrow Publishers Inc., better known as Jann Wenner's magazines, is changing its name.
As of today, it is Wenner Media.
"Straight Arrow seems sort of out of date, sort of archaic," Mr.
Wenner said in a telephone interview.
"It was one of those odd things that came along when I was 21 years old -- we even had a little Boy Scout logo -- but the name has lost its meaning."


Whitman Criticizes Comments by Rollins
Gov.-elect Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey today depicted her campaign strategist, Edward J. Rollins, as "so insecure" that he was driven into a fierce competition with a rival strategist that led him to make false accusations that her campaignhad tried to suppress black votes.
"I felt sorry for anyone who is so insecure -- that's where it comes from," Mrs.
Whitman told reporters at the opening conference here of the Republican Governors Association.
"The need to say that is just too bad."


North Carolina Wins Its 8th Title in a Row
The women's soccer team at the University of North Carolina captured its eighth consecutive National Collegiate Athletic Association title yesterday with a 6-0 triumph over George Mason at Chapel Hill, N.C.
The game was played before a crowd of 5,721, the largest in the history of women's collegiate soccer.


Browns Booed, Bruised and Beaten
Oilers 27, Browns 20
An angry Cleveland crowd turned on the home team yesterday, and Houston's Gary Brown turned the run-and-shoot into the run-and-run.
Brown ran for a bruising 194 yards and a touchdown -- a second straight 100-yards-plus effort in place of the injured Lorenzo White -- to lead the Oilers past the stumbling Browns, 27-20.


American Rejects Request for Mediation
American Airlines rebuffed a request by its striking flight attendants' union yesterday for emergency mediation to help settle their standoff that began on Thursday.
The decision means that travel through the busy Thanksgiving holiday period is likely to remain difficult for tens of thousands of passengers.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania stand to reap tens of millions of dollars from a revamping of the Government survey from which unemployment rates are calculated.  [ Page A1. ]  While the rest of the New York regional economy remains bogged down, Fairfield County, Conn., appears to be coming to life again.  [ B1. ]
Consumer spending has become the main source of economic strength.
Some economists say pent-up demand is so large that satisfying it could bolster the economy into the mid-1990's.  [ D1. ]


Bank's Offer Withdrawn
Faced with tough opposition from the New York State Superintendent of Banking, the Republic New York Corporation said late Friday that it was withdrawing its $250 million offer to acquire Green Point Savings Bank.
The Banking Superintendent, Derrick D. Cephas, said on Thursday that the Republic bid was "illegal and improper and should be withdrawn immediately." Before the Republic offer, Green Point had announced plans to convert from a mutual savings bank to a publicly owned company through a stock offering.


Canadian Renews Call To Modify Trade Pact
Prime Minister Jean Chretien of Canada today renewed his call for modifications to the North American Free Trade Agreement, a day after the Senate approved the pact.
But he muted his previous threats to hold up Canadian implementation of the accord.
Canada's Parliament has approved the agreement but has not taken the final step of proclaiming the legislation.
"We're negotiating at this moment, and at the end of the day I will know if we've made enough progress for us to proclaim -- I don't want to speculate on that today," Mr.
Chretien said on the ABC news program "This Week" in Seattle today.


Home Heating
The National Weather Service will issue its 90-day forecast next Monday giving a first indication of how high home heating bills will be this winter.
The price of natural gas, which all states regulate at the distribution level, is steadier than that of heating oil.
Last spring's cold snap prompted a temporary rise in gas prices.
Oil prices soared after a cold winter in 1989-90 and the Persian Gulf war in 1990-91 but two warm winters back to back have brought them back down.
Prices also vary by region because of differences in local business costs, transportation and competition.
Home heating oil now fetches about $1.13 a gallon on Long Island; in the Albany area, it's 92 cents.


Abroad at Home; Where Is Janet Reno?
When Janet Reno became Attorney General, she spoke critically of Congress's recent tendency to impose mandatory minimum sentences for crimes.
Agreeing with most judges and penologists, she said such inflexible rules distorted the criminal justice process and filled prisons with small-time drug offenders.
Now the Senate has passed a crime bill stuffed with new mandatory minimums.
The bill even insists that states impose mandatory sentences if they want to use new regional prisons that the Federal Government will build for them.


Emile Ardolino, Director, Is Dead; Specialist in Dance Films Was 50
Emile Ardolino, an Oscar-winning maker of dance documentaries who went on to become a Hollywood director of films including "Dirty Dancing" and "Sister Act," died on Saturday morning at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 50.
The cause was AIDS, said Cindy Gilmore, a longtime colleague and co-producer at Ardolino Productions.


Patents; From 'Shaq' to Sinatra's spaghetti sauce, trademarks protect the bizarre and the sublime.
FOR some people, the $210 it costs to apply for a trademark is a meager outlay compared with what can be earned from protecting the rights to a name or image.
There might not be a better example than the trademark announced last month for Shaquille O'Neal, the National Basketball Association star of the Orlando Magic, for his nickname, "Shaq." The announcement lists nearly 200 products in three classes of goods.


Trying Again in Ireland
If Israel and the P.L.O. can talk directly, then why can't Britain do the same with Sinn Fein, the political wing of the outlawed Irish Republican Army?
The I.R.A. seemed to give its answer in October when it bombed a fish shop in a Protestant area of Belfast, killing 10 people.
When Protestant gunmen retaliated by killing Catholics, there were a half-dozen more funerals; it was the worst carnage in years in British-ruled Northern Ireland.
On its face, this reciprocal violence appeared to doom a new peace initiative aimed at drawing Sinn Fein and its leader, Gerry Adams, into talks.
But the Belfast bombing deceptively obscured deep divisions and a pervasive battle-weariness even within the I.R.A.
There is sufficient evidence of this to prompt last week's carefully worded appeal to Mr.
Adams by Prime Minister John Major to renounce terror "and join the dialogue on the way ahead."


INSIDE
Europe Airlines Won't Merge
Four European carriers called off their talks, citing irreconcilable differences over which American carrier would be their partner.
Page D1.
Linebacker a Hit on Wall St.
The hottest new stock offering of 1993 is a company run by Lawrence Taylor, the star linebacker for the New York Giants.
Page D1.
Polarized Voting in Italy
Italy's political center was losing ground to forces on the right and left in voting that was seen as a plebiscite on corruption scandals.
Page A3.
A Carrot for North Korea
The United States is revising its strategy on North Korea, planning to offer small concessions in return for inspections of nuclear sites.
Page A5.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Chicago Bulls Lose Again  Mitch Richmond scored 28 points and Walt Williams had 17 in his first game of the season as the host Sacramento Kings beat the Chicago Bulls last night, 103-101.
Wayman Tisdale also scored 17 points to help the Kings snap a four-game losing streak.
Chicago, which lost for the fourth time in five games, was led by B. J. Armstrong with 23 points.
Toni Kukoc had 19 points and Horace Grant had 19 points and a game-high 18 rebounds.
Bulls Coach Phil Jackson was ejected with 11.3 seconds left in the first half after protesting an illegal defense call, the team's second of the quarter.
Richmond's two free throws with 52.4 seconds left gave the Kings a 102-99 lead.
Pete Chilcutt's free throw gave Sacramento a 4-point edge, and Armstrong scored a basket for the final margin. (AP) Pistons 103, 76ers 89: Bill Laimbeer scored 13 of his 25 points in the fourth quarter, and rookie Lindsey Hunter added a career-high 23 to lead Detroit to victory over visiting Philadelphia.
Hunter, replacing the injured Isiah Thomas at point guard, played all 48 minutes.
He played better than his fellow first-round pick, Shawn Bradley, who had just 10 points on 4-of-12 shooting, 6 rebounds and no blocked shots. (AP) N.H.L.
Blues Remain Unbeaten at Home, Barely  Keith Primeau was left alone in front of the net, and scored with 2 minutes 16 seconds left in regulation as the visiting Detroit Red Wings tied the St.
Louis Blues, 2-2, last night.
With the tie, the Blues remained the only team in the National Hockey League with an unbeaten home record, 7-0-3. (AP) Sabres 6, Sharks 5: Dale Hawerchuk had two goals and an assist as host Buffalo held off a late San Jose rally to defeat the Sharks.
It was Buffalo's second straight home victory after a dismal 0-7-1 start. (AP) FIELD HOCKEY  Maryland Wins N.C.A.A.
Championship  Maryland beat North Carolina, 2-1, on penalty strokes yesterday to win the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I field hockey championship in Piscataway, N.J.
The face-off was a rematch of the 1987 finals when Maryland (22-3-0) also beat North Carolina (16-3-3) by 2-1.
Sabrina Salam of the Terrapins and Jennifer Blizzard of the Tar Heels scored one unassisted goal each in the first 15 minutes, and the score remained tied thereafter.
When neither team was able to score in two 15-minute overtime periods, the game went to penalty strokes. (AP)


Corrections
An article on the Law page on Friday about the trial of two brothers for the killing of their parents, and a caption with the article, referred incorrectly to Leslie Abramson, a lawyer.
She is representing Erik Menendez, not his brother, Lyle.
In addition, a second caption with the pictures of the brothers reversed their identifications in some copies; Erik was at the left and Lyle was at the right.


Susan Frumkies, Jeffrey Fuchs
Susan Sara Frumkies, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George Frumkies of Yonkers, and Jeffrey Scott Fuchs, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton I. Fuchs of Long Boat Key, Fla., were married yesterday.
Rabbi Solomon S. Sternstein performed the ceremony at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.
The bride, 30, teaches third grade at Public School 78, in the Bronx.
She graduated from Boston University.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Ted Turner is not afraid to turn his personal vision into a multimillion-dollar project for his company.
THE name on the door of Turner Broadcasting still means what it says: Ted Turner runs the place.
Mr.
Turner's personal passions have dictated many of the directions taken by his company, and that continues to be the case.
Starting next week, Turner Broadcasting System Inc. will begin an ambitious multimedia programming initiative built around the history and culture of American Indians.
The project will last through most of next year.


Touching Nerves in Newsrooms; Resignation Reflects Vulnerability to Claims of Bias in Coverage
The resignation of William Newill was only sketchily mentioned last week in the pages of The Burlington County Times, the suburban daily newspaper where he had been editor for nine years.
Behind the bland announcement was a story that touches nerves in many American newsrooms.
On one level, it is about white editors of small newspapers who run stories critical of local black officials.
On another, it is about the vulnerability of these editors to charges of bias in their coverage because they have no black editors or reporters on their small staffs.
Absences Criticized
It all started in late September when the 40,000-circulation afternoon paper published a front-page article about Assemblywoman Priscilla B. Anderson, a black Republican whose district covers western Burlington County, across the Delaware River from Philadelphia.


Marsha Silver, Jeffrey Heit
Marsha Ann Silver, the daughter of Sanford and Saralyn Silver of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Dr.
Jeffrey Heit, the son of Leon H. Heit of Boynton Beach, Fla., and the late Paula Heit.
Rabbi Baruch Silverstein performed the ceremony at the Park Avenue Synagogue in New York.
The bride, 26, was until recently the senior account executive at S. Bower Inc., an importer and distributor of photographic accessories in New York.
She graduated from Boston University.
The bride's father is a lawyer in private practice in Brooklyn.


PRO FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; Broadway Joe Scolds the Silent Jets Fans
HAND a microphone to Joe Namath and he's never at a loss for words. Or at a Jets' loss.
When the microphone at a Miami football dinner before Super Bowl III was handed to the Jet quarterback, he "guaranteed" the 16-7 upset of the Baltimore Colts.
And when the microphone was handed to the now 50-year-old legend as the Jets led the Cincinnati Bengals, 14-3, at halftime yesterday, he scolded the 64,264 listeners.


Dance in Review
Frank Conversano St. Mark's Church East Village
Frank Conversano's performance on Thursday night at St.
Mark's Church both validated a theory of modern-dance esthetics and proved to be as worthwhile to watch as it was to think about.


115 Die in Plane Crash in Macedonia


Mapplethorpe Estate and Warhol Case
The tangled, bitter court fight over the value of the Andy Warhol estate and the fees that should be paid to the estate's former lawyer has spawned another tangled, bitter fight.
The new fight centers on the value of the photographer Robert Mapplethorpe's estate and the way it was appraised.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Budget Deficit . . .
October
Tuesday  None  Wednesday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Durable-Goods Orders . . .
October  Thursday  None  Friday  None


Review/Theater: Cyrano: The Musical; Cyrano's Flights Have Touched Down On West 52d Street
Credit the many people involved in turning "Cyrano de Bergerac" from a lyrical, swashbuckling French play into a Dutch musical into a $7 million English-language musical with at least one success: its plot is as easy to follow as a synopsis laid out in Cliffs Notes.
Indeed, for all its technologically sophisticated sets and elaborately orchestrated score, "Cyrano: The Musical," which opened last night at the Neil Simon Theater, comes across as a lavishly illustrated study guide, with many helpful, cipherlike characters in sumptuous historical costumes taking pains to explain who they are and what they're doing.
It is not unusual for songs to include phrases like "But let me tell you what happened yesterday" or "Roxane, so you're still here. It must be seven years."


Foote, Cone Chosen For Ore-Ida Account
The H. J. Heinz Company in Pittsburgh said it had selected Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in San Francisco as the first agency to handle its Ore-Ida specialty products division account.
Though billings were not determined, trade publications estimated them at $5 million to $7 million for the first year, with the possibility of substantial growth.


Let's Assume That All Children Can Achieve
To the Editor:
"Dumb About Smarts" by Anna Quindlen (column, Nov. 7) ignores the vast body of research that clearly shows that tracking systems by any of their names -- magnet schools, gifted and talented programs, theme schools -- benefit no one, except perhaps teachers, who have an easier time working with homogeneous groups.
Even those children who happen to be performing at a higher level than their peers at some point are not well served by limiting their discourse to students who are at exactly the same place.


Data Unavailable
The World Economies table does not appear in Business Day today because current data were not available.


Otto Allen Will Jr., 83, Psychoanalyst, Is Dead
Otto Allen Will Jr., a psychoanalyst and the former medical director of the Austen Riggs Center, a psychiatric hospital in Stockbridge, Mass., died on Wednesday at his home in Richmond, Calif.
He was 83.
The cause was heart failure, said his wife, Dr. Beulah Parker.


Market Place; On Wall St., as on Gridiron, 'L.T.' Is a Hit
The hottest new stock offering of 1993 is a company run by a football player.
If the market prices hold, Lawrence Taylor, the star linebacker for the New York Giants, stands to make millions on an investment of a few thousand.
It is hard to tell whether the amazing performance of All-Pro Products Inc. reflects the popularity of Mr.
Taylor or the excesses of a bull market that has gone wild.
Probably it is a little of both.


Board of Ed Goes Too Far With Abuse Edict
To the Editor:
After 32 years in the New York City school system, I thought I had heard everything.
However, the Board of Education's new directive calling all contact with students a form of sexual abuse takes the cake.
On the surface it seems the right thing to do.
Those in the trenches know there is a big difference between proper and improper contact.


Paramount Investors Await Judge's Call on Bidding War
Investors in Paramount Communications Inc. may learn as early as this morning how the Delaware Chancery Court plans to rule in the takeover battle being waged for the company by Viacom Inc. and QVC Network Inc.
Vice Chancellor Jack Jacobs of the Chancery Court, mindful of time pressures, has scheduled a telephone conference call with all parties for 9:30 A.M. today.
He is expected either to hand down a decision or to say when he will rule.


CHRONICLE
"Let my people know" is a personal credo for Rabbi ADIN STEINSALTZ , the revered Israeli scholar who is translating the Babylonian Talmud into English and modern Hebrew and interpreting it.
Today he takes one more step toward the education of Jews around the world: he is presenting the first volume of a Russian translation of the Talmud to YULI VORONTSOV , the Russian Ambassador to the United Nations.
The Talmud, the first one in any language to be permitted in Russia since the 1917 Revolution, is being published there under the sponsorship of the Russian Academy of Sciences.
Rabbi Steinsaltz said that presentation of the volume, in ceremonies at the United Nations, symbolized "the death and, I hope, rebirth of another era.


House Democrats Scuttle Revolt On Campaign Finance Measure
Weary House Democrats late tonight narrowly quelled an internal revolt against their leadership's plan to overhaul campaign spending laws, but the effort left them so spent that they quit for the night, leaving passage of the measure something less than assured.
That left the principal vote on approving the package for Monday, with virtually all the chamber's Republicans and a fair number of Democrats still opposed to many of the measure's most important provisions.


Review/Music; A 'Turandot' in Norfolk Crowns a Renovation
Harsh climates produce good civilizations, or so one historical theory goes.
A case in point might be the Virginia Opera, which has prospered in an inadequate habitat since 1975.
The company put on its first production at the newly luxurious Harrison Opera House on Friday night; and once the well-earned exhilaration over fresh paint and added elbow room has abated, it will be interesting to see how well and wisely it will be used.
The Virginia Opera has not moved; it has repaired, augmented and rearranged what it had.
Norfolk's Center Theater, a public-works project for U.S.O. shows during World War II, was two auditoriums backed against each other: wrestling on one side, Dorothy Lamour and Bob Hope on the other.
Minimal plumbing facilities for patrons and artists tested the will power of all concerned.


In Fairfield County, Small Companies Renew Job Base
When Robert Thomson set up a computer software company a dozen years ago, he placed it here, near what he hoped would be his prime market: the Fortune 500 companies that flocked to this leafy suburb after leaving gritty New York.
For much of that time Mr.
Thomson's IMRS Inc. thrived along with those mammoth companies.
These days, though, as companies like General Electric, Union Carbide, and Champion International have undergone painful layoffs, IMRS continues to expand and prosper.


Defense Department Fuels the Giants' Machine
How good was the Giants' defense in today's 7-3 victory over the Eagles?
"A great defensive effort," said Coach Dan Reeves of the Giants.


Corrections
An article in some editions yesterday about the Senate's approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement misstated the position of Senator Carol Moseley-Braun, Democrat of Illinois.
She voted in favor of the measure.


Four-Day Prescription: Europe's Workweek Debate -- A special report.; Europeans Ponder Working Less So More of Them Can Have Jobs
France, it is sometimes said, has little inclination for reform and a penchant for revolution.
True to its reputation, the country has suddenly become obsessed by a revolutionary idea: a wholesale switch to a four-day workweek that would, its proponents insist, slash unemployment, improve family life and bring new hope to a disenchanted society.
The proposal's chief advocate, Pierre Larrouturou, 29, a consultant for the accounting firm Arthur Andersen, has achieved such fame in recent weeks that he is now known simply as "le gourou." Swept from Elysee Palace to Government offices to television talk shows, Mr.
Larrouturou has tapped what appears to be a thirst for a radical solution at a time of political torpor and economic recession in Europe.


PC Magazine Is Mirroring an Industry's Success
No one could accuse PC Magazine of talking down to its readers.
Twice a month, the magazine serves up an editorial diet rich in computer jargon and technical acronyms.
Readers squeamish about descriptive passages loaded with "GUI accelerators" and "Type 3 bitmaps" are well advised to go elsewhere.
Its stock-in-trade is comparative product testing, sometimes more than 100 offerings in an issue, each graded, measured and charted, page after page.
Even its editors call it a "nerd's magazine."


Give John Demjanjuk a New Trial
Only five months ago John Demjanjuk, branded as the barbaric "Ivan the Terrible" of Holocaust death camps, was under death sentence in Israel.
Now the 74-year-old retired auto worker is back in Ohio, with a chance to regain his American citizenship and perhaps live out his life in the United States.
But the Justice Department still claims that even if he was not Ivan, Mr.
Demjanjuk was a prison guard at other death camps and doesn't deserve U.S. citizenship or residence.
This is an intolerable state of affairs.
Sixteen years after the Justice Department first moved against John Demjanjuk, there is no reliable judgment on the Government's remaining claims that he hid a Nazi past to obtain refuge in America 40 years ago.
Attorney General Janet Reno needs to seek a prompt trial using all the available evidence.


Strikers at American Airlines Say the Objective Is Respect
It is not so much the pay or the benefits or the sometimes grinding, four- and five-city, one-day trips or the interminable, unpaid delays between some flights.
It is the little things that the striking flight attendants at American Airlines say grate on them and amount to a lack of respect.
"They treat us like we're disposable, a number," said Helen Neuhoff, a 33-year-old international flight attendant who lives here with her husband and two children and had earned $23,000 this year until the start of the strike.


One Minute Of Offense Gets Giants Tie for First
The Giants had practiced it during the week, lining up running back David Meggett as a wide receiver and sending him deep.
Why not try it?
Nothing else had been working in the passing game, so why not let the little guy fly down the field and see what happens?
When Meggett lined up wide right, it meant that Eagles safety Wes Hopkins, more a hitter than a cover guy, was forced to cover the speedy running back one-on-one.
Meggett started downfield, gave Hopkins a big-time head fake, and the safety bit.
Meggett turned, streaked past Hopkins, and was wide open for a 50-yard catch to the Eagle 30.


CHRONICLE
"How can you tell the difference between the male head and the female?" LOUISE BOURGEOIS , the sculptor who represented the United States at the Venice Biennale, asked about her own work the other day.
"That's easy: look at the Adam's apple."
Ms.
Bourgeois was taking delight in describing an edition of six male and six female heads she has created in bronze, to be sold in a project called Art Object to benefit the American Foundation for AIDS Research.
Designs by 17 artists will be sold at Barneys stores in Manhattan and Chicago starting tomorrow and will be on display tonight at the foundation's "Disco Ball." The party starts with cocktails at Barneys on Madison Avenue and proceeds to Maxim's across the street.
The artists include Jenny Holzer (who designed stockings), Robert Rauschenberg (a men's tie) Kenny Scharf (table linens), Cindy Sherman (a watch) and William Wegman (socks).


A Dangerous Deficit Bill
The House votes today on a superficially seductive bill that would knock about $100 billion off the deficit without raising taxes.
No wonder its sponsors -- Timothy Penny, Democrat of Minnesota, and John Kasich, Republican of Ohio -- are close to attracting enough votes to pass their bill.
But Congress would do grave damage if it passed the Penny-Kasich bill.
Most of the cuts it proposes are needed to meet existing budget targets as well as to pay for health care reform and the Administration's strategy of investing in education, training, research and infrastructure.
So if the bill passes, Congress will be forced to hit the higher deficit targets by making additional cuts elsewhere, shredding, for example, an already-tattered safety net for low-income families.


Beth R. Goldberg, Joshua L. Nash
Beth R. Goldberg, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur A. Goldberg of New York, was married there yesterday to Joshua L. Nash, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Nash of New York.
Rabbi Marc D. Angel performed the ceremony at the Spanish and Portuguese Synagogue.
Mrs.
Nash, 26, is an M.B.A. candidate at Columbia University.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a partner at Neuberger &amp; Berman, a financial management concern in New York.
Her mother, Carol Goldberg, is an art adviser in New York.


Treasury Plans to Auction Bills and Notes This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financing is confined to bills and notes this week, beginning with the regular weekly auction today of new three- and six-month bills.
Also to be auctioned today is a new two-year note, followed tomorrow by the auction of a new five-year note.
According to traders, at the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.10 percent and the rate on the six-month issue was 3.26 percent.
The two-year note was being offered on a when-issued basis at a price to yield 4.24 percent, and the five-year note at a price to yield 5.17 percent.


Attacking Crimes Against Cabs
For four years, the police, cab-industry representatives and regulatory officials have been meeting at police headquarters almost monthly to coordinate their response to the robberies and killings of drivers of cabs, particularly liveries.
Fidel F. Del Valle, chairman of the Taxi and Limousine Commission and a participant, said that an early theory was that a small number of people, perhaps a dozen, were committing the bulk of robberies, which this year totaled 2,105 through Aug. 31, and for all of last year were 3,675.
During the last five years, 186 cab drivers have been killed, most of them during robberies.


U.S. Revising North Korea Strategy
Even as President Clinton and leaders from across Asia met here to declare the arrival of a new "Pacific community" based on economic rather than security links, Administration officials working the back rooms of Asia's first summit meeting were quietly revising their strategy for forcing North Korea to give up its nuclear weapons program.
This week in Washington, Mr.
Clinton and South Korea's President, Kim Young Sam, are expected to agree on a long-brewing change of course in its dealings with the bankrupt but volatile North Korean Government.
Under a so-called "package deal," the United States will offer a series of small concessions and larger promises of future aid to North Korea -- and steps toward diplomatic recognition -- in return for immediate, limited inspections of its nuclear sites.


Ukraine's Hedging on A-Arms Angers Russia
Russia has reacted angrily to Ukraine's partial and highly conditional ratification of a major nuclear-arms treaty, saying Ukraine's decision to retain 58 percent of its 1,650 warheads could destabilize "the entire system of international relations, especially in Europe."
The decision, made by Ukraine's Parliament on Thursday, was also a severe embarrassment to the Clinton Administration, which has thus far failed to persuade the Ukrainians to abide by their President's commitment to become a non-nuclear state.


U.S. Unions Back Shorter Week, But Employers Seem Reluctant
Many American labor unions are also promoting reduced workweeks, usually of 30 or 35 hours, as a way to spread work to people who would otherwise be laid off.
A Democrat in Congress, Representative Lucien E. Blackwell of Philadelphia, introduced a bill last month in the House calling for a Government-mandated 30-hour week, but his proposal so far has gathered little steam.


It's Safety First, Then Chaos at End For the Jets
Perhaps it is an indication that the Jets have truly turned the corner when they can play a purely pedestrian game against an inferior opponent, withstand an intrusion by game officials on the last play of the game and emerge with a victory.
Those were the circumstances this afternoon at Giants Stadium, a day on which the members of the Jets' victorious Super Bowl III team were honored at halftime and quarterback Joe Namath exhorted the crowd to support the 1993 Jets as if they were Super Bowl champions.


Giuliani Offers to Back Mayor's 'Tough' Choices
After a week of jousting between Mayor David N. Dinkins and his successor, Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Mayor-elect yesterday offered a bit of an olive branch to Mr.
Dinkins, saying that he was willing to support the Mayor "in any tough decisions" so long as "problems not be made worse."
Perhaps in that spirit, an aide to the Mayor-elect said earlier in the day that Mr.
Giuliani had agreed to support the continuing work of the Mollen Commission, which was formed by Mr.
Dinkins in 1991 to investigate police corruption.


Graf at Top of Her Game, If Not in Tiptop Condition
With a pain in her back and a single objective in her oh-so-stubborn mind, Steffi Graf closed the door on 1993 yesterday with a decisive four-set victory over Spain's Arantxa Sanchez Vicario in the final of the Virginia Slims Championships.
"It's been a great, great year, and that's the way you want to end it," said Graf, who collected three of 1993's four Grand Slams, set a tour record for single-season earnings with more than $2.8 million in prize money, and finished the year atop the rankings ladder for the first time since 1990.
It was her first victory at Madison Square Garden since 1989 and her third championships title over all.


For Bradys, A Gamble On Gun Bill Pays Off
On the morning after, James Brady slept in.
But his wife, Sarah, was up and reveling in the late-night Saturday turnaround victory in the Senate for the gun-control measure that she and her husband had labored to pass for more than five grueling years.
"It was like a Dewey-Truman story," Mrs.
Brady said in a telephone interview this morning.


Dance in Review
Forces of Nature Davis Hall City College
Abdel Salaam continued his longtime exploration of new forms and themes in a program by his Forces of Nature dance company on Friday night at Davis Hall at City College.
It wasn't that the territory was so unfamiliar in Mr.
Salaam's "Passion Fruit," a premiere set to music by Robert Riche, Ennio Morricone and Giorgio Moroder.
The subjects of love and passion are probably as old as dance itself.
But quietly inventive movement and strong performances made this a fresh, clear, sultry look at romance.


Books of The Times; What Made Allard Lowenstein Run: A Psychological Portrait
Never Stop Running  Allard Lowenstein and the Struggle to Save American Liberalism  By William H. Chafe  Illustrated. 556 pages.
Basic Books/HarperCollins. $28.
Allard K. Lowenstein (1929-1981) may be remembered now as a man who never stopped running for Congressional seats in and around New York City, and never stopped losing.
But in William H. Chafe's fascinating new political and psychological biography, "Never Stop Running: Allard Lowenstein and the Struggle to Save American Liberalism," Lowenstein comes to life again as a Pied Piper for the young and idealistic and as a man who passionately believed in the possibility of reforming the system without tearing it apart.


In New York City, French TV Has Its Day
The French may be worried about the impact of American television shows and movies on their culture, but the reverse is not the case.
Today, the New York City Board of Education's television station, WNYE, is proudly giving itself over to a day of programming from a French pay-television company, Canal Plus.
From 7 this morning to 1 A.M. tomorrow, WNYE, Channel 25, will broadcast Gallic fare like "La Grand Famille," a consumer-oriented talk show; "Orson et Olivia," an animated series, and "Le Journal du Cinema," a news program devoted to film.
The shows will be in French with English subtitles.


Movin' to the Beat to Raise Money for AIDS Research and Care


Bridge
Youth dominated the two major events that ended here Saturday night at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals.
The Life Master Open Pairs was won by Brad Moss and Ravindra Murthy, two junior players under 25 from Berkeley, Calif.
They scored 65 percent in the final session to clinch the title.
A year ago they just failed to win another major title, the Blue Ribbon Pairs.
The standings were: 1st, Moss and Murthy, 1696.76 match points; 2d, Edward Nagy of Walnut Creek, Calif., and Jeffrey Pollisner of Lafayette, Calif., 1633.16; 3d, Sam Lev of Forest Hills and Clifford Russell of Miami, 1632.78; 4th, Pratap Rajadhyaksha of Grand Ledge, Mich., and Geoff Hampson of Toronto, 1613.48.


Clinton Presses for an End to Violence
President Clinton made the trip today from a lofty conference on international trade to a school playground in East Los Angeles to tell a predominantly Hispanic audience to concentrate on what they could do for themselves to fight crime.
Buoyed by the Senate's sudden passage of the Brady bill on Saturday night, Mr.
Clinton returned to a theme he sounded passionately on Nov.13 to a group of black ministers in a church in Memphis.
Invoking the memory of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., Mr.
Clinton pleaded for black people to take more responsibility for ending urban violence.
Today, using virtually the same words, Mr.
Clinton raised the image of Cesar Chavez, the late union leader, to renew his call to end the killing.


Provide Work Again In New York City Parks
To the Editor:
New York City's parks offer a challenge for Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani and his new commissioner of parks: Put maintenance first.
Hire the unemployed.
Make parks labor-intensive.
Provide work for all.


Review/Theater: The Black Rider; When Tragedy Becomes the Food of Satire
The vaudevillian ghouls who strut and skulk through "The Black Rider" are literally born in a trunk.
Or is it an enormous coffin?
As though summoned by the Ghost of Show Business Past, they emerge one by one out of a 10-foot-tall black box, jerking and writhing across the stage like ventriloquist's dummies to form a hideously jovial chorus line.
Leading the revels is Pegleg (Dominique Horwitz), a white-faced Kabuki devil, oozing an icily hospitable cheer.
As magician, ringmaster and host, Pegleg suggests a fiendish descendant of Joel Grey in "Cabaret" as he sings the show's title song in a high mocking voice.
"We'll have a gay old time," he carols gleefully.
"Lay down in the web of the black spider/I'll drink your blood like wine."


Corrections
A front-page picture caption in some editions yesterday about the meeting of Pacific Rim leaders misidentified the man in the right foreground.
He was Prime Minister James Bolger of New Zealand, not Prime Minister Jean Chretien of Canada.


Essay; The Three Clintons
Last week, we saw three Bill Clintons in action: the thin-skinned politician, the maturing President and the simplistic pitchman.
It began with an outburst of self-pity.
At the end of an interview with William Greider and Jann Wenner of Rolling Stone magazine, a Clinton nettled by questions about his ideological firmness blew up:


Native Americans Plant Tree of Peace in Central Park


Italians, in City Elections, Abandon Tainted Centrists
In mayoral elections today that became a plebiscite on 21 months of scandal, the traditional Christian Democratic center-weight of Italian politics seemed to collapse as voters sought new political homes among ex-Communists, neo-Fascists and the insurgent Northern League.
The sharply polarized results emerged from surveys at polling sites in six cities.
The voting, in 428 municipalities, seemed to indicate an extensive re-drawing of the political map, with the Democratic Party of the Left, formerly the Communist Party, scoring heavily against the right.


Lynn Steppacher, William Martin
Lynn Cecile Steppacher, a vice president at Warburg, Pincus Counsellors Inc., an investment management company, and William Towne Martin, a senior vice president for the eastern region of Mastercard International, were married yesterday.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Leslie C. Hughs performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church in Manhassett, L.I.
The bride, 40, is the daughter of Walter M. Steppacher of Sarasota, Fla., and Margery Steppacher of Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
She graduated from Smith College and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
The bride's father retired from the Dutchess Bank and Trust Company in Poughkeepsie, where he was an assistant vice president.


J. Walter Thompson Fills Marketing Post
William C. Thompson Jr., the vice chairman of operations at the J. Walter Thompson Company in New York, was promoted to the new position of chief marketing officer.


How Jockeying Brought Brady Bill Back to Life
Pronounced dead on Friday night, the Brady gun control bill was brought back to life on Saturday.
The political CPR that led to passage of the measure in the Senate was accomplished by George J. Mitchell's stubbornness and Bob Dole's flexibility, personality traits that have not made either of them famous.


Anne E. Young, M. L. Greenberg
Anne Elizabeth Young, a daughter of Thomas and Patricia Young of Westport, Conn., and Michael Lawrence Greenberg, a son of Hank and Nikki Greenberg of Teaneck, N.J., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
William B. Bryant, a Congregational minister, and Rabbi Charles D. Lippman officiated at the Inn at Longshore in Westport.
Ms.
Young, 29, is an editor at Matthew Bender &amp; Company, a legal-publishing company in New York.
She graduated from Connecticut College and received a law degree from Brooklyn Law School.


Rose Bowl Waiting for Japan Game
Amid all the maneuverings over possible bowl matchups, one thing is certain: None of it will affect the Rose Bowl, the only major bowl outside the bowl coalition.
The Jan. 1 matchup in Pasadena, Calif., will feature U.C.L.A., which barely held off Southern Cal on Saturday, against either Wisconsin or Ohio State.
The Big Ten representative won't be determined until Dec. 4, when Wisconsin, 5-1-1 in the conference and 8-1-1 over all, plays pesky Michigan State (4-2, 6-3) in Tokyo.
If the Badgers win, they will tie Ohio State (9-1-1, 6-1-1) for the best conference record and will go to Pasadena, according to the last-team-to-go rule.
Wisconsin last played in the Rose Bowl in 1963, Ohio State in 1985.


Dance in Review
Neo Labos Dancetheater  Ohio Theater SoHo
The Neo Labos Dancetheater united choreography with texts, visual spectacles and commissioned scores on Wednesday night at the Ohio Theater in SoHo.
Michele Elliman and John O'Malley, the company's directors, mixed media with skill in their collaboratively choreographed offerings, and the performers' sharp-edged dancing made every sequence vivid.
Yet only one work really mattered much.


End to Strike Is Only a Lull in Industrywide Upheaval, Airline Experts Say
The walkout by flight attendants at American Airlines has ended for now, but industry experts say that further labor turmoil in the airline industry is likely in the coming year and many people could find their travel plans disrupted.
Big airlines like American are reacting to new competition from upstart, no-frills carriers by asking their unions to help drive down costs.
And the unions, which have fought such pressure since the industry was deregulated in 1978, are not cooperating.


Reid Won't Take a Back Seat to Anyone
A recent scrimmage had just ended at St.
Raymond High School in the Castle Hill section of the Bronx when Gary DeCesare, head coach of the basketball team, walked over to Kareem Reid and the rest of the losing squad and said simply, "Pull out the chairs."
Reid, considered one of the top point guards in the nation, dragged his feet across the gymnasium floor and began pulling long racks of folding chairs from beneath the stage to help prepare for a parents-teachers meeting later that evening.


Controlling School Violence
Last week a student at Springfield Gardens High School in Queens, who had reportedly been harassed repeatedly by other students, sprayed 18 people in a hallway with a corrosive acid.
The week before that, a security officer at Louis D. Brandeis High School in Manhattan was beaten by a gang of students.
These are just two recent examples of the escalating violence that has already marred the school year.
In an effort to regain control of the schools, Chancellor Ramon Cortines has proposed to appoint a new administrator to coordinate and supervise security and violence-prevention programs.


Fuel-Short Ukraine Is Caught in Wintry Vise
This is the coldest autumn here in 50 years, and Ukrainians are beginning to feel it indoors as well as out.
Throughout the country, apartments and offices are getting colder, hot water is running out and brownouts are more common.
Temperatures have already dipped to 8 degrees below zero Fahrenheit, and even the Parliament building is freezing inside.
At many factories, like Gostomel Glass Works outside Kiev, workers on the assembly lines dress in thick parkas, fur hats and gloves.


Clinton Claims Another Black Casualty
To the Editor:
In dismay and disappointment I have watched the Clinton Administration orchestrate a campaign of leaks designed to discredit and force the resignation of Deputy Secretary of State Clifton Wharton Jr.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Citizen and other watch marketers are set for a big holiday push.
FOR most people, Christmas is 32 days away.
Some, however, reckon that it is 768 hours . . . 46,080 minutes . . . 2,764,800 seconds.
For those who measure time that way, the nation's watch marketers, these are the most frenetic weeks of the year.
Around 40 percent of all watches sold in this country are bought during the Christmas shopping season, more than twice as many as are purchased during the second-busiest period, the months of May and June (Mother's Day, Father's Day and graduations).


Smokers Can't All Quit the Same Way
To the Editor:
A Nov. 14 article reports on a study that concludes the smoking habit can be overcome in stages.
This presents false hope to many smokers.


High Rate of South American Abortion Ills Seen
In South America, where abortion is illegal, hospitalizations for complications from clandestine abortions may be seven times as high as officially reported, a new study indicates.
In a study of hospital records in Bolivia, Colombia, Peru and Venezuela, only 9 percent of 8,589 women hospitalized for complications surrounding terminated pregnancies admitted to having had induced abortions.
All the rest said they had miscarried.


Congressional Roundup: House Fends Off Effort To Trim Budget Further; Panel Sues to Get Packwood's Diaries
The Senate ethics committee filed suit today to force Senator Bob Packwood to turn over four years worth of his diaries.
The lawsuit was approved by the Senate three weeks ago by a vote of 94 to 6 after a wrenching debate, and the legal case was supposed to have been filed last Friday.
But it was delayed as the Oregon Republican considered whether he should resign from the Senate to put an end to the ethics inquiry into sexual harassment accusations.


Review/Theater; The Backstage View of TV's Golden Age
So it wasn't Paris in the 20's.
But midtown Manhattan in the 50's produced its own cockamamie earthquake in American letters.
Creating sketches for "Your Show of Shows" and then "Caesar's Hour," a band of young, mostly Jewish writers forged a comic style that dominated the new medium of television, as well as Broadway and the movies, for decades.
If you want to find the ur-texts of "The Producers" and "Blazing Saddles," of "Sleeper" and "Annie Hall," of "All in the Family" and "M*A*S*H" and "Saturday Night Live," check out the old kinescopes of Sid Caesar cavorting with Imogene Coca, Carl Reiner and Howard Morris on those Saturday nights 40 years ago.
Of all the illustrious "Show of Shows" alumni, none has had a longer run at the top of American comedy than Neil Simon.
"Laughter on the 23d Floor," Mr.
Simon's new play at the Richard Rodgers Theater, is his memoir of what went on in the writers' room back when Caesar was king. (Or prince, since Max Prince is the name of Mr. Simon's Caesar stand-in.) Given so funny a playwright and subject, not to mention the lofty talents of the evening's star, Nathan Lane, and director, Jerry Zaks, a theatergoer cannot be blamed for arriving at "Laughter on the 23d Floor" with high expectations.
Lower them, and you may have a better time.


Report Finds Federal Nutrition Data to Be Unreliable
The Federal Government's information on nutrients in food, used around the world to determine public nutrition policy, plan feeding programs, do medical research and answer questions like how much vitamin A is in a sweet potato or how much fat is in a sirloin steak, is flawed and unreliable, according to a Federal report issued today.
For average people on diets who are counting calories or grams of fat, or for people on low-sodium diets, the inaccuracies reported by the General Accounting Office, the investigative arm of Congress, could present a problem.


Congressional Roundup: House Fends Off Effort To Trim Budget Further; Committee Proposes Procedural Changes
On the last full day of the Congressional session, a select House committee today proposed a broad set of procedural changes, from applying all civil rights and labor laws to Congress to shifting the budget process from an annual to a two-year cycle.
But at the same time House leaders abandoned plans for a vote tonight on legislation that would require many more people to register as lobbyists and prohibit them from giving gifts, including meals and theater tickets.


Books of The Times; Fictionalizing the Sage of Monticello
Jefferson  A Novel  By Max Byrd  424 pages. Bantam Books. $22.95.
Thomas Jefferson, the author of the Declaration of Independence and the third President of the United States, presents the historical novelist with several problems.
To begin with, the historical record concerning Jefferson is enormous, as the bulk of Jefferson's own eloquent writings and Dumas Malone's minutely detailed six-volume biography attests.
Jefferson's life does not provide a lot of room for novelistic improvisation.
Furthermore, the highly rational, practical-minded Jefferson does not immediately present the novelist with a particularly colorful or emotionally sympathetic canvas.
While no one would contest Jefferson's role as a pivotal figure in the history of American democracy, he is not a historical personage with the personal bravura of an Aaron Burr or a Huey Long.
This, after all, was a man who counted every penny he spent and filled volumes of journals with notes on the weather.
His hagiographers have depicted him as a man of perfect marble, swearing, in one historian's words, "eternal hostility to every form of tyranny over the mind of man." His detractors have portrayed him as a hypocrite: an abolitionist who owned slaves, an egalitarian who believed in racism, a libertarian who often failed to defend civil liberties.
Max Byrd, a scholar specializing in 18th-century literature and the author of five suspense novels, has focused on another contradiction in Jefferson's life -- his inability to reconcile the promptings of his head and his heart -- and has used this contradiction as a springboard for a wonderfully vivid novel that brings the sage of Monticello (or a version of him, anyway) to life.
Mr.
Byrd is not interested here in using Jefferson as a vehicle for reinterpreting a pivotal era in America history; he is interested in Jefferson as a personality, as a highly gifted and conflicted individual who happened to play a formative role in the founding of this country.
His Jefferson is an elusive, mercurial fellow: a romantic who conceals his emotional vulnerabilities behind a mask of cordiality; a lonely widower, who is ill at ease in the public world of banquets and speeches; a doting father who refuses to accord his daughters the freedom he promotes for the masses, and a chilly moralist and master of self-control who finds himself unexpectedly falling in love.
Borrowing a device from Gore Vidal's "Burr," Mr.
Byrd allows the reader to see his protagonist through the eyes of a young man who works in Jefferson's office.
In this case, the young man is based on a real person named William Short, one of Jefferson's proteges, who served as his secretary during his years as American envoy to France.
A callow, impulsive young man, Mr.
Byrd's Short is almost hopelessly in awe of Jefferson; he hopes to play Boswell to Jefferson's Johnson.
"He would sift, examine, develop," Mr.
Byrd writes of Short.
"Penetrate Jefferson's defenses, disclose the springs of his character: explain once and for all why he guarded his feelings so closely; why his feelings were all the stronger for being walled in and guarded."
Although the fictional Short's memoirs cut back and forth in time to sketch in Jefferson's youth and the years of the American Revolution, they concentrate on Jefferson's tenure in France (1784-89), a period that recently drew considerable attention in a biography by Willard Sterne Randall, who argued that the sophistications of Paris effectively helped to transform Jefferson's world view.
This is also the period when Jefferson is believed, by some writers, to have seduced a mulatto housemaid named Sally Hemmings.
Skating nimbly around the Hemmings controversy, Mr.
Byrd's Short instead focuses his attention on Jefferson's romantic attachment to Maria Cosway, a painter married to a successful British artist.
It appears to have been love at first sight.
We see Jefferson behaving like a besotted schoolboy in front of the lovely Maria: he even breaks his wrist, attempting to impress her by leaping over a fence.
The affair quickly blossoms, and then just as rapidly dissolves.
Why has their love failed to take root?
Short speculates that "Maria was far too flirtatious and independent" and Jefferson "liked women who were submissive, feminine, yielding." Also, Short thinks, Jefferson's daughter Patsy hated Maria, and "Jefferson's ties to Patsy were the unshakable Virginia ones of blood."
Here and there in this volume, Short engages in Freudian speculation about Jefferson's life.
He suggests that Jefferson disliked his mother, and that this early, sour relationship colored his subsequent romances with women.
He suggests that the early death of Jefferson's father left him in need of a father figure, and that George Washington filled the bill.
And he suggests that the many losses Jefferson suffered in his life (the deaths of his parents, coupled with the untimely deaths of his wife and several of their children) caused him to erect elaborate emotional fences.
By placing this speculation in the mouth of the fictionalized Mr.
Short, Mr.
Byrd is able to sidestep questions concerning the veracity of such musings.
In an author's note, he tells the reader that he has made a few minor changes in the historical record (mainly involving dates), but has otherwise adhered "to the generally agreed-upon facts" as he found them in the real William Short's papers, and contemporaries' papers, including the vast annotated edition of Jefferson's own writings.
So authoritatively does Mr.
Byrd conjure up the day-to-day details of Jefferson's life, so knowingly does he describe the atmosphere of prerevolutionary France that the reader practically forgets that his novel is based on thousands and thousands of researched facts.
Indeed, "Jefferson" has the organic intimacy of a novel that has sprung full-blown from the imagination of its creator.


Sports of The Times; Getting To the Heart Of the Matter
WHEN Hank Gathers of Loyola Marymount collapsed and died in March 1990, Garry Mendez wondered if there was something more to Gathers's death than the sudden demise of a college basketball superstar.
As executive director of the Washington-based National Trust, an organization that focuses on health issues affecting black men, Mendez wondered whether Gathers's death from idiopathic cardiomyopathy, an enlargement of the heart wall, was isolated.
Or was it a warning of other undetected time bombs residing in the chests of great athletes?


Rollins Issue Puts Whitman In Center of G.O.P. Meeting
There was a big distraction as the nation's Republican governors gathered here today to celebrate their recent victories, and it was not only the sight of the basketball stars Michael Jordan and Charles Barkley posing for a footwear commercial at the hotel pool.
Inside, the star attraction was Gov.-elect Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey.
But the politicians and hangers-on who attend these meetings were less fascinated by how Mrs.
Whitman defeated Gov.
Jim Florio than in how she was holding up in the firestorm over whether her campaign sought to discourage black voters in urban areas.


Dow Falls 23.76 Points In Selloff
Concerns over rising interest rates and a weakening bull market pushed stock prices down yesterday and intensified fears that American stocks might be facing new downward pressures.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 23.76 points to close at 3,670.25, after tumbling more than 40 points in the morning.
But even more troubling, market traders said, was that the number of stocks falling in price outnumbered those gaining by a margin of about 7 to 2 -- an indicator of broad market weakness.


So Long, Farewell, A Happy Goodbye
The women's tennis game, though its administrators are loathe to admit it, fell into a strange limbo the instant the curtain closed on the $3.5 million Virginia Slims Championships late Sunday afternoon after the event played to a non-record total of 100,784 fans at Madison Square Garden last week.
Nobody waxed nostalgic over 1993, a year marred by a quasi-assassination attempt on the world's best player; the expulsion of another top player's father from the Kraft Tour because of his abusive behavior; and the demise of the Kraft Tour itself, a corporate decision that has left women's tennis sponsorless.


New York Urged to Shift Cost of Fighting Shore Erosion
People who live near the shore would pay more in taxes and fees to help protect New York's coastline from storm damage under a plan released today by a state task force.
Local governments and private citizens who would benefit most from coastal anti-erosion projects would be asked to pay more of the cost.
The current formula, in which the state pays 70 percent and localities 30 percent for certain projects, would be changed to a 50-50 split.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
American Airlines flight attendants returned to work after President Clinton brokered an agreement for the union and the airline to submit their dispute to arbitration.
The President's involvement was the most direct step the White House has taken to influence a work stoppage since President Reagan dismissed striking air traffic controllers in 1981.  [ Page A1. ]


Two Arrested In a Scheme To Pass Tests
Two South Korean men have been arrested and charged with running a New York City company that used impersonators to take exams like the Scholastic Aptitude Test on behalf of immigrants seeking admission to American colleges and universities.
The company, Total Test Center in Manhattan, charged $4,000 to $5,000 to send an impersonator to virtually any standardized test, according to Patricia E. Taylor, a lawyer for Educational Testing Service, which administers most of the exams.


Albert S. Pergam, 54, International Lawyer
Albert Steven Pergam, a partner with the international law firm of Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen &amp; Hamilton in New York, died on Sunday at Tisch Hospital of New York University Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 54 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was complications relating to cancer, his family said.


Software Maker Accused of Using Virus to Compel Client to Pay Bill
When a custom-designed computer program failed to meet William Haberman's expectations, the furniture builder used the leverage of dissatisfied customers everywhere: he held back on payment.
And when Michael Lafaro realized he might not be paid, he used his art and singular access as a software designer: he infected the client's system with a virus that would cripple his business unless he paid up, the Nassau County police said.


HOUSE, 255 TO 175, VOTES TO RESTRICT CAMPAIGN SPENDING
Weighing public demands for campaign reform against the high cost of seeking re-election, House members today approved a change in campaign finance laws that includes voluntary limits on spending and the first public financing of Congressional campaigns.
No one can say with certainty what impact the measure will have, but if enacted it would represent the first effort to limit the advantages of incumbency since 1974, when Congress regulated political contributions in the wake of the Watergate scandal.


Whitman Is Star Attraction as Governors Meet


Faster and Faster, More Data on CD-ROM
SOME of the most exciting new software for personal computers is going to come on compact disks instead of on floppy disks, if last week's Comdex Fall trade show in Las Vegas was any indication.
Scores of new, affordable CD-ROM software titles were introduced at the show, typically combining high-quality color graphics, stereo sound, full-motion video clips, animation and lots of text.
Computer users who want to take advantage of these new and forthcoming CD-ROM programs must first have a CD-ROM disk drive, which is not the same thing as an audio CD player, even though the disks used by both appear to be similar.


Bridge
Leading into the two final sessions of the Open Board-a-Match Team Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals here today were four players well known to fame: Paul Soloway of Mill Creek, Wash., Bob Goldman and Mike Passell of Dallas, and Mark Lair of Canyon, Tex.
Their score was 35 boards out of a possible 52.
Second with 34 were Chip Martel of Davis, Calif.; Lew Stansby of Castro Valley, Calif.; Howard Weinstein and Peter Nagy, both of Chicago, and Brad Moss and Ravindra Murthy, both of Berkeley, Calif.
Leading in the Board-a-Match Women's Teams, with 37 boards, were Juanita Chambers of Schenectady, N.Y., Margie Gwozdzinsky of Manhattan, Gerrianne Klafter of Allentown, Pa., Shawn Womack of Irvine, Calif., and Jan Cohen of Los Angeles.


SCIENTIST AT WORK: Harold E. Varmus; Out of the Lab and Into the Bureaucracy
HAROLD E. VARMUS, the new director of the National Institutes of Health and therefore one of the most powerful figures in science, is a man with many weighty matters over which he can mull.
He can worry about the slide in government financing for scientific research, or the wretched state of science education in America.
He can dwell on the demoralized condition of the institutes themselves, where many of the clinics and laboratories are dangerously decrepit and where charges of racial discrimination and sexual harassment have been flying.
He can fret over choosing the perfect director for one of the most politically sensitive of the new divisions at the N.I.H., the Office of AIDS Research.


Roehm and Saks Make Music
Carolyne Roehm has embarked on a new phase of her fashion career.
For six years she ran her own designing-manufacturing business on Seventh Avenue, producing high-priced apparel.
When she closed the business two years ago, she began organizing a mail-order operation based on styles she designed.
It would include accessories, gifts and objects for the home as well as clothes.
The first catalogue appeared last spring, followed by one for fall.


Students Injured in Connecticut Highway Accident


O'Neal Receives Fine
Orlando's SHAQUILLE O'NEAL was fined $5,000 yesterday by the National Basketball Association for making derogatory comments about the officiating in the Magic's game against Detroit last Wednesday. (AP)


Chinese End Austerity Drive In Favor of Yet More Growth
For months experts have been debating whether China's soaring economy could be brought in for a landing, a "hard" one or a "soft" one depending on the austerity measures the Government used last summer to apply the brakes.
But it now appears the Chinese economy is not going to land at all.
Indeed, China's top leaders are no longer looking for an airport, some experts have concluded.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
3.06
2.89
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.14
3.10
3.27
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.30
3.26
3.45
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.44
5.38
6.47
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.38
6.33
7.54
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.42
7.39
8.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.68
5.66
6.40
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Much Ado, Little Done
For seven long years, Congressional supporters of a waiting period for the purchase of handguns blamed the lawmakers who were blocking the measure for the deaths of tens of thousands of people.
But if the history of gun control and the views of law-enforcement officials are any measure, the chances are that any results from the legislation establishing the waiting period will be far less dramatic than the bitter legislative debate suggested.
Indeed, the main impact may very well be a symbolic one.


Turgeon Is Honored
PIERRE TURGEON of the Islanders was chosen National Hockey League player of the week yesterday on the strength of three multiple-goal games. (AP)


Salou Journal; Swords Drawn in Spain Over Teaching in Spanish
When classes resumed here on Sept. 15, young children attending the Santa Maria del Mar primary school brought home a disturbing bit of news for their Spanish-speaking parents.
In the future, they would be taught only in the language of Catalonia.
Many parents were furious.
This proud region of northeast Spain has long been promoting Catalan as a way of reinforcing its identity as a "nation." But until now, with Spanish-speakers accounting for about half of its six million residents, bilingualism was the norm in many schools.


Three South Africans Accused of Murder Are Released


An Author Who Lets Women Be Bad Guys
Margaret Atwood is tired of seeing only nice girls in fiction, so in her latest novel, "The Robber Bride," she has created a formidable alternative.
She is an anti-heroine named Zenia, a brilliantly scheming temptress who betrays other women, steals and discards men like so many secondhand clothes, constantly reinvents herself for her own dark purposes and generally conducts herself with flamboyant malevolence.
Her power reverberates right away, when the three women whom she has hurt the most are eating together at a Toronto restaurant called the Toxique.
Each is absorbed in her own reverie of relief over Zenia's apparent death five years earlier, when she was blown up (in typically exotic style) by terrorists in the Middle East.
But then Zenia walks in, not dead at all, and quite pleased with herself.
"Waves of ill will flow out of her like cosmic radiation," Ms.
Atwood writes.
"She sees all three of them. She knows how they feel. She's enjoying it."


2 Officers Indicted For Arrest Actions
Two New York City police officers have been indicted on charges that they assaulted a man and woman after the officers sought to question the couple about why their vehicle had temporary license tags.
One of the officers was also charged with aggravated harassment because, an official familiar with the case said, he used a racial epithet during the encounter.
The official, who spoke only on condition of anonymity, said the two officers are white and the couple are black.


Ayer and Hal Riney Discussing a Merger
Ayer Inc. of New York and Hal Riney &amp; Partners of San Francisco said yesterday that they had discussed a merger but denied that any combination was imminent.
Advertising Age and Adweek reported this week that a merger was being discussed by top executives at the two shops.
A merger would create a company with $1.8 billion in billings from clients like the General Motors Corporation, A.T.&amp; T., Alamo Rent-a-Car and the Stroh Brewery Company.


Trade Pact Raises Threat of TB From Cattle; Dangerous Hormone
To the Editor:
The Food and Drug Administration has approved injection of cow growth hormone, bovine somatotropine, in our country's cows to increase milk production as much as 20 percent.
We don't allow our Olympic athletes to inject themselves with human growth hormone, yet we are allowing the food supply to be contaminated by cow growth hormone.


A Seeker of Mystery Takes Stock of Suburbs
IT was a dark and stormy night.
As the wind whistled through the trees, the lights in the spacious Victorian and colonial homes beckoned with the promise of warmth and shelter.
A blue Volvo station wagon slowly cruised the street, its driver speaking in a hushed voice as he cautioned that this neighborhood, one of the most desirable in Montclair, was home to unhappy secrets.


Dean Witter Gets Entry to Mastercard
Ending one of the most bitter battles in the credit-card business, Mastercard International said yesterday that it would allow the rival Dean Witter, Discover &amp; Company to sponsor a Mastercard credit card.
In a compromise, Dean Witter would offer the card jointly with an existing Mastercard member, Nationsbank of Charlotte, N.C.
They will split the expenses and the revenues of the product, which will be introduced early next year.


2 New Suits Filed Against Prudential
Prudential Securities Inc. and its parent company suffered new blows when two new groups of investors sued the companies late Friday over allegations of fraud that date back more than a decade.
The two lawsuits, both of which are seeking class-action status, signal that the legal problems of the firm and its parent, the Prudential Insurance Company of America, are not likely to be ended by last month's settlement of charges of Federal and state securities law violations.
In that settlement, the firm agreed to pay at least $371 million in fines and compensation to hundreds of thousands of customers who suffered losses because of widespread fraud.


SOCCER
The Final Draw
Now that the qualifying matches to determine the 24 finalists have been completed, the final draw -- Dec. 19 at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nev., -- is the focus of attention.


METRO DIGEST
SOFTWARE DESIGNER ACCUSED OF VIRUS USE The president of a New York City software-design company and one of his technicians were charged with infecting a dissatisfied client's computer system with a virus that would cripple his business unless he stopped withholding payment for the system.
A1.
WHITMAN IS A STAR ATTRACTION The star attraction as the nation's Republican governors met in Phoenix was Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey.
B6.


Ordeal For Farr A Study in Courage
She was not built like a fighter.
She stood 5 feet 1 inches tall and, at the end, she weighed 90 pounds.
But inside, Heather Farr had more fight than a gym full of heavyweights.
Inside the small body -- a body racked for more than four years by cancer, a body cut open more than 15 times, zapped by radiation and shocked by chemotherapy -- was a spirit that simply would not yield.
It was only last week that she showed it again, before her second and third brain surgeries were performed.
She had just come out of anesthesia after holes had been drilled in her skull to relieve pressure on her brain.


Yeshiva U. Is Bequeathed $40 Million
Yeshiva University has received a $40 million gift, the largest in its 107-year history, from the estate of Rachel Golding, who died last year at the age of 81.
The bequest was made by Mrs.
Golding in memory of her late husband, Samuel H. Golding, a New York banker and realtor who, with other Jewish community leaders, helped in 1953 to establish the university's Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
He died in 1970.


64-Car Freight Train Derails in Oregon


Congressional Roundup: House Fends Off Effort To Trim Budget Further; Brady Bill Faces More Resistance
Facing continuing Republican resistance to the Brady bill, Senator George J. Mitchell, the Democratic majority leader from Maine, said he would call Senators back to Washington from their holiday recess to give final passage to the measure if he needed to.
In a 238-to-187 vote, the House tonight approved a compromise reached in a Senate-House conference committee hashing out two versions of the measure, which sets a waiting period of five working days for the purchase of a handgun.


Aikman on Mend, Smith on Table
The Dallas Cowboys, who lost one on the field Sunday, won one and lost one yesterday in the trainer's room.
Coach Jimmy Johnson announced that Troy Aikman would probably play Thursday against the Miami Dolphins but that Emmitt Smith would probably not.
Aikman is the quarterback and Smith the running back who make the Cowboys the most dangerous team in the National Football League, even after Sunday's stunning 27-14 upset loss to the Atlanta Falcons.
Aikman has missed the last two games with a strained left hamstring.
Smith suffered a bruised right thigh against the Falcons.


Trade Pact Raises Threat of TB From Cattle; Threat to Cows
To the Editor:
The Food and Drug Administration's approval of the much-criticized bovine growth hormone has many people worried.
But who will really suffer?
The cows!


WORLD COLOR PRESS TO BUY PRINTER IN LOS ANGELES
World Color Press, a printer of magazines, catalogues and directories, agreed yesterday to buy George Rice &amp; Sons of Los Angeles for $86 million, including the assumption of debt.
The acquisition of Rice, which specializes in high-quality color printing, will increase World's annual revenue to about $950 million.
World Color Press, a privately held company controlled by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company, the buyout firm, said it expected the sale to be completed by the end of the year.
World, based in New York, has 13 plants around the nation.


Congressional Roundup: House Fends Off Effort To Trim Budget Further; S.&amp; L.'s Are Given $26.3 Billion More
After years of delay, the House today cast what Congress fervently hopes will be the last vote ever to provide money for cleaning up the savings and loan debacle of the 80's.
In a 235-to-191 vote, the House endorsed a compromise agreement, approved over the weekend by the Senate, that makes up to $26.3 billion available to the Resolution Trust Corporation and its eventual successor, the Savings Association Insurance Fund.
The R.T.C., which since April 1992, has lacked the financing to take over failed savings and loans, will now resume doing so.
The agency will go out of existence by the end of 1995.


Mets: Valentine Isn't in Waiting
Before becoming the manager of the Texas Rangers in 1985, Bobby Valentine did not manage in the minor leagues.
"People said I didn't pay my dues," Valentine said yesterday, "so after 1,200 games in the major leagues, I'd like to erase that blemish from my resume."
Valentine, the Mets announced yesterday, will manage their Class AAA minor league team at Norfolk of the International League.
The Mets also quickly emphasized that Valentine will not be a manager-in-waiting -- waiting for Dallas Green to disappear as the Mets' manager.


Drug Treatment Funds Will Cut Violent Crime
To the Editor:
"Hope for a Crime Bill" (editorial, Nov. 12) states: "drug treatment for addicted prison inmates is a constructive step, even if Congress can't muster the will to create more community-based treatment."


Bond Prices Continue Their Slide
The Treasury sold $17 billion of two-year notes yesterday as bond and note prices continued to dive.
The price decline pushed the yield on the 30-year bond up to 6.38 percent, its highest level since Aug. 12.
In the last three trading days, the price of the bond has plunged more than 2 1/2 points, with the yield jumping almost a quarter of a percentage point.


Holiday Promises as Much Travail as Travel
The American Airlines strike may be ending, but travel agents across the country say passengers with tickets on its flights should still expect delays, re-routing and other inconveniences.
Even without a strike, tomorrow is traditionally the busiest day of the year for air travel, making it a prime opportunity for delays, lost baggage and other travel unpleasantries.
It will be at least a few days before American returns to normal, the carrier said.
Gus Whitcomb, an American spokesman, said last night that the airline expected to have 60 to 75 percent of its flights in operation today, "up to 85 percent Wednesday, and we hope to be close to 100 percent over the weekend."


Taylor Has Blue-Chip Options To Ponder
Lawrence Taylor, whose finances are booming as a result of the stock-market success of his company, All-Pro Products, could make this his final season with the Giants so he can focus his efforts on building the company, according to friends and league officials.
Taylor's company is the hottest new stock offering on the market, and it's unclear whether that is because of his popularity as a linebacker or the excesses of a bull market.
Whatever the reason, friends of Taylor say that while the linebacker was strongly considering coming back next season, the success of his company has made him rethink whether he should finish the second year of his two-year contract with the Giants.


Mr. Packwood Had It Right: Resign
Senator Bob Packwood's friends say that he had finally decided to quit last week after a year of dodging and ducking over charges of sexual misconduct.
Then, when he received a Justice Department subpoena for documents the Senate is also demanding, he decided to stay after all.
Mr.
Packwood had it right the first time.
He should pack his bags and depart.
The Senator's change of mind is an unfortunate byproduct of the Justice Department's interest in the possibility that he misused his office.
New questions of possible misconduct arose last month when the Senate Ethics Committee staff was scanning his office diaries.
Those questions included whether he improperly solicited the help of a lobbyist to obtain a job for his wife, who was divorcing him.


Germany Finds 2 Blood Donors Had AIDS Virus
Investigators have discovered that two samples of blood donated to a German company suspected of distributing H.I.V.-tainted blood were infected with the virus, a prosecutor announced today.
He said nine other samples could not be positively certified as being free of the virus, which causes AIDS.
The prosecutor, Norbert Weise, said that his investigators had checked 25,018 blood samples from the estimated 4,000 people who donated blood to the company, but that the results were not "absolutely reliable" because records were not fully in order.


Complaints Are Rising On Substitute Officials
Negotiations aimed at ending an eight-day strike by National Hockey League officials broke off yesterday in Buffalo amid a growing chorus of complaints about the substitute referees.
Gary Bettman, the N.H.L. commissioner, and Don Meehan, an agent representing the N.H.L.
Officials Association, met for the second consecutive day, along with their respective negotiating teams.
On Sunday, they had bargained for the first time in a week, a five-hour session in Hartford.
Yesterday's meeting lasted about two and a half hours.


Hispanic Protest at Cornell Ends


U.S. Concern Scores Big In Russia
A tiny Indiana company has become the first Western company to successfully arrange the launching of a Russian satellite entirely for commercial communications.
The Rimsat Corporation, a two-year-old Fort Wayne compny, said today that it had successfully placed into orbit a Russian satellite called a Gorizant.
The 4,500-pound satellite was launched last Thursday aboard a Russian Proton rocket from a space center in Kazakhstan.
Company officials said that the spacecraft had reached its intended orbit over the Equator and that they hoped to sell television and telephone links over much of the Pacific Rim and Asia.


Turkey's War on Kurds
To the Editor:
In "Turkey Looks to West" (letter, Nov. 9), Nuzhet Kandemir, the Ambassador of Turkey, states that "Turkish citizens of Kurdish or other ethnic origins enjoy equal rights within Turkey's democratic society."


Title Added At Lehman
Richard S. Fuld Jr., the president of Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc., is adding the additional title of chief executive, completing a management transition that began last July with the breakup of the former Shearson Lehman Brothers organization by its parent, the American Express Company.
Mr.
Fuld, 47, became president of Lehman Brothers in March, after American Express announced the sale of the subsidiary's Shearson retail brokerage operation to Smith Barney.
The sale was completed in July, with American Express retaining Lehman Brothers as its investment banking subsidiary.


Classical Music in Review
Lionheart  St.
Ignatius of Antioch Episcopal Church West End Avenue at 87th Street Manhattan


Agriculture Department, in Shift, Will Punish Corrupt Contractors
After flouting a Presidential directive for seven years, the Agriculture Department will stop giving hundreds of millions of dollars in Government contracts to large dairies and other agricultural companies that have been caught defrauding Federal programs.
The decision by Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy, made under pressure from Congress, ends the department's longstanding refusal to go along with President Ronald Reagan's 1986 directive requiring that any company found abusing a Government program be barred from all Government work.


By Design; Punk Goes the Kilt
The kilt has gone punk.
Well, maybe post-punk.
That term is used by Kalman Ruttenstein, Bloomingdale's fashion director, for the micromini kilts fastened with slews of safety pins, shown recently in the store's windows.
He might also be talking about the teeny-weeny kilts in Anna Sui's spring show, worn with bare midriffs, low-slung silver belts and silver Lurex knee-highs.
The kilt has come a long way from the Scottish highlands.


Manufacturer to Withdraw Controversial Ammunition
The manufacturer of the Black Talon hollow-point pistol rounds, which are designed to do greater damage than ordinary ammunition, announced today that it was withdrawing the cartridges from sale to the general public.
The decision by the manufacturer, Winchester Ammunition, comes two and a half weeks after some lawmakers proposed banning them.
One threatened to impose a 10,000 percent tax on the sale of the exotic ammunition as one way to help finance the overhaul of the nation's health care system.
The company, based in East Alton, Ill., acknowledged the impact of such proposals in its announcement.


Keenan Faces Surgery
The Rangers, who are undefeated in their last 12 games, were rewarded by Coach MIKE KEENAN by getting this past weekend off.
But while his players were enjoying their mini-break, Keenan was in a New York hospital having X-rays taken and finding out that he had torn cartilage in his right knee.


Starks! Starks! Starks! Knicks Win in 3-Point Blur
Who can figure out John Starks?
On Saturday night, his shooting was horrific.
Last night, he was terrific.
And it took a broken nose to distract him from a possible record-setting shooting performance.
In scoring 37 points, Starks tied a National Basketball Association record with seven 3-point field goals in the first half, propelling the Knicks (8-2) to an easy 119-87 victory over the Miami Heat at Madison Square Garden.


Dinkins Accepts Faculty Post In Urban Affairs at Columbia
Mayor David N. Dinkins will join the faculty of Columbia University to teach urban affairs and other subjects at the School of International and Public Affairs after he leaves office at the end of the year, the chairman of the university's Board of Trustees said yesterday.
"We think this is terrific," said Henry L. King, the board chairman.
"No mayor of New York City has ever gone on to higher office -- not Lindsay, not La Guardia, not O'Dwyer, not Koch. But now Mayor Dinkins has achieved that distinction. He's joining the faculty of Columbia University, and I regard that as a promotion."


Barkley's Good and Bad
CHARLES BARKLEY of the Phoenix Suns, who averaged 28.3 points and 15.3 rebounds while leading his team to a 3-0 record, was chosen the league's player of the week.
Meanwhile, the police yesterday in Scottsdale, Ariz., neared completion of their investigation into a bar-pool-hall scuffle early last Thursday in which a man accused Barkley of punching him in the face, a charge denied by the forward.
Police Lieut.
MIKE KEELEY said the police would not make a recommendation to the prosecutor's office about whether to charge anyone in the case. (AP)


Varied Methods for One Goal: Getting Out the Vote
Politicians call it, simply, G.O.T.V.
It means Get Out the Vote -- every last vote, for candidates from president to council members.


Her Study Shattered The Myth That Fraud In Science Is a Rarity
AS a premedical student at Wellesley College in the 1960's, Judith P. Swazey was puzzled by the disappearance of slides of tissues her research team had prepared.
A few months later she opened a scientific journal and exclaimed to her professor: "My, that looks familiar!" She was looking at pictures of the missing slides.
The author's girlfriend, who may or may not have been a Wellesley student, had often dropped by the laboratory.
Dr.
Swazey said her group merely thought she was expressing "collegial interest." In fact, she had stolen the slides.


Boy, 5, Dials 911 After He Is Left Alone
The little boy spoke so softly that two different 911 operators had trouble hearing him.
He kept saying he wanted the police number.
"My mother's not here," he told the operators on duty in the early morning hours yesterday.
"She went out."


Crowding Reduces Fertility Of Voles
THE tiny meadow vole, a mouselike creature that ordinarily spends most of its three-month life span producing babies, is apparently so sensitive to population pressure that it quickly reins in its reproductive urge when there are too many voles in its neighborhood.
Dr.
Richard S. Ostfeld and his colleagues at the Institute of Ecosystem Studies in Milbrook, N.Y., reported in the current issue of the journal Nature that by regulating the population density of voles in experimental plots of land, they could precisely control the animals' breeding rate.


Airline Strike Ends as Clinton Steps In
Striking American Airlines flight attendants decided today to end their walkout after President Clinton took the unusual step of brokering an agreement between the union and the airline to submit the labor dispute to binding arbitration.
Mr.
Clinton announced the end of the impasse at an afternoon news conference that began barely 20 minutes after the airline and the flight attendants signed off on a plan that was put together by top Administration officials in just a few hours.
He said the resolution, which puts the contract dispute before a mutually agreed-upon arbitrator, was intended to allow Thanksgiving holiday travel to return to normal.


Holiday on Thursday
The Thanksgiving holiday will be observed on Thursday.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  PARADE Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade begins at 9 A.M. on Thursday at 77th Street and Central Park West.
The parade will continue to Columbus Circle, south on Broadway to Herald Square, and east on 34th Street to Seventh Avenue.


An Outlaw in the Balkans Is Basking in the Spotlight
"Arkan," campaign posters proclaimed in letters three times as high as those of the Serbian Unity Party, and none of the crowd that jammed a drafty basketball court in this grim industrial suburb or indeed in all of the former Yugoslavia needed further identification.
"We have a Serbian dream!" he shouted, standing stiffly in a dark double-breasted suit as several thousand supporters, huddled in ski parkas, roared from the bleachers.


After Elections, Italy Is Still a Muddle
In nationwide municipal elections depicted as an oracle of things to come, Italian voters registered their disappointment with the tainted parties of the mainstream by turning to the neo-Fascist and ex-Communist candidates in record numbers.
In 428 mayoral ballots from Palermo to Venice on Sunday more than one quarter of Italy's 40 million voters supported the neo-Fascist Italian Social Movement, the Democratic Party of the Left, successor to the Communist Party of Italy, or the insurgent Northern League.


Classical Music in Review
The Warsaw Philharmonic  Carnegie Hall


Corrections
An entry in the Metro Digest yesterday for an article about cultural awards to be presented by Mayor David N. Dinkins misidentified the head of Dance Theater of Harlem in some editions.
He is Arthur Mitchell, not Arthur Miller.


Burlington Resources
Shares of Burlington Resources Inc., an oil and gas developer, rose yesterday.
Burlington will replace Paramount Communications Inc. today as a component stock of the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index.
Paramount was replaced because of merger speculation.


Rules on Lawyers Start With Matrimonial Cases
To the Editor:
A letter Nov. 17 laments the fact that new New York State rules for lawyers in matrimonial cases, effective Nov. 30, prohibit a sexual relationship between attorney and client only during representation in a matrimonial case.
These rules resulted from the recommendations made by the Committee to Examine Lawyer Conduct in Matrimonial Actions, whose mandate was spelled out in its name.
The proposed rules apply only to matrimonial cases.


Patterns
A Call to Boycott Benetton
An AIDS charity headed by Pierre Berge, the chief executive of Yves Saint Laurent, is urging a boycott of Benetton products in the latest outcry against a Benetton advertising campaign.


Kimball Will Get Manslaughter Release
BRUCE KIMBALL , the United States Olympic diver who in 1988 drove under the influence of alcohol into a group of teen-agers and killed two, is to be released tomorrow after serving less than 5 years of a 17-year manslaughter sentence.
But when Kimball, 30 years old, walks out of a Miami halfway house, he will not be completely free.
Kimball will never be able to hold a driver's license and will remain on probation for 15 years.


Stanley Rich, Entrepreneur, 76; Invented Submarine Sonar Device
Stanley Robert Rich, an entrepreneur and inventor who devised a scanning sonar for submarines in World War II, died on Sunday at Youville Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 76 and lived in Grantham, N.H., and Wellesley Hills, Mass.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Tokyo Stocks Fall 3.1%; Anxiety Grips Market
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's failure over the weekend to issue a clear commitment to reinvigorate the deteriorating Japanese economy sent the stock market here into a fearful dive today, with the closely watched Nikkei index of 225 issues plummeting more than 3 percent.
With Japanese investors' self-confidence eroding by the day, the Nikkei fell from the start and accelerated in the afternoon.
At the close it had lost 556.35 points, or 3.1 percent, for its second worst day of the year and with few prospects of a recovery anytime soon.
The market will be closed Tuesday for a national holiday.


Tank Dress: Simply Minimal
They're the length of some swimsuits.
They often have tank tops, like swimsuits.
When they have narrow straps, they look like slips.
But they're not intended to be worn under anything.
They're dresses, meant to be seen.
Calvin Klein is especially enthusiastic about these new-age dresses.
He shows them with short hemlines and with long ones.
He piles two or three sheer dresses on top of one another to cut the transparency, or tucks a T-shirt underneath.
Add thick-sole shoes with chunky heels, worn with black anklets, and the dress develops a distinctive look.


Fordham Coach Is Out
After winning just five games in the last four seasons, including only one in 11 outings this year, LARRY GLUECK has stepped down as Fordham's head coach.
Glueck leaves with an an eight-year record of 30-51-1. (AP)


Cornelius Forster, 74, A Dean in Providence
The Rev.
Cornelius Aloysius Philip Forster, founding dean of the Providence College Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, died on Thursday at St.
Joseph Hospital in North Providence, R.I.
He was 74 and lived at the Priory of St.
Thomas Aquinas in Providence.
The cause was cancer, the priory said.


Dressing the Metropolitan Museum for Another Opening


Scientists Seek Warnings of Environmental Problems in Seas
SCIENTISTS say the world's oceans could serve as natural alarm systems for warning of impending climate changes, pollution crises and other global hazards, and they have urged the speedy development of new technologies to monitor the seas.
At a meeting of the Acoustical Society of America last month, scientists from several nations, including Russia, outlined new techniques for using the oceans, particularly the Arctic Ocean, to find clues to the approach of environmental trouble.


CUNY Head Returns for a Time
The trustees of the City University of New York, voting unanimously, temporarily reinstated the president of the College of Staten Island yesterday, less than a month after they had dismissed him.
Under an agreement the president, Dr.
Edmond L. Volpe, will remain in the job until Feb. 1, when the college's executive vice president and provost, Dr.
Felix Cardegna, will assume the job of acting president.
Dr.
Volpe will then go on an academic leave of absence and will retire on June 30.


Kenyan and Arkansas Win
Josephat Kapkory of Washington State University, a 26-year-old Kenyan whose training is limited by rigorous studies in chemical engineering, raced to victory today in the National Collegiate Athletic Association cross-country championships.
Kapkory, a senior who placed 12th last year, drew away from the field of 180 runners near the two-mile point of the 10,000-meter (6.2 mile) race.
Amid ideal conditions, he ran unchallenged to the finish, winning by 50 meters in 29 minutes 32.4 seconds.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  SERBIAN OUTLAW ENTERS POLITICS  Arkan, wanted for murder and bank robbery in Europe, is the newest political star in Serbia as he runs for a seat in Parliament.
A1


Microsoft Co-Founder in Ticketmaster Deal
Paul G. Allen, the co-founder of the Microsoft Corporation, said today that he would acquire a majority stake in the Ticketmaster Corporation, whose computers dominate the sales of sports and concert tickets.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed, but an official close to the negotiations said Ticketmaster was valued at more than $300 million.
Mr.
Allen is acquiring at least 80 percent of the company, the source said.


Scanning The Future Of Books On Disks
BOOKS go back to the early centuries of the first millennium.
By the fourth century A.D., "the rectangular codex (Latin, 'book')," had replaced "the inconvenient scroll," in the words of Microsoft Encarta, that lively CD-ROM encyclopedia.
Undoubtedly there were old fogies in the early fifth century still scanning scrolls while their children, clucking in pity, flipped to Chapter Five of the latest Elmorus Leonardus.
No one can safely predict that the digital book will replace the printed book in the third millennium, but that is where the seemingly smart money is today.


Editors' Note
An article on Oct. 1, reporting on Senate testimony by Hillary Rodham Clinton about health care, included a passage about former Gov.
Richard D. Lamm of Colorado.
It said Mr.
Lamm "drew widespread antagonism when he said in 1984 that the elderly, if ill, 'have got a duty to die and get out of the way.' "
Similar characterizations of Mr.
Lamm's speech of March 27, 1984, were published soon after it was given, and have appeared periodically.
But that version of Mr.
Lamm's remarks is a distortion, as Governor Lamm complained in 1984.
He said then that insufficient attention to detail by the news media had led to a misinterpretation.


Injuries Put Jet Offense In a Defensive Position
Last week it was the Jets' linebacking corps that was shaken by injuries.
This week the injury bug bit the offense, particularly the offensive line and the running backs.
Right guard Dwayne White, right tackle Siupeli Malamala, and running backs Johnny Johnson and Richie Anderson all left Sunday's game against the Cincinnati Bengals with injuries.


No Headline
"He's the elected leader of the country. For any citizen or any company or any union to say 'No, I won't do that' to the President requires an awfully good reason." -- ROBERT L. CRANDALL, American Airlines chairman.  [ A1:6. ]


Williams on 'Waver' List at Corner
Cornerback Perry Williams is one of the classiest players in the Giants' locker room.
But you can be the nicest guy on the planet and if the coaches don't think you can do the job, you are gone.
That is the situation for Williams, an 11-year veteran whose days with the Giants could be numbered.


Florio Declines to Rescue Whitman From Democrats' Lawsuit
Gov.
Jim Florio today declined to rescue his successor, Christine Todd Whitman, from a Democratic lawsuit to overturn her election, an effort that suffered a setback today when the Democrats tried unsuccessfully to expand it.
Responding to a plea from Mrs.
Whitman to use his influence to call off the lawsuit, Mr.
Florio said in a statement: "I have said I believe that any allegations of voter suppression are serious, that they send a distressing message about democracy in this country and that they deserve to be fully investigated."


Injury Nagging Thomas, And So Are His Critics
Blair Thomas was responding to a question about the possibility that he might be available for this week's game at New England, after missing the last five games with an injury.
"It's been six weeks and five games," he said, correcting the reporter on the length of his absence.


Wider Gap In City Budget Is Projected
Offering his final projections for New York City's budget, Mayor David N. Dinkins announced yesterday that his successor, Rudolph W. Giuliani, would face a projected gap of $1.73 billion in the budget he must have outlined by January, about $450 million more than projections only three months ago.
The widening gap reflects not new or unexpected costs but rather the effects of a number of decisions to stop counting on revenues that require outside actions, like the assumption by the state of the city's share of Medicaid costs.


CHRONICLE
The theme of the evening on Sunday was "Harold and Stella: Love Letters," and the readers, actors like GERALDINE FITZGERALD, ELI WALLACH, ANTHONY QUINN and RUBY DEE, brought to life the private sentiments of Harold Clurman and Stella Adler.
Mr.
Clurman was the director, critic, author and teacher and a founder of the Group Theater, which flourished in the 1930's and helped to begin the careers of Lee Strasberg, Elia Kazan and John Garfield, among others.
Miss Adler, the actress, was considered by many to be the leading American teacher of acting.
Together they were a legendary couple in the annals of theater.
They had a romance that lasted 10 years, a marriage that lasted 20 years before they divorced in the early 1960's, and a friendship that endured until Mr.
Clurman's death in 1980.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CATERPILLAR INC., Peoria, Ill., said it had received orders worth $46 million from a petroleum transport company and a gold mining company in Russia.
GENERAL DYNAMICS CORP., Falls Church, Va., announced a definitive agreement to sell its lime and brick operations to Calcitherm Nederland N.V.


Museum as Cultural Anchor: The Studio at 25
When the Studio Museum in Harlem opened its doors in a rented loft in 1968, most black artists were being excluded from gallery and museum shows, and only a handful -- among them Romare Bearden, Jacob Lawrence and Elizabeth Catlett -- had gained national or international exposure.
That number has grown exponentially, as has the number of institutions collecting black art, and the museum, which is regarded by many in the art world as the premier fine-arts institution of its kind, has been instrumental.
Two current exhibitions at the museum illustrate its defining missions: to provide studio space for black artists and to exhibit their work.
One is "The 25th-Anniversary Exhibition: Recent Acquisitions and Selected Works from the Studio Museum in Harlem Collection," which includes works by Bearden, Ms.
Catlett, Emma Amos, Melvin Edwards, Sam Gilliam, Serge Jolimeau and Alvin Loving.


Congressional Roundup; House Fends Off Effort To Trim Budget Further
The same House that gave President Clinton a yearlong string of squeaker legislative victories delivered a final one tonight, barely rejecting an anti-establishment bid to slash an additional $90 billion from Mr.
Clinton's five-year budget package.
But though the vote went to the President and his House leaders, 219 to 213, the daylong brawl left the victors bloodied and the losers -- freshmen, second-termers and other youngsters, mostly -- laying claim to the mantle of generational change.


Congressional Roundup: House Fends Off Effort To Trim Budget Further; More Money Backed For the Unemployed
The House tonight passed by a vote of 320 to 105 and sent to President Clinton a long-delayed bill to provide an extra 7 to 13 weeks of unemployment benefits for about a million long-term jobless who had exhausted their basic 26 weeks of benefits.


Game Over. No Reason to Call Home.
The trip to New York was a welcome chance to leave the hotel, to not have to lay around, feel the weight of tragedy, the anxiety of being alone.
Brian Shaw rode to Brooklyn.
There were uncles and cousins to see yesterday afternoon, in Flatbush and in Sheepshead Bay.
There were warm family embraces and stories to tell and tears to shed.
There was the thrilling sensation of ticket requests that simply had to be met.


Leaders of Cuba and China Meet


Observer; Cunning Are the Rich
An angry letter writer who says he is rich accuses me of "rich-bashing" in a recent column.
Not content with that, he insinuates that I am probably rich myself.
I deny this last charge and do so vehemently and categorically, just in case any deadbeat relatives, alumni associations or encyclopedia salesmen happen to be reading this newspaper.


U.S. May Dilute Earlier Threats To North Korea
A day before President Clinton meets South Korea's President to discuss the standoff on nuclear inspections in North Korea, South Korean officials said they feared the Administration may be pursuing too conciliatory a policy.
Mr.
Clinton said today that he intended to seek an endorsement from President Kim Young Sam for a "new approach" to encourage North Korea to comply with international regulations.
He gave no details, but South Korean officials indicated that they worried that the revised strategy might be too conciliatory.


On My Mind; Waiting for China
Sometime in June we and they will find out what President Clinton was able to accomplish in Seattle.
Results on the economic agenda, the President's hopes for a great Asian-Pacific-American trade zone, will take a lot longer to judge -- years.


Market Place; Paramount's Latest Thriller Glues Speculators to Seats
It is hard to imagine a more passive style of investing than running an index fund.
But put some indexers together with merger speculators, with each seeking a small advantage, and you can get a wild day of trading.
That's what happened yesterday in the trading of Paramount Communications shares on the New York Stock Exchange.
The day started with a clerical error that had traders gasping before it was corrected, and ended with a surprising surge in the stock price.


In Defeat, a Victory for D.C.
"Washingtonians pay taxes with us and they serve in wars with us. . . . And when we voted two years ago to send our young people to war in the Persian Gulf, I wondered to myself what it would feel like to be a father here in the District of Columbia and have a son or daughter go and have no vote on the floor of this House."
These words came Sunday from Representative Richard Gephardt of Missouri, just before Congress defeated a bill that would have granted statehood to the District of Columbia, which has nearly 600,000 citizens but is denied a vote in the Congress that dictates its affairs.


INSIDE
Gauging Brady Bill's Effect
Experts say the impact of the Brady bill, which would establish a waiting period for gun purchases, may be symbolic.
News analysis, page B9.
Ammunition Is Withdrawn
A maker of a hollow-point ammunition announced it would withdraw the rounds from public sale.
Page B9.
Gulf War Syndrome Studied
Many veterans of the Gulf War have reported similar symptoms but no single cause or disease has been found.
Science Times, page C1.
His Honor the Professor
Mayor Dinkins plans to teach at Columbia after leaving office, a university official said.
Page B4.


Space-Age Techniques Find New Meaning in Dead Sea Scroll
ISAIAH'S hopeful prophecy that nations would beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning hooks was an early expression of what today is called technology transfer.
Now some cold war technologies, transferred to scholarly pursuits, are being applied to the study of people of biblical times -- and could become important tools in all archeology.
These tools are advanced infrared imaging systems enhanced by highly sensitive electronic cameras and computer image-processing technology.
Many of these technologies were developed at the height of the cold war, some for aerial and space reconnaissance, and have since been extended to civilian earth surveys and improved methods of observing the planets and stars.


While Out on Bail, Kevorkian Attends A Doctor's Suicide
The pain was relentless, and no one needed to tell Dr.
Ali A. Khalili that it was going to get worse before the bone cancer ravaging his 61-year-old body killed him.
At times, he could not walk, cough or even sneeze without his back hurting.
He knew better than most patients what was coming next.
A prominent pioneer in rehabilitative medicine in Chicago, he had spent much of his life trying to put broken people and their hopes back together.
As a former colleague put it, Dr.
Khalili helped his patients believe again that "life was worth living."


A New Effort On Suicides By Officers
Two days after an eighth New York City police officer took his own life this year, Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly announced a stepped-up campaign to detect the warning signs and help officers at risk of suicide.
The plan will center upon ways to pierce the rigid world of the police precinct, and will try to break through the officers' own emotional shells, hardened by a profession that often demands a steely facade, Mr.
Kelly said.


Gulf War Syndrome: Is It a Real Disease?
IT began in Indiana early in 1992, when soldiers in two reserve units that had fought in the Persian Gulf war began to suffer a puzzling array of symptoms.
Some became unusually fatigued, and others said their joints ached.
They experienced headaches, rashes and hair loss, and their memories occasionally failed them.
In some cases the symptoms were severe enough to require hospitalization.
Over the next year, hundreds and then thousands of veterans began showing up at hospitals run by the Department of Veterans Affairs with these and a wide array of other symptoms.
Eventually, 10,000 veterans asked the hospitals for physical examinations to see if they had what has come to be called gulf war syndrome.


30 Years Later


Dressing the Metropolitan Museum for Another Opening


Q&amp;A
Pipes and Cigars
Q.
Have any studies been done comparing second-hand smoke hazards from pipes and cigars with those from cigarettes?


Orioles Sign Fernandez While Rangers Obtain Clark
The Baltimore Orioles, replacing the Yankees as the American League East's most aggressive pursuer of free agents, snared Sid Fernandez for their pitching staff yesterday but stumbled in their quest to make Will Clark their first baseman.
Clark instead replaced Rafael Palmeiro as the Texas Rangers' first baseman.
Fernandez, whom the Mets made little effort to re-sign after a 10-year association, agreed to a three-year contract worth $9 million.
The Rangers, who had offered Palmeiro $26.5 million for five years, gave Clark $30 million for five.


Foyt Names Jones
A.
J.
FOYT announced yesterday that DAVY JONES , a 29-year-old racer from Lake Tahoe, Nev., who made his name in sports car racing, will be the driver on his Indy-car team starting in 1994.
Jones replaces ROBBY GORDON , a promising but crash-prone driver who left Foyt's team after his rookie season in 1993 to go to DERRICK WALKER's team.
This is not Jones's first time with Foyt, who gave Jones his first ride at Indianapolis in 1987.
Jones responded then by posting the fastest qualifying time for a rookie.


30-Year Commemoration In Dallas and Arlington
On the 30th anniversary of John F. Kennedy's death, thousands of tourists filed past his grave at Arlington National Cemetery today, and the plaza in Dallas where he was shot to death was declared a National Historic Landmark.
Senator Edward M. Kennedy, the former President's only surviving brother, arrived at the grave shortly after 3 P.M. with Representative Joseph P. Kennedy 2d and their wives.


RESULTS PLUS
PRO BASKETBALL Pacers Crush the Celtics Rik Smits scored 14 of his 27 points in the third quarter and grabbed 10 rebounds last night, leading the Indiana Pacers to a 102-71 romp over the Boston Celtics in Hartford.
Dale Davis added 13 points and had 14 rebounds for the Pacers, who never trailed.
Malik Sealy had 17 points and Reggie Miller, sidelined with an ankle injury the previous two games, added 16.
Xavier McDaniel and Kevin Gamble each scored 13 points to lead Boston.
Larry Bird was on hand for a halftime tribute for six former Celtics at the Civic Center.
The other players were Dennis Johnson, Jo Jo White, John Havlicek, Dave Cowens and Don Nelson.
Space was left on the banner for the numbers of Kevin McHale and the late Reggie Lewis. (AP)


Chess
It's hard to be a rebel in chess, at least for any length of time.
If you avoid mainline theory and are successful, you become swallowed up in the new, inclusive main line.
If you are not successful, you remain on the fringe, losing a lot of games.
There are players who feel no need to be perked up by a venture into variety: such worthies as Anatoly Karpov and Walter Browne would apparently be quite happy to contest both sides of the Queen's Indian Defense to eternity.
But most players like to take a chance every once in a while.
And there is sometimes a way to have your cake and eat it, too.
Perhaps you can hit upon a system of play that you are comfortable with but that the majority of your contemporaries are not.


Inquiry Into Slaying of Sheik's Confidant Appears Open
When prosecutors charged Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 14 other men with a massive terrorist conspiracy in August, the indictment left out one crime that investigators had long tried to tie to the sheik.
The investigators had said at that time that they had looked into but could not prove whether Mr.
Abdel Rahman had ordered his followers to carry out the 1991 murder of Mustafa Shalabi, his former confidant and a fund-raiser supporting the rebels in the Afghan war.
Now, lawyers who used to represent the sheik say the Government is again trying to tie Mr.
Abdel Rahman to the killing.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $56 million of medium-term notes due in 1998 priced at 100 to yield 5.24 percent through Lehman Brothers.
The five-year notes are noncallable.


Apple Going Into Home Marketing
Apple Computer Inc. will jump into the home-shopping market next month with a compact disk that contains text, sound and images from mail-order catalogue companies like Lands' End, Williams-Sonoma and Tiffany &amp; Company.
The disk, called En Passant, includes 21 catalogues from 18 retail companies as well as information on personal finance, video interviews and magazine articles.


Classical Music in Review
Orpheus Chamber Orchestra Carnegie Hall


Disabilities Act Wins Support in AIDS Case
A Federal judge in Manhattan has issued the first ruling to uphold the authority of the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 over health plans that are accused of discriminating against employees with AIDS.
Judge John E. Sprizzo on Friday dismissed a motion by a benefits fund representing a group of New York construction companies and laborers' unions, which contended that it was exempt from the disabilities act.


Classical Music in Review
Ridge Ensemble  Weill Hall


Corrections
A book review yesterday about "Never Stop Running: Allard Lowenstein and the Struggle to Save American Liberalism," by William H. Chafe, misstated the date of Mr.
Lowenstein's assassination.
It was March 14, 1980, not 1981.


Trade Pact Raises Threat of TB From Cattle
To the Editor:
"Increased Trade in Mexican Cattle Brings a Rise in Disease to U.S. Dairies" (news article, Nov. 16), on the threat of tuberculosis from cattle imported from Mexico, misses important points about the potential health threat to consumers and to feedlot and meatpacking workers.


Sun Microsystems Invests in Rival
In a surprising alliance of former rivals, Sun Microsystems Inc. is scheduled to announce Tuesday that it plans to invest $10 million in Next Inc., the struggling brainchild of Steven P. Jobs, co-founder of Apple Computer.
The alliance is certain to leave many Silicon Valley pundits scratching their heads, because until recently Sun Microsystems and Next had been bitter enemies, quarreling over the lucrative and rapidly growing market for corporate work station applications.


China Stiffs the President
Braving criticism by human rights activists and their supporters in Congress, President Clinton held out the hand of diplomatic compromise to China's President, Jiang Zemin, in Seattle last Friday.
What he got in return was an unyielding lecture on China's hard-line positions.
Nobody realistically expected China to announce dramatic changes in its human rights, arms sales and trading policies on the spot.
But by failing to reciprocate Washington's carefully planned package of good-will gestures, Beijing confounds the Administration's efforts to reverse an alarming slide in U.S.-China relations.


DIALOGUE: TV Violence: Survival Vs. Censorship; Save the Children
Imagine an intruder entering your home, seizing your children and forcing them to watch 8,000 murders and 100,000 acts of violence.
A monstrous crime?
Yes.
A crime that would do untold psychological harm to your children?
No question about it.
Wake up, parents.
Chances are that your child is the victim I just described.
The statistics come from the American Psychological Association, which reported in 1992 that by the end of elementary school, the average American child has watched that many acts of violence on television.
Saturday morning children's programming leads the way in mayhem and gore, showing an average of 32 violent acts per hour.


Mutilation of Girls' Genitals: Ethnic Gulf in French Court
As she rose in a Paris courtroom, a small figure in a black lawyer's robe, Linda Weil-Curiel talked so softly that the judge and the jury had to lean forward to hear her argument.
"This is butchery invented to control women," Miss Weil-Curiel told the court.
She was speaking as a member of the prosecution team in the trial of a woman accused of allowing the genital mutilation of her daughter, a tradition widely practiced in parts of Africa and Asia for centuries.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article last Tuesday about Iraqi Government moves against opposition Shiite Muslims in southern Iraq misspelled the name of the Geneva representative of the Supreme Council of Islamic Revolution in Iraq, an opposition group.
He is Ali Ali al-Adhadh.


Leo Burnett Plans More Layoffs in U.S.
Leo Burnett U.S.A. of Chicago said yesterday that it planned to lay off about 200 of its 2,200 employees in the United States by the end of the year.
The layoffs will be in addition to an early retirement package being offered to about 20 employees.


Review/Critic's Notebook; Celebrating Segovia As Master and Mentor, Even as Imperfect Man
The daylong celebration of Andres Segovia's centenary at the Metropolitan Museum of Art on Sunday must have seemed at least slightly peculiar to any nonguitarists in the audience.
What the museum offered, in the form of lectures on Segovia's life, working methods, achievements and instruments, ending with a recital by Manuel Barrueco, was the kind of examination regularly lavished on composers and hardly ever on performers.
Performers, after all, stand a rung or two lower than composers on the evolutionary ladder.
Composers create; performers are their henchmen.
And besides, performers reap their rewards -- adulation, high fees -- in this world.
Composers are rewarded posthumously, with such benefits as daylong seminars.
But there are reasons Segovia's work warrants examination.
Although the Spanish guitar had both virtuosos and enthusiasts long before he made his public debut in 1909, it was Segovia's evangelical zeal that brought the instrument into the mainstream of concert life.
And although his own compositions were few and inconsequential, he goaded hundreds of composers into writing for his instrument.


The Kremlin's Latest Intrigue Shows How Real Life Imitates James Bond
On a muggy July night when the power struggle in Moscow was at a low simmer, a 30-year-old Russian lawyer was secretly smuggled into the country from self-imposed exile in Canada, on a special mission for President Boris N. Yeltsin.
He was installed behind a computer in a large though shabby suite inside the Kremlin, and ordered to sift through suitcases of documents for incriminating evidence against Mr.
Yeltsin's powerful enemies.
But these enemies, including the just-dismissed head of the Security Ministry and the country's chief prosecutor, managed to track him down and even issue an order for his arrest.
After a nerve-tingling journey that began at a Moscow railway station and ended in the skies over Armenia, the young lawyer made his way back to Canada, where the threats against him continued.


CHRONICLE
Oh, sigh.
Another teen-age idol is a bachelor no more.
LUKE PERRY, 27, the actor who plays Dylan McKay on "Beverly Hills 90210," was married on Saturday night to MINNIE SHARP, 24, in a private ceremony in Los Angeles.
So private were the rites, in fact, that PAUL BLOCH, Mr.
Perry's publicity agent, said yesterday that he did not know any details of the wedding, the honeymoon or Miss Sharp's occupation.


Court Delays Its Decision On Paramount Suit by QVC
The Delaware Chancery Court postponed a decision in QVC Network Inc.'s lawsuit against Paramount Communications Inc. until tomorrow, the companies said yesterday.
Vice Chancellor Jack Jacobs had previously indicated that he would hand down his decision yesterday.


Review/Television; Two Antic Evenings Of Comedy and Tributes
A brief history of comedy over the past several decades can be gleaned from a couple of this week's better shows: Home Box Office's "Tracey Ullman: A Class Act," tonight at 10:15; and NBC's "Comedy Hall of Fame," tomorrow night at 9.
Comics, comedians, comic actors: they're all here seriously trying to be funny, and often succeeding brilliantly.
Miss Ullman is anything but a stand-up comic.
She is a gifted character actress and mimic with a ferocious appetite for life's foibles.
After barreling around New York for HBO last month in the first of what should be (if there's any justice in comedy heaven) a string of specials, Miss Ullman now returns home to England to burrow into its entrenched class system.
The gallery of characters, many of them odd, most played by herself, is very much in the style of Lily Tomlin.
Laughing doesn't preclude a wince or two.


'No Pain, No Gain' Not a Network Motto
In the aftermath of ABC's decision to drop the New York City Marathon last week after a 13-year run, Fred Lebow, the race's director, was rueful, knowing that he could have delayed the decision.
"Last year," Lebow said, "they offered us a two-year deal and we took one. That was our mistake."


12 Charged In Drug Deals That Involve Phone Fraud
It is the latest in criminal sophistication: A cellular phone's electronic identity is snatched out of the air and used to make thousands of dollars worth of illegal calls.
Law-enforcement officials say the technique has lately become a hallmark of the illegal drug trade.


Some Big Games Provide Big Questions
Florida State (10-1) and Nebraska (10-0), ranked 1-2 and 2-1 in the polls that count, appear headed for an almost absolutely dead certain national championship showdown in the Orange Bowl on Jan. 1, with two caveats.
One is Oklahoma (8-2), which plays archrival Nebraska on Friday.


A Teen-Age Pall at the Mall; After-School Gatherings Please Youths but Are Worrying Many Others
On the days Joel Rosario goes to school, he heads over to the Chapel Square Mall in the late afternoon to hang out with his friends and to meet girls.
When he doesn't go to school, Mr.
Rosario says he goes there even earlier.
Mr.
Rosario, 16, is one of hundreds of teen-agers who congregate in the downtown New Haven mall every afternoon and have created a prickly public relations problem for the mall.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Sunday about an "open letter" campaign in the Slovenian press referred imprecisely to its origin.
The campaign was originated by Slovenian newspapers, not by President Milan Kucan.


COMPANY NEWS: Short but Sweet; Seattle Stores Promote Candy With Itty-Bitty Ad
A chocolate candy that is an obsession in the Pacific Northwest and elsewhere will star this month in what a retailer is trumpeting as the shortest and the most expensive television commercial ever made.
Bon Marche, one of the region's leading department stores, which says it is the only chain in the West selling the candy, called Frangos, will broadcast the commercial on Nov. 29 on "Evening Magazine," a local news magazine shown on KING-TV, an NBC affiliate here.


New York Simulcasting? Don't Bet on It Quite Yet
Will New York save itself from another bleak winter at the races?
Horses, trainers and even jockeys are starting to gather their tack this week for the trip south and a winter of racing in Florida.
But what kind of landscape will they leave behind in the North?


New York Police Ban Use of Choke Holds
The New York City Police Department has banned the use of choke holds, the restraining maneuvers that cut off the flow of blood and oxygen to the brain and have been blamed in the deaths of suspects in New York and other cities.
The directive comes as police departments around the country have prohibited or reviewed the use of various choke holds by officers.
It also underscores a nationwide debate on the appropriate use of police force, from 9-millimeter handguns to "hogtying" to pepper spray.


AT DINNER WITH: Ricki Lake; Half the Weight and on the Rise
AMERICA'S most pleasingly plump, cheerfully chubby young actress is no longer living with euphemisms.
When Ricki Lake made her movie debut almost six years ago in John Waters's "Hairspray," those were the kinds of phrases people used to describe her.
Back then, while just 19 years old and 5 feet 4 inches tall, she weighed 200 pounds.
Her role -- a sweet, overweight girl-next-door who lands a spot on a Baltimore television dance program -- won her a quick and early dose of fame.


Eating Well
THE announcement this week that the Federal Government's information on nutrients in food is flawed and unreliable will probably cause even greater angst among those who are already confused about healthful eating.
It shouldn't.
Each time there seems to be contradictory advice about nutrition, a few more people who have been on the fence about their eating habits throw up their hands in disgust and rush to a fast-food outlet for a fix of fries and a burger.
Now, finding out that the the bible of nutrition information, known as Handbook 8, has a lot of errors, may be the coup de grace for many of the fence-sitters.


Bratton of Boston Indicates He Is Interested in New York Police Job
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton of Boston, who less than two weeks ago said he was not interested in the job, indicated yesterday that he would consider an offer to become the commissioner of New York City's Police Department.
The remarks by Mr.
Bratton, who served as head of the city's transit police before going to Boston in January, came as he emerged as a top contender for commissioner under the city's next mayor, Rudolph W. Giuliani, according to people familiar with the search by one of Mr.
Giuliani's transition committees.


Reviews/Film: A Perfect World; Where Destiny Is Sad and Scars Never Heal
In a perfect world, says one rueful character in Clint Eastwood's quietly devastating new film, the events that shape the story of Butch Haynes and Philip Perry wouldn't have to happen.
But the world in which "A Perfect World" unfolds is a place of sad, ineradicable scars that shape their characters' destinies.
Many of those scars have to do with the burdens and misapprehensions of manhood, as illustrated beautifully during the course of this eloquent road film and understood by Mr.
Eastwood in subtle, profoundly moving ways.
The time and place -- Texas, just before the Kennedy assassination -- tacitly heighten the film's sense of needless tragedy.
"A Perfect World," a deeply felt, deceptively simple film that marks the high point of Mr.
Eastwood's directing career thus far, could never be mistaken for a young man's movie.
Nor could it pass for a reckless, action-packed tale of characters on the run.
A lifetime's worth of experience colors the shifting relationship between Butch, superbly played by Kevin Costner with an unexpected toughness and passion, and Phillip (T. J. Lowther), the little boy who starts out as Butch's prisoner and winds up as his surrogate son.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Guerlain's lengthy review works to a small agency's advantage.
GUERLAIN INC., ending one of the longest recent account reviews, has selected a small, creatively focused New York agency to help raise the profile of its premium-priced products.
Guerlain, the American unit of Guerlain S.A., the venerable French fragrance, cosmetics and skin-care marketer, disclosed yesterday that it would move its account to Weiss, Whitten, Stagliano Inc. from J. Walter Thompson New York, its agency for the last seven years.


U.S. and Seoul Differ on Appeal To North Korea on Nuclear Sites
The United States and South Korea agreed today to hold out to North Korea a package of inducements if it allows some inspections of its nuclear sites and resumes discussions with South Korea.
But the two longtime allies could not agree on exactly what the offer should contain.
At a meeting at the White House today with President Clinton, President Kim Young Sam of South Korea expressed some reluctance to go along with an earlier American proposal to offer the North a suspension of an annual American-South Korean military training exercise, called "Team Spirit," saying he felt that this might make him look too eager to meet one of the North's principal demands.


Ruling on Demjanjuk Errs in Assumptions
To the Editor:
Re "Judges Assail U.S. Handling of Demjanjuk" (front page, Nov. 18): The decision by the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit in the case of John Demjanjuk is shocking.
One element of it is also erroneous.
You report that "the judges said the prosecutors had faced pressure from Jewish groups to win the case," noting a 1986 visit to Israel on behalf of the Anti-Defamation League by Allan A. Ryan Jr., head of the Justice Department's Office of Special Investigations.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Burlington Motor Holdings, Daleville, Ind., parent of Burlington Motor Carriers, is selling $100 million of senior subordinated notes due in 2003 priced at 100 to yield 11.5 percent through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co. and Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.
The issue is redeemable in five years and is rated B-3 by Moody's and CCC+ by S.&amp; P. *
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., or Freddie Mac, is selling $100 million of debentures due 2003 priced at 100 to yield 5.99 percent through Lehman Brothers.
The 10-year debentures are noncallable.


Ralph Berton Is Dead; Jazz Teacher Was 82
Ralph Berton, a teacher and writer on jazz, died last Wednesday at Valley Hospital in Ridgewood, N.J.
He was 82 and lived in North Bergen, N.J.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said his son John, of New York City.


Food Notes
T-Day and Counting
Making a well-burnished, flavorful turkey is not a complicated task.
But certain guidelines should be followed.
Whether fresh or thawed, the bird should not be ice cold before it goes into the oven.
Leaving it out for about an hour should bring it to room temperature.
Preheat the oven to 425 degrees.
Stuff the turkey, if desired, and put it in a rack on a roasting pan.
Roast it for 30 minutes, basting once or twice with a little butter or oil.
Reduce the heat to 350 degrees, and continue roasting until the thigh meat registers 170 degrees -- altogether about 18 minutes a pound.
The United States Department of Agriculture recommends 20 to 25 minutes a pound and 180 degrees internal temperature for a stuffed turkey, but that excessive margin of safety results in dry turkey.
Since salmonella is destroyed at 160 degrees, cooking the turkey to 170 degrees is more than adequate.
The internal temperature of the stuffing should be 165 degrees.


Rangers Would Love A Parade, Any Parade
The frustration of the Montreal Canadiens was personified in Patrick Roy, their star goalie, who fished four pucks out of his net last night when the Rangers won by 5-4 at Madison Square Garden.
In the first period, Roy bent over in his crease and threw an unpenalized left jab to the head of Steve Larmer, who didn't belong there.
In the second period, with Mike Gartner steaming around his net, Roy stepped into him with a thundering shoulder check and earned a two-minute penalty for his deed.


Holiday Tales of Turkey And Its Discontents
LEFTOVER turkey is a ghoulish reminder on the morning after Thanksgiving.
Roasted, dismembered and carved, remnants of big bird tweak the guilt of all who dare crack the refrigerator door.
Therein lies evidence of abundance, testimony to overindulgence.
Great are the protestations of all who possess an embarrassment of second-day turkey.
Many claim to loathe it and say they can endure its presence and face its challenge only because leftover turkey is an unavoidable byproduct of Thanksgiving's behemoth sine qua non.


Corrections
An obituary on Monday about the film director Emile Ardolino misspelled the name of his companion.
It is Luis Miguel Rodriguez-Villa.


A Lucky Ending for Rangers as Streak Reaches 13
The game ended in controversy, a final-seconds Montreal goal disallowed on a debatable offside call by one of the National Hockey League's substitute linesman, who was clearly out of position on the play.
It ended with a late-game surge by the Canadiens, some soft play from the Rangers and a lot of reasons for different people to complain.
But last night's Rangers-Canadiens game at Madison Square Garden did not end much differently than the previous 12 games played by New York.
With a 5-4 victory over Montreal, the defending Stanley Cup champions, the Rangers extended their league-leading unbeaten streak to 13 games.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about American policy toward North Korea referred incorrectly in some editions to a meeting between President Clinton and President Kim Young Sam of South Korea.
It was yesterday, not this coming Friday.
A report about the meeting appears today on page A16.


Review/Theater: Perestroika; Following an Angel For a Healing Vision Of Heaven on Earth
If you end the first half of an epic play with an angel crashing through a Manhattan ceiling to visit a young man ravaged by AIDS, what do you do for an encore?
If you are Tony Kushner, the author of "Angels in America," you follow the angel up into the stratosphere, then come back home with a healing vision of heaven on Earth.
"Perestroika," the much awaited Part 2 of Mr.
Kushner's "Gay Fantasia on National Themes," is not only a stunning resolution of the rending human drama of Part 1, "Millennium Approaches," but also a true millennial work of art, uplifting, hugely comic and pantheistically religious in a very American style.


George Balanchine's "The Nutcracker"; An Intimate 'Nutcracker' With a Culkin Star Turn
You don't have to believe in Santa Claus to be swept up in the magic of Christmas.
By the same token, some of the fairy-tale magic of "George Balanchine's 'The Nutcracker' " has been lost in its translation from a staged ballet into a film, but it doesn't hurt; it is only a fraction.
If Rouben Ter-Arutunian's depiction of the Sugarplum Fairy's Palace of Pleasures is obviously a painted stage set, its elegant swirl of domes and pedestals is still gorgeous.
And what is sacrificed in realism is gained in intimacy.
In close-up, Karinska's original costumes are even more awesome in their beauty and richness of detail than when seen from afar.
And children who watch Emile Ardolino's handsome film version of the New York City Ballet's classic production can be vicarious participants in its Christmas Eve games, folk dances and roughhouse.


DOCTORS QUESTION HAITI HEALTH DATA
A physicians' group that took part in a recent study of the impact of an international embargo on the people of Haiti has challenged the study's projection that the sanctions may be killing as many as 1,000 children each month.
In a statement today the group, Physicians for Human Rights, said the estimated death toll was an unreasonable extrapolation of data from a small region.
The report was drawn up by the Center for Population and Development Studies at Harvard University.


2 Clinton Aides Are Leaving on a Winning Streak
Two senior White House officials will leave the Government by the end of the year, taking advantage of the relatively good news the Administration has enjoyed of late to make their departures.
Howard Paster, the President's chief liaison with Congress, and Roy M. Neel, the deputy chief of staff, both said their decisions were based on personal reasons and to some degree by the professional burnout in a hectic first year in office.


U.S. RESTRICTIONS ON ADULT TV FARE ARE STRUCK DOWN
A Federal appeals court today struck down as unconstitutional a Government regulation prohibiting indecent television programs broadcast between the hours of 6 A.M. and midnight.
The three-member panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit said that in trying to shield children from indecent programs, the Federal Communications Commission did not adequately consider the First Amendment rights of adults to view such programs.


Mexico City Journal; South of the Border, the Trade Deal Was a Breeze
As the Mexican Senate prepared to cast its decisive vote on the free trade agreement that will join this country with the United States and Canada in the largest trading bloc in the world, a wall of dark suits rose on Monday night by the telephones in the Senate cloakroom.
"He's the President of Austria," a senator moaned into the receiver, apparently meaning that nation's Foreign Minister, Franz Vranitzky, who was in town on a visit.
"I cannot not go to the dinner."


God Saves Queen, but Not England Coach
GRAHAM TAYLOR quit as manager of England's national team yesterday, six days after his team was eliminated from the World Cup.
The announcement was made by GRAHAM KELLY, chief executive of the English Football Association.
The F.A. said LAWRIE McMENEMY, Taylor's assistant, had also resigned.
Taylor, who had been manager for nearly three and a half years, had eight months remaining on his contract.


C. Clark Zantzinger Jr. Architect, 89
C.
Clark Zantzinger Jr., a founder of the Philadelphia architectural firm Kneedler, Mirick &amp; Zantzinger died on Sunday at his home in Haverford, Pa.
He was 89.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Mary.


A Hero in the AIDS Battle and a Fun-Loving Boy
AT the Javits Center on Saturday night James Matarazzo, who is 12 years old, was hanging around backstage waiting for his friend Joey DiPaolo, who is 14, to go on and address the 10,000 dancers who were raising money to combat AIDS.
It was about an hour before Joey was scheduled to tell the people about his own experience with the disease but at that moment he was stripping sesame seeds off crackers and slipping them into the sodas of his friends.
Joey is small and has the kind of wiseguy cuteness that lets him get away with this kind of stuff.


G.O.P. Governors Weigh Protecting 'Own' Issues
Vowing to regain control of a majority of the nation's statehouses next year after almost 25 years of Democratic dominance, Republican governors concluding a conference here today agreed that the best course was to emphasize issues that have been staples of their party platform: fighting crime, cutting taxes and controlling spending.
But strains were already apparent among the governors over how best to pre-empt the Democrats' attempts to make these issues their own and not compromise traditional Republican principles.


Mammograms Before 50? A Hung Jury
THE decision was eagerly awaited.
A prestigious advisory board to the National Cancer Institute was going to vote on what to do about the mammography question.
Should women under 50 have regular mammograms?
The answer could help settle one of the most contentious disputes in medicine.
But the decision, reached yesterday morning, was anticlimactic.
Rather than coming down on one side of the question or the other, the board carefully noted that there was great controversy and then recommended that the cancer institute defer making any changes in its guidelines.


Blair Having Treatment on Injured Calf
BONNIE BLAIR, the top American female in the sport, is receiving treatment this week in Rocky River, Ohio, for a calf muscle injury she sustained last Friday in Germany, the United States speed skating federation said yesterday.
Blair tore the fascia, the sheath that covers the calf muscle, in her right leg during an outdoor practice session in Inzetl, Germany.


For Gators, Seminole Game Could Be Route to No. 1
The last two things Errict Rhett and his University of Florida teammates will see before they step onto the field on Saturday to face Florida State are a very old photograph and a fairly new sign.
The photo is of Dale Van Sickle, a defensive end from the 1928 Florida team, which almost went to the Rose Bowl.
The sign, painted above the doorway two seasons ago, reads:
"The Swamp. Only Gators Get Out Alive."


Market Place; A Squeeze Play by Big Aluminum
Few companies would pass up a chance to wish away a big competitor.
And apparently, the American aluminum industry is willing to do just that -- even if it means losing a big customer while they are at it.
All five publicly traded producers of aluminum have seen their stocks move up in recent days, as much as 10.5 percent.
Investors are anticipating that Western countries will coax reluctant aluminum producers from the Commonwealth of Independent States to curb production to help stem a world glut of the metal.


Now, Back to Health Care: the White House Is Mobilizing Again
With the distraction of the North American Free Trade Agreement behind them, the Administration and its allies are hoping to use the two-month Congressional recess to revive their campaign for overhauling the health care system.
They have planned a relentless exercise in retail politics: town meeting by town meeting, hospital by hospital, videotape by videotape.
Most Cabinet officials will descend on hospitals this holiday weekend to draw attention to the issue again.
The Democratic National Committee is planning to distribute 10,000 copies of its new video, "Health Care Security, Challenge to America," and one million copies of its brochure, "What the President's Plan Means for You."


Mammograms Before 50? A Hung Jury
THE decision was eagerly awaited.
A prestigious advisory board to the National Cancer Institute was going to vote on what to do about the mammography question.
Should women under 50 have regular mammograms?
The answer could help settle one of the most contentious disputes in medicine.
But the decision, reached yesterday morning, was anticlimactic.
Rather than coming down on one side of the question or the other, the board carefully noted that there was great controversy and then recommended that the cancer institute defer making any changes in its guidelines.


In School
The Department of Education recently invited 200 great teachers, including most of the state teachers of the year, to the Capitol to get their points of view on education reform.
The Department, with aid from A.T. &amp;T., flew the teachers here and housed them for two days at the Omni Shoreham Hotel.
In the first hour and a half, the Education Secretary, the Deputy Secretary and several assistant secretaries welcomed the great teachers; praised them for devoting their lives to the most noble profession; couldn't emphasize enough how the teacher is the most important cog in educational reform.


Sports of The Times; Don't Argue With the Computer
NOTRE DAME fans, enraged, continue to call the office.
They don't even try to disguise their voices or claim they are freshmen who happen to be pledging Lou Holtz House.
They just want to know how their team could be ranked No. 9 by The New York Times's trusty computer this week, five places lower than the rest of the entire poll-taking civilization.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
I recently came across an ad in a supplement to a Sunday suburban paper for "best-loved recordings" of Steve Lawrence and Eydie Gorme.
Rather than wait for the local mall to open, I ventured into Manhattan and headed for a nearby Sam Goody.
Not only was I unable to find that particular CD, I couldn't find any Steve and Eydie recordings.
The clerk tried to help me: "Steve Lawrence and Eydie Gorme -- right? And they record together?"
"Yes, usually," I answered. "They're married."


Now Batting and Playing First Base for the Yankees, (the Mets?), It's . . .
Although the Yankees are the New York team that has expressed interest in Rafael Palmeiro, whose job the Texas Rangers have given to Will Clark, the Mets could become the New York team that seriously tries to sign him.
The possibility is not as farfetched as it might seem now.
The Mets' interest, though nonexistent at the moment, could develop quickly depending on a decision the Rangers must make in the next two weeks.
Now that the Rangers have given Clark $30 million to play first base for them, do they offer Palmeiro salary arbitration by the Dec. 7 deadline?


Cusk, Spanish Style, Adds a Twist To Traditional Holiday Meals
BECAUSE of my wife's Spanish origin, fish is a traditional choice for our family at holiday time.
The spicy Spanish-style fish featured in this menu is typical of the dishes reflecting her heritage that appear on our Thanksgiving and Christmas tables along with the more familiar turkey and trimmings.
The cusk I use here, also called ocean whitefish or oyster fish, is a mild-flavored member of the cod family with firm-textured white flesh that separates into large flakes when cooked.
If you haven't seen it at your fish market, it is probably either because your fish dealer is knowingly labeling cusk as cod, or because he is unfamiliar with it.
If the dealer doesn't know cusk, suggest he ask his supplier about the availability of this fish, which is relatively inexpensive and plentiful almost year round.


Review/Film; Kafka's Sinister World by Way of Pinter
Harold Pinter can be Kafkaesque even when presenting a love story, as he did in letting the finely calibrated events of "Betrayal" unfold in reverse chronological order.
So the combination of Mr.
Pinter and Franz Kafka would appear to be made in heaven, or at least in the kind of hell that both parties might understand.
In fact, Mr.
Pinter's spare, faithful adaptation of "The Trial," which opens today at Angelika 57, sounds as much like his own work as it does like Kafka's, thanks to the mocking tone and the mysteries built into the material.
The distinctions between the two voices are as specific and fascinating as they are minuscule.


Comptroller Says City's Slump Is Ending
H.
Carl McCall, the New York State Comptroller, said yesterday that New York City was beginning a slow, uneven recovery after a four-year slump that cut far deeper than elsewhere in the nation.
"This report is good news, if only because the bad news is finally ending," said Mr.
McCall.
His conclusion that the downward economic drift had reached bottom echoed the views expressed by many of the city's economists and business leaders in recent months.


Blurring Cultural Lines In a Quick Autumn Meal
IS this what they mean by cross-cultural eating?
An Italian pasta seasoned with Chinese dried mushrooms, sesame oil and soy sauce?
And to further blur the lines, a side dish of broccoli rape, the Italian name for the vegetable known in Chinese as choy sum?
Most of the ingredients are commonplace for this wonderfully quick meal, just right for an autumn dinner after a long day at work.
Many Italians and Chinese love broccoli rape, which looks sort of like broccoli with flowers and leaves, but to most Americans its bitterness is an acquired taste.
Once the taste is acquired, however, you won't want to part with broccoli rape.
It is versatile, and it cooks quickly.


G.M. Sets Sale of 3 Parts Plants
To streamline its parts-making operations, the General Motors Corporation said today that it planned to sell most of its ownership in three plants that manufacture starting motors, generators and other products.
G.M. said it had reached a preliminary agreement to sell the plants to Transportation Systems Inc., a group of investors led by Harold K. Sperlich, a former president of the Chrysler Corporation and a well-regarded car and truck developer.
The investors also include Citicorp Venture Capital and Mascotech Inc., an automotive components company based in Taylor, Mich.
G.M. will own 20 percent of the joint venture.


Investors Hug Vermont Teddy Bears
A fondness for teddy bears, generally expressed with hugs, took a new form yesterday as investors warmly embraced the stock of the Vermont Teddy Bear Company on its first day of trading.
After an initial offering of 1.5 million shares at $10 a share, the price soared to $19 in over-the-counter sales before it closed at $16.75.


The City's Budget: Better and Worse
Mayor David Dinkins's final report on the New York City budget shows him leaving office with a perfect score -- four balances in four years.
Expected post-election spending cuts will not be needed to balance this year's books, he says.
But in the same report he warns of looming deficit problems much larger than he estimated last summer.
So much for that perfect score, and welcome to City Hall, Mr. Giuliani.


Israeli Arabs Say P.L.O. Pact Is a Path to First-Class Status
Diab Mahroum, a pastry maker in this ancient city, could see for himself how much the world had suddenly changed when he put his baklava on display at a food fair in October in Cologne, Germany.
For the first time, he said, business executives from Saudi Arabia and Kuwait felt confident enough to visit the Israel booth.
Before you could say pistachio, they had placed orders for 8,000 pounds of sweets from the factory here founded by his father, Foad.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  CROSSROADS FOR COLISEUM?
It has been nearly nine years since Mortimer B. Zuckerman won the right to replace the Coliseum, a building much maligned by architecture critics, with a gleaming new mixed-use complex on Columbus Circle.
Today the Coliseum still stands, and the fate of the site, prime real estate near the southwest corner of Central Park, seems as uncertain as ever.
B3.
COMMISSIONER CANDIDATE IS COY
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton of Boston, who less than two weeks ago said he was not interested in the job, indicated yesterday that he would consider an offer to become the commissioner of New York City's Police Department.
The remarks by Mr.
Bratton, who served as head of the city's transit police before he left in January to become the No. 2 police official in Boston, came as he emerged as a top contender for commissioner.
B3.


Reform: Now for the Hard Part
Nobody said it would be easy.
And Democratic leaders suffered a few scary moments before winning House approval for an overhaul of Congressional campaign financing.
The reforms will, at last, give challengers of modest means a competitive shot at well-financed incumbents.
The bill approved on Monday includes spending limits and an innovative system of free vouchers that candidates may use to purchase media time and mailings.
It passed by a comfortable, 80-vote margin.
But to get to that point the measure first had to survive a key procedural vote on a challenge from Representative Mike Synar, Democrat of Oklahoma.
Had Mr.
Synar won that vote, thus permitting him to offer a weaker alternative, the stronger reform supported by the Democratic leadership might have been doomed.


Books of The Times; Experts in the Comedy of Self-Love
Private Parts
By Howard Stern
Illustrated. 446 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.
Confessions of a Raving, Unconfined Nut
Misadventures in the Counterculture
By Paul Krassner
Illustrated. 352 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.
Attention, readers: If you do not want to hear about breasts, buttocks, body parts and foreign objects; about radio orgies accompanied by Gene Autry crooning "Back in the Saddle Again" and Janis Joplin singing "Down on Me"; about lesbians at Girl Scout camp and talk show hosts who call themselves names like Rumpleforeskin, please turn the page.
If you choose to read on, know that you have entered the Comedy Testosterone Zone.
That zone takes in the playpen, the club, the bar and the Entertainment Network.
For Paul Krassner, who is 61, it includes the counterculture of the 60's and draws on political satire.
For Howard Stern, who is 20 years younger, it includes the Long Island subculture of the 80's and relies on social caricature.


Mrs. Doubtfire; A Wig, a Dress and Voila! Dad Becomes the Nanny
"Mrs. Doubtfire" is about a man who dresses as a dowager to invade the household of his estranged wife, who has thrown him out.
The movie's biggest challenge, one that it does not exactly meet, is to persuade the audience that this husband and father's escapade is somehow an act of love.
Fortunately, Robin Williams lurks behind that latex face mask, ready to scatter wicked jokes and brilliant non sequiturs about whatever crosses his mind.
Mr.
Williams's genius is in these details, and it is given free rein during much of "Mrs. Doubtfire," as in the sequence that has him improvising with toy dinosaurs at a television studio and coming up with a Raptor Rap. ("Yo, yo, see me/I'm livin' below the soil/I'll be back/But I'm comin' as oil.") But if this film creates as good a showcase for the Williams zaniness as anything short of "Aladdin," it also spends too much time making nice.
And not enough time making sense.


Pressure for a Decision on Coliseum Site
It has been nearly nine years since Mortimer B. Zuckerman won the right to replace the Coliseum, a building much maligned by architecture critics, with a gleaming new mixed-use complex on Columbus Circle.
Today the old Coliseum still stands, and the fate of the site, which occupies prime real estate near the southwest corner of Central Park, seems as uncertain as ever.
Now, however, the Dinkins administration, in its waning days, is moving to compel the developer to build on the site or forfeit his deposit.


Food Notes
T-Day and Counting
Making a well-burnished, flavorful turkey is not a complicated task.
But certain guidelines should be followed.
Whether fresh or thawed, the bird should not be ice cold before it goes into the oven.
Leaving it out for about an hour should bring it to room temperature.
Preheat the oven to 425 degrees.
Stuff the turkey, if desired, and put it in a rack on a roasting pan.
Roast it for 30 minutes, basting once or twice with a little butter or oil.
Reduce the heat to 350 degrees, and continue roasting until the thigh meat registers 170 degrees -- altogether about 18 minutes a pound.
The United States Department of Agriculture recommends 20 to 25 minutes a pound and 180 degrees internal temperature for a stuffed turkey, but that excessive margin of safety results in dry turkey.
Since salmonella is destroyed at 160 degrees, cooking the turkey to 170 degrees is more than adequate.
The internal temperature of the stuffing should be 165 degrees.


Alexander Langmuir Dies at 83; Helped Start U.S. Disease Centers
Dr.
Alexander D. Langmuir, a leader in public health who is credited with saving hundreds of thousands of lives through his innovations in controlling epidemics, died on Monday in Baltimore, where he lived.
He was 83.
The cause was kidney cancer, the Department of Health and Human Services said.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League
CINCINNATI REDS -- Named Bob Boone bench coach, Joel Youngblood first base coach and Grant Jackson bullpen coach.


Corrections
The Personal Health column last Wednesday about a genetically engineered hormone, bovine somatotropin, or BST, that increases milk production in cows misstated the view of the American Academy of Pediatrics on its safety and desirability.
An editorial in Pediatrics, the organization's journal, endorsed the use of the hormone, but the academy has not taken a position.


Prince Charles, the Royal Cookie Maker
His face most certainly does not adorn the packaging, Paul Newman-like, and it would be a stretch to refer to his new products as big sellers.
But Prince Charles has plunged into the food business -- more specifically, the cookie business -- and so far no one is laughing.
Last year, under the brand name Duchy Originals, the Prince brought out his first product, the Oaten Biscuit.
This month he introduced a Gingered Biscuit.


Of Children And Dinos, With Feeling
"We're Back! A Dinosaur's Story" is a brief, witty children's book about dinosaurs who pay a visit to New York City, a place that is described amusingly from the dinosaurs' point of view.
But tiny admirers of Hudson Talbott's illustrated volume will be surprised to find the dinosaurs in the animated screen version, "We're Back! A Dinosaur's Story," play second fiddle to a cast of people.
The people are brash, rude and occasionally scary.
This was somebody's idea of how to enhance the authentic New York City atmosphere.
That somebody is apparently John Patrick Shanley, whose screenplay creates a wise-talking little boy named Louie as the story's human hero.
Louie is the kind of confident lad who addresses dinosaurs as "you morons" when he first sees them, although of course he comes to love them deeply only moments later. (The film is also shamelessly sentimental.) Accompanying Louie is a lonely rich girl named Cecilia, whom he addresses as "Babe" at one point and kisses amorously in the film's finale.


Contract for Police Holsters Prompts Query on Bidding
What initially looked like a routine contract to supply the New York City Police Department with holsters and gun belts for its new 9-millimeter semiautomatic pistols has resulted in an internal investigation and the discovery that the president of a company that has received departmental business was convicted of a felony.
In a convoluted chain of events, the department tentatively awarded the $600,000 contract to a Queens company, then revoked it and ultimately learned that the head of the company had pleaded guilty to Federal charges of offering a $25,000 bribe to suppress an income tax investigation.


Diminutive Runner, Big Numbers And a Dream of Playing in the N.F.L.
Archie Griffin, the only player to win the Heisman Trophy twice, sat in his office at Ohio State recently and talked about one of the top running backs in college football this season.
"It's amazing what he has done," said Griffin, a two-time all-American with the Buckeyes in the mid-1970's.
"To have a career like he's had, well, it's just a great accomplishment."


Holiday Tales of Turkey And Its Discontents
LEFTOVER turkey is a ghoulish reminder on the morning after Thanksgiving.
Roasted, dismembered and carved, remnants of big bird tweak the guilt of all who dare crack the refrigerator door.
Therein lies evidence of abundance, testimony to overindulgence.
Great are the protestations of all who possess an embarrassment of second-day turkey.
Many claim to loathe it and say they can endure its presence and face its challenge only because leftover turkey is an unavoidable byproduct of Thanksgiving's behemoth sine qua non.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the temporary reinstatement of Dr.
Edmond L. Volpe as president of the College of Staten Island misstated his scheduled role at commencement ceremonies next May.
He is to participate in the exercises; he will not preside.


James Stern, 88, a Prolific Writer Of Short Stories and a Translator
James Stern, an Anglo-Irish critic and prolific writer of short stories that traced his wanderings through the British Isles, Africa, the Pacific and America, died on Monday at his home in Tisbury, England.
He was 88.
Mr.
Stern was in frail health after he broke a hip several months ago, said a friend, the writer Nora Sayre.


Review/Film; Youngsters on the Run From Painful Realities
Twelve-year-old Josh Whitney (Jacob Tierney) is a computer whiz and a fast-talking liar who can worm his way out of any scrape by inventing an ingenious story.
He is also acutely sensitive to his divorced father's disappointment in him because he can't catch a football.
Josh's feisty 8-year-old brother, Sam (Noah Fleiss), also has problems.
His schoolmates call him Alien and Spaceman, he gets into fights, and he may not be promoted into the third grade.


Review/Film: George Balanchine's "The Nutcracker"; An Intimate 'Nutcracker' With a Culkin Star Turn
You don't have to believe in Santa Claus to be swept up in the magic of Christmas.
By the same token, some of the fairy-tale magic of "George Balanchine's 'The Nutcracker' " has been lost in its translation from a staged ballet into a film, but it doesn't hurt; it is only a fraction.
If Rouben Ter-Arutunian's depiction of the Sugarplum Fairy's Palace of Pleasures is obviously a painted stage set, its elegant swirl of domes and pedestals is still gorgeous.
And what is sacrificed in realism is gained in intimacy.
In close-up, Karinska's original costumes are even more awesome in their beauty and richness of detail than when seen from afar.
And children who watch Emile Ardolino's handsome film version of the New York City Ballet's classic production can be vicarious participants in its Christmas Eve games, folk dances and roughhouse.


Backer Spielvogel's Canadian Venture
Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide said yesterday that it had formed a joint venture with five advertising and marketing executives in Montreal to open an agency that will take over the Montreal office of Backer Spielvogel's Canadian unit, BSB Canada.
Terms of the agreement were not disclosed.
At the new shop, called Armada BSB Monde Worldwide, Ross MacKay, 56, former general manager of BSB Canada in Montreal, becomes vice chairman.
He shares responsibilities with the five executives.


Time to Pull Up Your Socks, Puerto Rico
To the Editor:
While I applaud your coverage of the referendum in Puerto Rico, I disagree with the premise of "Puerto Rico Chooses, for Now" (editorial, Nov. 16), that Congress has a responsibility to act on the results of that vote.
Given a historical chance to define a permanent relationship with the nation of which they are citizens, the people of Puerto Rico chose not to decide and to cling to an arrangement that is not only colonial in nature but that is also inherently unsustainable.


Sotheby's Chief Is Leaving As Auction Sales Rebound
Sotheby's Holdings Inc. announced yesterday that Michael L. Ainslie, its president and chief executive, was stepping down and would be replaced by Diana D. Brooks, the president and chief executive of its worldwide auction division.
Mr.
Ainslie, 50, who joined Sotheby's in 1984, is leaving the top post as the auction business shows signs of breaking out of a three-year slump that battered the company's balance sheet.


Palestinian Says Israel Agrees to Release Captives
The chief Palestinian negotiator at talks on carrying out the Israel-P.L.O. peace accord said today that Israel had agreed to include the release of Palestinian prisoners in any final agreement.
The Palestinian negotiator, Dr.
Nabil Shaath, said Israel softened its position on the issue of the release of Palestinian prisoners, promising to include it in writing in an agreement on Israel's withdrawal from Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho that the two sides are negotiating.


Review/Film: Mrs. Doubtfire; A Wig, a Dress and Voila! Dad Becomes the Nanny
"Mrs. Doubtfire" is about a man who dresses as a dowager to invade the household of his estranged wife, who has thrown him out.
The movie's biggest challenge, one that it does not exactly meet, is to persuade the audience that this husband and father's escapade is somehow an act of love.
Fortunately, Robin Williams lurks behind that latex face mask, ready to scatter wicked jokes and brilliant non sequiturs about whatever crosses his mind.
Mr.
Williams's genius is in these details, and it is given free rein during much of "Mrs. Doubtfire," as in the sequence that has him improvising with toy dinosaurs at a television studio and coming up with a Raptor Rap. ("Yo, yo, see me/I'm livin' below the soil/I'll be back/But I'm comin' as oil.") But if this film creates as good a showcase for the Williams zaniness as anything short of "Aladdin," it also spends too much time making nice.
And not enough time making sense.


From the Ashes, a Plus for a Utility
The New England Power Company burns a lot of coal at its waterfront power plant here: 2,400 tons a day, day in, day out, year round.
Because about 10 percent of coal is unburnable sand and shale -- what one executive calls "prehistoric dirt" -- the result is about 300,000 tons of coal ash a year that must somehow be removed.
That is a quarter of a ton of ash a year for each residential electricity customer.


U.S. and South Korea Agree, but Fail to Agree, on North Korea Plan


Review/Film: Mrs. Doubtfire; A Wig, a Dress and Voila! Dad Becomes the Nanny
"Mrs. Doubtfire" is about a man who dresses as a dowager to invade the household of his estranged wife, who has thrown him out.
The movie's biggest challenge, one that it does not exactly meet, is to persuade the audience that this husband and father's escapade is somehow an act of love.
Fortunately, Robin Williams lurks behind that latex face mask, ready to scatter wicked jokes and brilliant non sequiturs about whatever crosses his mind.
Mr.
Williams's genius is in these details, and it is given free rein during much of "Mrs. Doubtfire," as in the sequence that has him improvising with toy dinosaurs at a television studio and coming up with a Raptor Rap. ("Yo, yo, see me/I'm livin' below the soil/I'll be back/But I'm comin' as oil.") But if this film creates as good a showcase for the Williams zaniness as anything short of "Aladdin," it also spends too much time making nice.
And not enough time making sense.


State Suspends Doctor
The New York State Health Commissioner yesterday suspended the medical license of a Long Island physician accused of causing the death of a 14-year-old girl in his office on July 29.
The physician, Dr.
Maximo C. Chua, who has a practice in Smithtown, was charged with gross negligence and incompetence.
The board said he "inappropriately" gave the girl vitamins intravenously.


2 Beach-Erosion Control Projects Planned for L.I.
Two emergency beach-erosion control projects, the first for the North Shore of Long Island since last winter's destructive northeaster, were announced today by Federal officials.
Representative Gary L. Ackerman, whose district includes portions of Queens, Nassau and Suffolk Counties, said the Army Corps of Engineers would build a $750,000 dune barrier, made of cement, steel, bedding stone and sand, along a 900-foot section of Asharoken Beach.
The narrow strip of land was washed out by a two-day storm last December, leaving 4,000 residents stranded without electrical power, telephone service and emergency medical care.


The Great Expanding Holiday
New Yorkers live and breathe the rattle and hum of their city.
How could they not, with eight million people streaming along the sidewalks, jamming the subways or circling the block in a vain search for parking spaces?
Once, cushiony daytime silence in the city came only with snowstorms or holidays.
These days, however, the holiday season -- in this case Thanksgiving -- seems to have stretched and grown, providing a blessed period of tranquillity longer than any that went before.


Warner-Lambert Will Close 7 Factories and Cut 2,800 Jobs
The Warner-Lambert Company announced a restructuring yesterday, including plans to close seven factories and eliminate 2,800 jobs.
The cuts would be in addition to a reduction of 2,700 jobs already under way.
Warner-Lambert, based in Morris Plains, N.J., said the cuts, when completed, would reduce its worldwide employment by 16 percent from a high of 35,000 two years ago.


Blurring Cultural Lines In a Quick Autumn Meal
IS this what they mean by cross-cultural eating?
An Italian pasta seasoned with Chinese dried mushrooms, sesame oil and soy sauce?
And to further blur the lines, a side dish of broccoli rape, the Italian name for the vegetable known in Chinese as choy sum?
Most of the ingredients are commonplace for this wonderfully quick meal, just right for an autumn dinner after a long day at work.
Many Italians and Chinese love broccoli rape, which looks sort of like broccoli with flowers and leaves, but to most Americans its bitterness is an acquired taste.
Once the taste is acquired, however, you won't want to part with broccoli rape.
It is versatile, and it cooks quickly.


A Holiday Shopping Spree for the Needy


Kelly Bans Choke Holds By Officers
The New York City Police Department has issued an order banning the use of choke holds, the restraining maneuvers that cut off the flow of blood and oxygen to the brain and have been blamed in the deaths of suspects here and around the nation.
The directive comes as police departments around the country have prohibited or reviewed the use of various choke holds by officers.
It also underscores a nationwide debate, fueled by greater violence on city streets, on the appropriate use of police force, from 9-millimeter handguns to "hogtying" to pepper spray.


Review/Film; Kafka's Sinister World by Way of Pinter
Harold Pinter can be Kafkaesque even when presenting a love story, as he did in letting the finely calibrated events of "Betrayal" unfold in reverse chronological order.
So the combination of Mr.
Pinter and Franz Kafka would appear to be made in heaven, or at least in the kind of hell that both parties might understand.
In fact, Mr.
Pinter's spare, faithful adaptation of "The Trial," which opens today at Angelika 57, sounds as much like his own work as it does like Kafka's, thanks to the mocking tone and the mysteries built into the material.
The distinctions between the two voices are as specific and fascinating as they are minuscule.


Whitman Garners Praise In Handling Rollins Furor
There have been longer honeymoons.
After eking out a victory in a raucous New Jersey gubernatorial race, Christine Todd Whitman might have expected a respite, a sweet and relaxed recess between the rigors of campaigning and the difficulties of governing.
But as innumerable headlines have reported, Mrs.
Whitman's respite was barely a week old when her former chief strategist and campaign manager, Edward J. Rollins, shattered the peace by telling reporters that the campaign had paid off black ministers and Democratic Party workers to suppress the black vote.
Fueled by angry black clergymen, finger-pointing Democrats and national attention, the furor raged on even after Mr.
Rollins recanted, leaving Mrs.
Whitman to cope with a scandal that threatened to maim her administration before it began.


Moore's Position Redefined
As the Jets' offense has evolved, so has Rob Moore's role.
During the early part of the season, Moore was a big-play receiver, using his height and athletic ability to stretch defenses deep and strike fear into cornerbacks.
But over the last four games, since returning from arthroscopic surgery to repair torn cartilage in his right knee, Moore has become more of a possession receiver, running short crossing routes and slant patterns over the middle.


Cusk, Spanish Style, Adds a Twist To Traditional Holiday Meals
BECAUSE of my wife's Spanish origin, fish is a traditional choice for our family at holiday time.
The spicy Spanish-style fish featured in this menu is typical of the dishes reflecting her heritage that appear on our Thanksgiving and Christmas tables along with the more familiar turkey and trimmings.
The cusk I use here, also called ocean whitefish or oyster fish, is a mild-flavored member of the cod family with firm-textured white flesh that separates into large flakes when cooked.
If you haven't seen it at your fish market, it is probably either because your fish dealer is knowingly labeling cusk as cod, or because he is unfamiliar with it.
If the dealer doesn't know cusk, suggest he ask his supplier about the availability of this fish, which is relatively inexpensive and plentiful almost year round.


Looking for La Bomba: Is Tomba on the Wane?
Can that really be the fiery Italian ski racer, Alberto Tomba, over there in the dimly lit corner of the Vintage restaurant, his shoulders hunched and his eyelids at half mast?
It is Tomba -- Tomba la Bomba to the legion of fans in Italy who exult in his flamboyant successes on the slopes.
But here he is in Winter Park, getting ready for this weekend's World Cup event in Park City, Utah, yet looking more like a truck driver from Newark after a two-day haul.


A Flying Dutchman May Miss World Cup
MARCO van BASTEN, the top striker of Italian League champion A.C.
Milan and the Netherlands national team, may miss the rest of the season and the World Cup finals because his right ankle has been slow to heal.
Dr.
RODOLFO TAVANA, the A.C.
Milan physician, said yesterday that the three-time European footballer of the year will be sidelined for at least three more months.
The World Cup, to be played in nine American cities, starts on June 17.


Referees Agree on Money
Don Meehan, the agent for the striking National Hockey League officials, said yesterday that the union had accepted the league's proposed salary scale and has halved its benefits proposal from an increase of $1.5 million a year to $750,000 a year for the 58 members.
"We've made a serious concession we're not entirely happy with," said Meehan, whose group has been on strike for 10 days.
"I'm not sure where we go from here except for completely capitulating to the league. If that's the response they're looking for, it's not going to happen."


U.S.-Europe Trade Talks
Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, and Sir Leon Brittan, the European Community's top trade official, held detailed discussions today to resolve some of the many quarrels that have delayed the completion of a 116-nation free trade pact.
They also agreed to hold more talks in Brussels next week.
The tempo of the talks has increased because both sides are increasingly optimistic that a deal can be struck by Dec. 15, when the Administration's negotiating authority from Congress is scheduled to expire.


Workplace Bias Tied to Obesity Is Ruled Illegal
In the first Federal appeals decision of its kind, a three-judge panel in Boston ruled unanimously on Monday that job discrimination against severely obese people violated a Federal disabilities law.
The case was brought by Bonnie Cook, a 5-foot 2-inch, 320-pound Rhode Island woman who was refused a job at a state center for retarded people because of her weight.


It's 'Showtime' Again for Erving, a k a Dr. J
Six years after his retirement, JULIUS ERVING thought the time was now right for a return to pro basketball, so yesterday he became the studio analyst of NBC's "NBA Showtime" pre-game show.
He replaces QUINN BUCKNER, who left the studio last season to become coach of the Dallas Mavericks.


Holiday Tomorrow
Thanksgiving is tomorrow. Here are holiday schedules. NEW YORK
PARADE: Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade begins at 9 A.M. tomorrow at 77th Street and Central Park West.
The parade will continue to Columbus Circle, south on Broadway to Herald Square, and east on 34th Street to Seventh Avenue.


2 Beach-Erosion Control Projects Planned for L.I.
Two emergency beach-erosion control projects, the first for the North Shore of Long Island since last winter's destructive northeaster, were announced today by Federal officials.
Representative Gary L. Ackerman, whose district includes portions of Queens, Nassau and Suffolk Counties, said the Army Corps of Engineers would build a $750,000 dune barrier, made of cement, steel, bedding stone and sand, along a 900-foot section of Asharoken Beach.
The narrow strip of land was washed out by a two-day storm last December, leaving 4,000 residents stranded without electrical power, telephone service and emergency medical care.


Personal Health; Turning your anger into a constructive force
THREE New Yorkers were recently overheard venting their spleen:
"Michael, leave your brother alone. Now go to your room and stay there until you're ready to behave. And no movies for you today."


New Study Links Increased Hypertension To Greater Anxiety in Middle-Aged Men
THERE may be more truth than doctors have long believed to the notion of a relationship between tension (as in stress) and hypertension (as in high blood pressure), at least for middle-aged men.
A newly published study has found that over the course of decades, highly anxious men are twice as likely to develop high blood pressure as are men who take life more in stride.


Mr. Rollins Stirs the Pot Anew
The plot twists in the New Jersey election fracas get stranger and stranger.
Ed Rollins, campaign manager in the final stretch of Christine Todd Whitman's successful run for the governorship, spent nearly seven hours last Friday denying under oath his earlier boast about suppressing the black vote -- but also indicated there might be some truth to it.
That tantalizing tidbit was then denied by another key player.
Mrs.
Whitman insists the suppression never happened; she urges the Democrats to call off the dogs.
Not yet, says Gov.
Jim Florio, and rightly so.
While it is surely frustrating for Mrs.
Whitman to have her victory parade pelted by charges and countercharges, there are important questions yet to be answered.
The people of New Jersey have a right to a full airing.


Those Gaudy Billboards Still Give a Thrill
To the Editor:
I read with interest your Nov. 19 Advertising column by Michael Janofsky about the soon-to-be-lighted Hertz supersign in Times Square.
Mr.
Janofsky asks if the sign will be glitzy enough to compete with some of the greats in the area.
Only time will tell.


Cuomo Names Stein to Head A Study Panel
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today announced the creation of a commission to study shortcomings in the state's juvenile justice system, and appointed Andrew J. Stein, the departing New York City Council President, to head the panel.
Mr.
Cuomo said he created the commission largely in response to statistics showing that violent crime by juveniles has risen 80 percent since 1988 and that homicide has become the leading cause of death for people under the age of 25 in New York City.


U.N. FINDS BAGHDAD IS GAINING IN SOUTH
President Saddam Hussein has now succeeded in draining about 40 percent of the fresh water marshlands of southern Iraq so his military forces can press their campaign against dissident Shiite Muslims there, a United Nations human rights inspector reported today.
Max van der Stoel, a former Dutch Foreign Minister, said the Iraqi Government's systematic draining of the southern marshes around the confluence of the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers, so that its forces can penetrate and drive out the so-called Marsh Arabs from their traditional homes, was "a serious human rights violation against the people of the region."


Bridge
Two major titles were decided here Monday night at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals.
Four of the world's largest collections of master points became a little bigger when Paul Soloway of Mill Creek, Wash., Bob Goldman and Mike Passell, both of Dallas, and Mark Lair of Canyon, Tex., won the Open Board-a-Match Team title by a narrow margin.


Tariff Fought On Tobacco
With the North American Free Trade Agreement clear of Congress, Senator Hank Brown, a Colorado Republican, introduced legislation this week that would delay a protectionist measure on tobacco that was included in the budget package approved by Congress last summer.
The new bill is aimed at a regulation that requires tobacco products made in the United States to include 75 percent American-grown tobacco and places a high tariff on imported tobacco.
The regulation is to be in effect pending a determination whether it violates the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.


Review/Theater: Perestroika; Following an Angel For a Healing Vision Of Heaven on Earth
If you end the first half of an epic play with an angel crashing through a Manhattan ceiling to visit a young man ravaged by AIDS, what do you do for an encore?
If you are Tony Kushner, the author of "Angels in America," you follow the angel up into the stratosphere, then come back home with a healing vision of heaven on Earth.
"Perestroika," the much awaited Part 2 of Mr.
Kushner's "Gay Fantasia on National Themes," is not only a stunning resolution of the rending human drama of Part 1, "Millennium Approaches," but also a true millennial work of art, uplifting, hugely comic and pantheistically religious in a very American style.


Peter Henderson; Oil Executive, 69
Peter Henderson, owner of the Peter Henderson Oil Company of New York and Houston and an avid polo player, died on Saturday at his home in Locust Valley, L.I.
He was 69.
The cause was cancer, said his daughter, Melissa Henderson.


Up for Auction: The Cooking Tips Of a Duchess
JUST when we thought they'd been totally forgotten, they're back.
Amy and Joey?


Grumman Agrees to Pay U.S. $20 Million
The Grumman Corporation agreed yesterday to pay $20 million to the Federal Government to avert criminal charges of defrauding the Navy and to strengthen the way it supervises internal corporate ethics.
The settlement came as part of a broad Pentagon investigation of improprieties in the military industry.
Grumman, the 10th-largest military contractor in the United States, did not admit wrongdoing.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Scuffle? What Scuffle? Barkley Is Cleared
CHARLES BARKLEY of the Phoenix Suns will not be prosecuted for a scuffle during which a patron at a bar said he was punched by the National Basketball Association's most valuable player.
"No or little likelihood of conviction," City Prosecutor KAY BIGELOW said yesterday in Scottsdale, Ariz., when asked to explain her decision.
She declined to elaborate.


OLYMPICS: 80 Days to Lillehammer &lt;HEADLINEAfter Hard-Luck Year, U.S. Skaters Cutting New Groove
As the last figure-skating season ended last spring, American women were suffering through more crashes than the average Indy car race.
Nancy Kerrigan, a bronze medalist at the 1992 Winter Olympics, stumbled to fifth place at the 1993 world championships.
Tonya Harding, overweight and perhaps over the hill, finished fourth in a weak field at the United States championships and didn't even qualify for the world title event.
Meanwhile, Oksana Baiul, a 15-year-old sprite from Ukraine, came from nowhere to No. 1 in the world.
Suddenly, people were talking shutout in the medal count for the American women at the 1994 Winter Games.
But that was last season.
The new one has brought new hopes for the Americans, particularly for Kerrigan, who has situated herself as the gold-medal favorite for Lillehammer, site of the Games in Norway, while Baiul has struggled just to maintain her balance, much less her No. 1 ranking.


Strike Is Called Victory For Women, Not Unions
President Clinton's intervention Monday in the strike by flight attendants at American Airlines represented a breakthrough for working women, rather than a victory for organized labor, union leaders said today.
The airlines, more than most industries, are thoroughly dominated by well-paid men, both those who run them and those who fly the planes.
Through the years, flight attendants, most of them women, have been forced to settle for less than the airlines' male employees -- less pay, inferior benefits, more inconvenient working arrangements and indignities including rigid dress and weight codes and lectures on how to be nice.


Treasury Market Bill Is Passed
It took more than two years and came with little fanfare.
But around 2 A.M. yesterday, the House of Representatives gave the final approval needed to pass the bond market legislation proposed in the wake of the Salomon Brothers Treasury scandal in August 1991.
The bill, which was passed by the Senate on Monday night and is expected to be signed by President Clinton, would make some important changes in the regulation of the $2.4 trillion Government securities market.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  FOR ISRAEL'S ARABS, OPTIMISM  Many of the 800,000 Arab citizens of Israel are hopeful that the agreement on Palestinian self-rule will bring sweeping improvements in their lives economically, politically and even culturally.
A1  Talks made progress on the issue of Palestinian prisoners.
A6


60-Minute Gourmet
FOR several years I have devoted this pre-Thanksgiving space to those who enjoy turkey but do not have enough guests to roast an entire bird.
For them I suggest turkey breast, which is widely available in supermarkets.
Turkey breast can be seasoned all sorts of ways and served with various stuffings.
I cook the stuffing separately, which lets me monitor the breast's doneness more precisely.
When a meat thermometer in the center of the breast reaches 160 degrees, it is done.
Let it rest, covered, 10 minutes or so before carving.


Giants' Defensive Line: Surprising Strong Point
It's not as if the origins were even humble.
No, the point of departure for the 1993 defensive line for the Giants was more like a tumultuous ground zero.
Players had fled for larger dollars.
Others had been cut.
Backups had become starters.
Veterans had been benched.
One prized rookie had been hurt.
There were new schemes, new faces, new coaches.
It looked as if being bad would get old quick.


Board Reports Played Down School Crime, Cortines Says
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said yesterday that Board of Education officials have in recent years minimized the extent of violence in the New York City schools by restricting information about school-based crimes, and he vowed to change the practice.
"It's time for a system like ours," Mr.
Cortines said, "to share this information about the crisis of violence in our schools so that people can begin to devise a solution."


Personal Health; Turning your anger into a constructive force
THREE New Yorkers were recently overheard venting their spleen:
"Michael, leave your brother alone. Now go to your room and stay there until you're ready to behave. And no movies for you today."


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Big East
The Boston College-West Virginia contest on Friday will be the three-year-old conference's first big game, a national television match that will affect rankings, bowls and opinions about a mythical national champion.


Skating By -- at 72 M.P.H.; Some Lovers of Rollerblading Are Speeding Up the Sport by Latching Onto Autos
Tom Rooney, an investment banker for Prudential Securities, was riding in a limousine uptown on Third Avenue for cocktails at Mortimer's the other night.
A companion tapped his knee, and said, "I think there's someone at the door for you."


Tarkanian Loses Another Round in Court
A federal appeals court in San Francisco ruled yesterday against former Nevada-Las Vegas basketball coach, JERRY TARKANIAN, and declared unconstitutional a Nevada law that was intended to protect him and others facing National Collegiate Athletic Association sanctions.
The 1991 state law, which specified the legal rights of Nevada state employees accused of wrongdoing by any national sports association, is an invalid attempt to regulate interstate commerce, said the 9th United States Circuit Court of Appeals.


Airlines Almost Back to Normal, Just When Normal Is the Busiest
The nation's flight paths returned to near-normal yesterday, the first full day of operations after the five-day flight attendants' strike against American Airlines.
More than 70 percent of the airline's 2,500 daily departures were operating with passengers, American officials said, with departure percentages reaching the 80's and 90's at the carrier's hubs in Dallas/Fort Worth and Miami.


Molson Picks Shop For Media Buying
Molson Breweries U.S.A., which imports 25 brands including Molson Golden, Molson Ice and Foster's Lager, named Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc. of New York to handle its media-buying responsibilities, previously handled by Lintas New York.
Backer Spielvogel, which already handles media buying for all the brands marketed by Molson U.S.A.'s parent, the Miller Brewing Company, was awarded the assignment without a review.
Though billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated the account could increase to $35 million in billings as Miller increases marketing support of Molson U.S.A. brands.
The assignment follows the appointment of Young &amp; Rubicam Chicago to handle the creative portion of Molson U.S.A.'s account, also previously at Lintas.


Youngsters on the Run From Painful Realities
Twelve-year-old Josh Whitney (Jacob Tierney) is a computer whiz and a fast-talking liar who can worm his way out of any scrape by inventing an ingenious story.
He is also acutely sensitive to his divorced father's disappointment in him because he can't catch a football.
Josh's feisty 8-year-old brother, Sam (Noah Fleiss), also has problems.
His schoolmates call him Alien and Spaceman, he gets into fights, and he may not be promoted into the third grade.


Wine Talk
MORE wine and spirits will be bought, and presumably consumed, in the next five weeks than in any other comparable time of the year.
The shops will be crowded, and even the friendliest clerks will get a bit edgy when asked what wine goes best with, say, shrimp in black bean sauce.
Many people are nervous in wine shops.
The endless racks of different bottles, the different countries, the different vintages, the incomprehensible names -- it's an intimidating scene in the best of times.
During the holidays, it can be terrifying.


Bleak Romanian Economy Growing Ever Bleaker
Bundled up against the icy cold of an unseasonably early winter, Victoria Uleia shopped at Bucharest's thinly supplied outdoor market, splurging on cheese but not meat.
Mrs.
Uleia, a well-paid accountant until she retired four years ago, says she is incomparably worse off financially than she was when the most brutal Communist regime in Eastern Europe collapsed.
She is glad Communism is gone, she said.
But, she added, economic conditions do not have to be as bad as they are.


Clinton Seeking To Consolidate Bank Agencies
The Clinton Administration today outlined a plan to create a single agency to regulate the entire banking industry, saying that dividing the job among four agencies no longer made sense.
The four agencies were created over the last several decades in response to various changes in the banking industry.
But the face of the financial industry has changed drastically in recent years, as banks and savings and loans have expanded the services they offer consumers, consolidated over state lines through mergers, and responded to increasing competition from nonbank companies.


Clash Between 2 Senate Leaders Stalls Brady Bill
A measure mandating a five-day waiting period for the purchase of a handgun stalled again today as Senate leaders failed to agree on a few remaining details.
The policy disagreements over the measure, the Brady bill, were compounded by a personality clash between Senators Bob Dole, Republican of Kansas, and Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware, that is growing into a bitter grudge match.


2 in House Want to Free Baby Bells
Two Congressional chairmen who have played opposing roles in regulating the telephone industry today proposed the lifting of all major restrictions on local phone companies that were put into practice when the old Bell System was broken up in 1984.
The move sets the stage for a fresh debate of the industry's future.


COMPANY BRIEFS
MACANDREWS &amp; FORBES HOLDINGS INC., New York, a company controlled by Ronald O. Perelman, the financier, said it had formed Meridian Sports Inc. as an active recreation company that will consist of four water sport units: Boston Whaler, Mastercraft, O'Brien and Skeeter.
TRIMAS CORP., Ann Arbor, Mich., has agreed to acquire the Lamons Metal Gasket Co., Houston, a subsidiary of Mascotech, for $60 million in cash.


To Help Girls Keep Up: Math Class Without Boys
In Laura Gamb's high school mathematics and science classes last year, the boys would make fun of her if she said million when she meant billion, and she learned to deflect their ridicule by saying, "Just kidding," or "Never mind."
In Amber West's middle school math class, she was so afraid of sounding stupid when she didn't understand something that she swallowed her questions, whispered them to a teacher between periods or waited until she got home and asked her mother.


Republic Breaks With Tradition
When the Republic New York Corporation sheepishly announced late last Friday that it was withdrawing its hostile bid to acquire the Green Point Savings Bank, it put to an end -- at least for now -- one of the most curious episodes in the recent history of banking.
Republic's groundbreaking attempt to thwart a planned initial public offering of stock by a mutual savings bank terrified the cloistered savings industry and infuriated the State Banking Superintendent, Derrick D.  Cephas, who declared the bid "illegal."


Sports Briefings; Victory in Alaska For St. Raymond's
St.
Raymond's, the defending New York City and state champion in the Catholic High School Athletic Association, opened its basketball season in Alaska Monday night by thrashing West Anchorage, 105-51, in the opening round of the Great Alaska High School Shootout.


Tatyana Nikolayeva, 69, Dead; Pianist and Shostakovich Expert
Tatyana Nikolayeva, a Russian pianist widely respected for her interpretations of the music of Bach and Shostakovich, died on Monday in San Francisco.
She was 69 and lived in Moscow.
The cause was a cerebral aneurism, said Jacques Leiser, her American manager.
Miss Nikolayeva suffered a cerebral hemorrhage during a recital on Nov. 13 at the San Francisco Music Center.
Stricken again soon afterward, she lost consciousness permanently.
She was being treated at the California-Pacific Medical Center when she died.


Elementary Democracy
To the Editor:
In "Rollins, the Unlikely Reformer" (column, Nov. 15), William Safire seems not to see the difference between getting the vote out and suppressing it.


Driver's Shot From the Point Earns a Point for the Devils
Devils 1, Nordiques 1
Two of the National Hockey League's best young goaltenders got to shine last night in Quebec before fans from their hometown area.


E.D.S. Signs On for Britain's Tax Agency
Electronic Data Systems, the information technology subsidiary of the General Motors Corporation, said yesterday that it had won a 10-year, $1.5 billion contract from Britain's national tax agency.
The contract with the Inland Revenue board, the largest data processing contract awarded in Europe, exceeds the 10-year, $1.34 billion deal announced last week between British Aerospace P.L.C. and the Computer Sciences Corporation of El Segundo, Calif.
Computer Sciences had been the other finalist for the Inland Revenue deal and, according to industry analysts, had been the front-runner.


Review/Pop; Singing Dirty but Staying Wholesome
Gloria Trevi, the young Mexican soap opera star turned pop singer, jams a microphone into her crotch when she performs.
She shakes a can of Coca-Cola (her sponsor), places it at groin level and pops the top.
She pours Coke over her breasts.
She licks her fingers, mimicking rote sexuality.
She talks dirty and sings even dirtier.
And her audience, which ranges from pre-teen girls to grandparents, loves it all.
Miss Trevi, a star in Mexico and across Latin America, has found a way to be overtly sexual without being, well, sexual.
She's stunningly beautiful, just an inch from an innocent prettiness, which helps; the raunch of her act doesn't camouflage her wholesomeness.
It's clear that she is working an act, and though she just as clearly loves the act, her public persona is still a game.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.97
3.05
2.58
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.14
3.20
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.25
3.30
3.40
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.33
5.44
6.43
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.31
6.38
7.53
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.36
7.42
8.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.68
5.68
6.40
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Review/Film; Of Children And Dinos, With Feeling
"We're Back! A Dinosaur's Story" is a brief, witty children's book about dinosaurs who pay a visit to New York City, a place that is described amusingly from the dinosaurs' point of view.
But tiny admirers of Hudson Talbott's illustrated volume will be surprised to find the dinosaurs in the animated screen version, "We're Back! A Dinosaur's Story," play second fiddle to a cast of people.
The people are brash, rude and occasionally scary.
This was somebody's idea of how to enhance the authentic New York City atmosphere.
That somebody is apparently John Patrick Shanley, whose screenplay creates a wise-talking little boy named Louie as the story's human hero.
Louie is the kind of confident lad who addresses dinosaurs as "you morons" when he first sees them, although of course he comes to love them deeply only moments later. (The film is also shamelessly sentimental.) Accompanying Louie is a lonely rich girl named Cecilia, whom he addresses as "Babe" at one point and kisses amorously in the film's finale.


Book Notes
Snowballing to Success  With a laughably minuscule promotion budget and no publisher to speak of, "The Celestine Prophecy," a first novel by James Redfield, a resident of Saginaw, Ala., might have been expected to die a quick and anonymous death.
But Mr.
Redfield published the book himself, calling his one-book company "Satori," and when he brought it to distributors, a curious thing began to happen.
"The book took off by its own little self," said Joyce Norman, the press agent for the Southern Publishers Group in Birmingham, Ala., one of the distributors.
"A woman called in and said, 'I need 12 copies because my neighbors and I only have one and we're tearing all the pages out and taking them home.' I started calling bookstores and they'd say, 'What's so special about it?' and I'd say: 'I don't know. I just know that people are buying them by the hundreds and that one little bookstore out West just bought 400 copies.' And they'd say, 'Did you say 4 copies?' And I'd say, 'No, 400.' "


INSIDE
Haiti Death Toll Questioned
A doctors' group challenged a study that said sanctions on Haiti kill up to 1,000 children a month.
Page A12. 'Perestroika' Opens
Part 2 of Tony Kushner's "Angels in America" opened on Broadway.
Frank Rich's review is on page C11.


Markets to Shut For Holiday
All banks and financial markets in the United States will be closed tomorrow in observance of Thanksgiving.
But markets in other countries will be open.
On Friday, there will be limited trading on the American financial markets.


In America; Battered Girls in School
Most of the time the girls just take the beatings.
They may think that getting beaten up is normal, or that there are no alternatives.
Or they may be afraid they will be beaten worse if they complain, perhaps even killed.
Their fears are not irrational.
Although they are still in high school, murder is real to them, as real as the stinging cuts and aching bruises on their adolescent faces and bodies.
Most have known someone who was murdered.
There is no reason to believe it couldn't happen to them.


While We Lock Up More People, Street Violence Only Grows
To the Editor:
It is dismaying when someone with the obvious intelligence and erudition of John DiIulio Jr. seriously proposes in "Save the Children" (Op-Ed, Nov. 13) that more police and jails, in whatever concentration or configuration, can help alleviate the crime problems of our cities.


Wine Talk
MORE wine and spirits will be bought, and presumably consumed, in the next five weeks than in any other comparable time of the year.
The shops will be crowded, and even the friendliest clerks will get a bit edgy when asked what wine goes best with, say, shrimp in black bean sauce.
Many people are nervous in wine shops.
The endless racks of different bottles, the different countries, the different vintages, the incomprehensible names -- it's an intimidating scene in the best of times.
During the holidays, it can be terrifying.


White House Dinner, but What Kind?
To most of the world, the dinner President and Mrs.
Clinton gave this evening for President Kim Young Sam of South Korea and his wife looked like the state dinners other Presidents have given for visiting heads of state.
But it was not, the White House insisted, a state dinner, merely an official one.
Yet when the President rose to toast Mr.
Kim, he spoke of it as "the first state dinner we've had at the White House."


Giant Map Expands Pupils' Horizons


New Study Links Increased Hypertension To Greater Anxiety in Middle-Aged Men
THERE may be more truth than doctors have long believed to the notion of a relationship between tension (as in stress) and hypertension (as in high blood pressure), at least for middle-aged men.
A newly published study has found that over the course of decades, highly anxious men are twice as likely to develop high blood pressure as are men who take life more in stride.


Bridge
Two major titles were decided here Monday night at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals.
Four of the world's largest collections of master points became a little bigger when Paul Soloway of Mill Creek, Wash., Bob Goldman and Mike Passell, both of Dallas, and Mark Lair of Canyon, Tex., won the Open Board-a-Match Team title by a narrow margin.


Merry-Go-Round's Credit Challenged
A shiver of concern swept through New York's garment industry yesterday as some factoring companies and credit-rating agencies advised clients against shipping goods to Merry-Go-Round Enterprises Inc., the operator of trendy specialty stores.
The company, which operates the Merry-Go-Round, Cignal, Attiva and Dejaiz chains, has been paying its bills regularly, manufacturers said yesterday.
"This has been a very fine, fine company, but they've had some difficulties this year," said Richard Posner, executive vice president of Credit Exchange Inc., a credit monitoring agency.
"People are worried going forward. Is this company going to represent some credit risk?"


W.W.F. Boss Enters Not Guilty Plea
The boss of the World Wrestling Federation, VINCENT McMAHON JR., pleaded not guilty yesterday in Uniondale, L.I., to federal charges accusing him of peddling muscle-building steroids to wrestlers between 1985 and 1991.


With Friends and Readers, Rushdie Pleads His Case
Surrounded by security guards and with the author Susan Sontag acting as what he jokingly referred to as "my beard," Salman Rushdie emerged from hiding tonight to receive an honorary post as visiting professor of the humanities at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
It was the 46-year-old writer's third public appearance in the United States since he was forced into an underground existence nearly five years ago after the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini of Iran condemned his book "The Satanic Verses" as blasphemous and sentenced him to death.
The reward for his assassin is more than $2 million.


Dinkins, a Professor With a Five-Year Plan


A Redecorated White House, the Way the Clintons Like It
It was farewell to the free trade agreement and the Pacific Rim conference.
At the White House today, it was time to concentrate on domestic issues -- like whether the country is ready for blood-red fabrics and neo-Victorian decor ornamented with gold Napoleonic laurel wreaths.
Like a family that has proudly remodeled but is worried what the neighbors might think, the Administration provided the most fleeting of glimpses of the much-anticipated restoration of the Clinton family quarters on the second floor of the White House.


60-Minute Gourmet
FOR several years I have devoted this pre-Thanksgiving space to those who enjoy turkey but do not have enough guests to roast an entire bird.
For them I suggest turkey breast, which is widely available in supermarkets.
Turkey breast can be seasoned all sorts of ways and served with various stuffings.
I cook the stuffing separately, which lets me monitor the breast's doneness more precisely.
When a meat thermometer in the center of the breast reaches 160 degrees, it is done.
Let it rest, covered, 10 minutes or so before carving.


Starks Willing to Pay Price for Success
It is no coincidence that John Starks has suffered two broken noses since March.
Starks is unafraid to stick his nose where the action is.
And that tenacity is one of the qualities that makes him so effective.
Starks tied a National Basketball Association record for most 3-pointers in a half (seven) during the Knicks' 119-87 wipeout of Miami on Monday.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
I recently came across an ad in a supplement to a Sunday suburban paper for "best-loved recordings" of Steve Lawrence and Eydie Gorme.
Rather than wait for the local mall to open, I ventured into Manhattan and headed for a nearby Sam Goody.
Not only was I unable to find that particular CD, I couldn't find any Steve and Eydie recordings.
The clerk tried to help me: "Steve Lawrence and Eydie Gorme -- right? And they record together?"
"Yes, usually," I answered. "They're married."


Bittersweet Memory for Minnesota's Haskins
Clem Haskins said that, all things considered, he was happy to be back in New York.
Last March, Haskins, the University of Minnesota's basketball coach, completed a five-team sweep and led his team to the National Invitation Tournament championship with a thrilling 62-61 victory over Georgetown.


Behind a Glamorous Image, Flying Working Class
The corporate stylebook so strictly decrees the proper image of flight attendants, from head to heels, that they have a wry saying about the requirements of their jobs: "You've got to be willing to go anywhere -- and to cut your hair."
And along with the cheerful smiles and starched shirts, the attendants say they are expected to be accommodating, even obedient.


An Adventure in Light and Shadow


How Africa Understands Female Circumcision
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal condemns female circumcision, a traditional practice common to many African and Arabic peoples, as "female mutilation" in "Female Genital Torture" (column, Nov. 12).
The inspiration for Mr.
Rosenthal's column is the introduction by Representatives Patricia Schroeder of Colorado and Barbara Rose Collins of Michigan of H.R. 3247, a bill to prohibit female circumcision in the United States.
He also calls for cutting grants and loans to governments that do not discourage the practice.


Prince Charles, the Royal Cookie Maker
His face most certainly does not adorn the packaging, Paul Newman-like, and it would be a stretch to refer to his new products as big sellers.
But Prince Charles has plunged into the food business -- more specifically, the cookie business -- and so far no one is laughing.
Last year, under the brand name Duchy Originals, the Prince brought out his first product, the Oaten Biscuit.
This month he introduced a Gingered Biscuit.


L.I. Business Group Says Federally Required Auto Inspections Will Be Disruptive
A Long Island business group, backed by gas station operators, is forecasting "delay, confusion, and a disruption of daily life" if New York proceeds with a federally required program for centralized auto inspections in 1996.
Matthew T. Crosson, the president of the Long Island Association, the region's largest business group, said the 13 inspection stations envisioned for Long Island would be unable to accommodate the two million cars and trucks in Nassau and Suffolk Counties, resulting in long lines and much inconvenience for drivers.


Up for Auction: The Cooking Tips Of a Duchess
JUST when we thought they'd been totally forgotten, they're back.
Amy and Joey?


Like the U.S., Western Europe Steps Up Its Trade With Asia
During a week in which the message from Washington and Seattle was that United States foreign policy has been too Eurocentric and must concentrate more on Asia, Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany was quietly touring China and concluding contracts to sell about $4 billion in German goods to Beijing.
"It was obvious that the Chinese want intensified contacts with Europe," said Lorenz Schomerus, a senior Economics Ministry official who accompanied Mr.
Kohl on the trip, which brought a contract for Siemens to build the Guangzhou subway and agreements for other German companies to build power and steel plants.


Books of The Times; Experts in the Comedy of Self-Love
Private Parts
By Howard Stern
Illustrated. 446 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.
Confessions of a Raving, Unconfined Nut
Misadventures in the Counterculture
By Paul Krassner
Illustrated. 352 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.
Attention, readers: If you do not want to hear about breasts, buttocks, body parts and foreign objects; about radio orgies accompanied by Gene Autry crooning "Back in the Saddle Again" and Janis Joplin singing "Down on Me"; about lesbians at Girl Scout camp and talk show hosts who call themselves names like Rumpleforeskin, please turn the page.
If you choose to read on, know that you have entered the Comedy Testosterone Zone.
That zone takes in the playpen, the club, the bar and the Entertainment Network.
For Paul Krassner, who is 61, it includes the counterculture of the 60's and draws on political satire.
For Howard Stern, who is 20 years younger, it includes the Long Island subculture of the 80's and relies on social caricature.


Stocks Recover Slightly As Dow Climbs by 3.92
Stocks yesterday recovered some of the losses suffered in Monday's sharp selloff, as investors were buoyed by a rally in the Treasury bond market and Britain cut its base lending rate.
"The market reaction was a snapback from the beating that interest-sensitive stocks have taken in the last few days," said John H. Shaughnessy, senior vice president of Advest Inc.
"It reflects the feeling that the Fed won't be obliged to raise short-term interest rates."


Corrections
An article in some copies yesterday about the House vote on a deficit-reduction proposal overstated the share of freshmen House members who supported the plan.
Fifty-five percent of the freshmen backed the proposal, not 75 percent.


CHRONICLE
CHELSEA CLINTON will take to the stage next month to perform in the Washington Ballet's production of "The Nutcracker," The Associated Press reported yesterday.
She is one of four students from the Washington School of Ballet who will alternate in the role of Favorite Aunt in the classic Christmas production at the Warner Theater in Washington.
But don't rush out to buy tickets solely with the hope of seeing the 13-year-old First Daughter pirouette on stage.
The ballet company will not announce which of the 18 performances from Dec. 10 through Dec. 26 she will dance in.


Executive Changes
GENESEE CORP., Rochester, appointed John Wehle Jr., its president and chief executive, to the additional post of chairman.
METRO-GOLDWYN-MAYER INC., Santa Monica, Calif., named Francis Ford Coppola, the film director, writer and producer, and Thomas M. Lewyn, a lawyer specializing in corporate and entertainment law, as members of the board.


Rights in the Baltics
To the Editor:
You are to be commended for calling on Russia not to link troop withdrawal from Estonia and Latvia with human rights issues in "Backtracking on the Baltics" (editorial, Nov. 10), but you deserve criticism for alleging human rights violations against Russians in those countries.


Eating Well
THE announcement this week that the Federal Government's information on nutrients in food is flawed and unreliable will probably cause even greater angst among those who are already confused about healthful eating.
It shouldn't.
Each time there seems to be contradictory advice about nutrition, a few more people who have been on the fence about their eating habits throw up their hands in disgust and rush to a fast-food outlet for a fix of fries and a burger.
Now, finding out that the the bible of nutrition information, known as Handbook 8, has a lot of errors, may be the coup de grace for many of the fence-sitters.


Wachtler Suffers Minor Injuries in Stabbing in Federal Prison
Sol Wachtler, New York State's former chief judge, was stabbed on Sunday in the Federal prison in North Carolina where he is serving a 15-month sentence, his family said yesterday.
Mr.
Wachtler, who was not seriously injured, told his family that he did not see his assailant but suffered two deep cuts in his upper back, said Paul D. Montclare, Mr.
Wachtler's son-in-law and lawyer.
The weapon was apparently a screwdriver, Mr.
Montclare said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The Clinton Administration proposed creating a single agency to regulate the entire banking industry, saying that dividing the job among four agencies no longer made sense.  [ Page A1. ]


CHRONICLE
If Donald Trump's former wife, Ivana, is selling her designs on the Home Shopping Network, can the mother of his fourth child, MARLA MAPLES, be far behind?
Ms.
Maples, who gave birth six weeks ago to Tiffany Trump, has gone into business as a designer of -- what else? -- maternity clothes.


AT DINNER WITH: Ricki Lake; Half the Weight and on the Rise
AMERICA'S most pleasingly plump, cheerfully chubby young actress is no longer living with euphemisms.
When Ricki Lake made her movie debut almost six years ago in John Waters's "Hairspray," those were the kinds of phrases people used to describe her.
Back then, while just 19 years old and 5 feet 4 inches tall, she weighed 200 pounds.
Her role -- a sweet, overweight girl-next-door who lands a spot on a Baltimore television dance program -- won her a quick and early dose of fame.


Safety 1st
Shares of Safety 1st Inc., a maker of child safety products, gained slightly yesterday, recovering from a round of profit taking last week.
The shares had run up to a peak on Nov. 15 after the company announced at the end of October that its earnings per share for the third quarter were more than twice those in the comparable period a year ago.


CHRONICLE
ORIBE CANALES, the hairdresser to stars and supermodels who is known simply as Oribe, has entered a drug rehabilitation center, his spokeswoman, Chen Sam said yesterday.
The 37-year-old hairdresser entered an unidentified clinic in Minneapolis two weeks ago, "but we want to keep the details confidential," Ms.
Sam said.


Book Notes
Snowballing to Success  With a laughably minuscule promotion budget and no publisher to speak of, "The Celestine Prophecy," a first novel by James Redfield, a resident of Saginaw, Ala., might have been expected to die a quick and anonymous death.
But Mr.
Redfield published the book himself, calling his one-book company "Satori," and when he brought it to distributors, a curious thing began to happen.
"The book took off by its own little self," said Joyce Norman, the press agent for the Southern Publishers Group in Birmingham, Ala., one of the distributors.
"A woman called in and said, 'I need 12 copies because my neighbors and I only have one and we're tearing all the pages out and taking them home.' I started calling bookstores and they'd say, 'What's so special about it?' and I'd say: 'I don't know. I just know that people are buying them by the hundreds and that one little bookstore out West just bought 400 copies.' And they'd say, 'Did you say 4 copies?' And I'd say, 'No, 400.' "


Real Estate; With hopes that casino gambling will soon follow, Philadelphia developers plan retail centers.
A 42-ACRE retail center is under construction on the Delaware River waterfront here, amid signs that future development on adjacent properties may include casino gambling in shoreline buildings, on piers and aboard ships.
The developer of the retail project, the Rubin Organization Inc., is building more than 250,000 square feet of retail space, two restaurants and parking at its Pier 70 Plaza project.
Years ago, the land was occupied by the shoreside buildings that served the piers beyond.
Rubin, based in Philadelphia, has reportedly sold options on four piers at the edge of its property to Capital Gaming International, a casino operator.
Rubin would not comment on the sale.


Review/Pop; Singing Dirty but Staying Wholesome
Gloria Trevi, the young Mexican soap opera star turned pop singer, jams a microphone into her crotch when she performs.
She shakes a can of Coca-Cola (her sponsor), places it at groin level and pops the top.
She pours Coke over her breasts.
She licks her fingers, mimicking rote sexuality.
She talks dirty and sings even dirtier.
And her audience, which ranges from pre-teen girls to grandparents, loves it all.
Miss Trevi, a star in Mexico and across Latin America, has found a way to be overtly sexual without being, well, sexual.
She's stunningly beautiful, just an inch from an innocent prettiness, which helps; the raunch of her act doesn't camouflage her wholesomeness.
It's clear that she is working an act, and though she just as clearly loves the act, her public persona is still a game.


Review/Film; Irish, Unwed, Pregnant: Why Is She Glowing?
"The Snapper" was shown as part of the recent New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 8.
The film opens today at the Lincoln Plaza Cinemas, 63d Street and Broadway.
With "The Snapper," a small, joyful lark of a film, Stephen Frears rediscovers the essence of the comedy of mundane situation, a perfectly respectable genre before television took it over and turned it into the mass-produced, wafer-thin, low-calorie entertainment called the sitcom.
As demonstrated by Mr.
Frears and Roddy Doyle, who adapted his own novel for the screen, there are still wonderful comedies to be made when care is taken and attention is paid.


Olajuwon Leads the Rockets to 10th Straight
Rockets 100, Bulls, 93
Hakeem Olajuwon scored 28 points, and Houston held off injury-weakened Chicago's second-half charge for a 100-93 victory last night in Houston, giving the Rockets a 10-0 record to start the season.


Sour End to Strong Year
The 103d Congress more or less ended a productive first session today, but on a note of ill will that made it clear that the legislative paralysis of recent years had been diminished but not vanquished.
Many bills that President Bush had vetoed became law with the signature and backing of President Clinton.
But party divisions were raw and obvious during the budget battle in the summer and clear again today as minor differences held up a popular gun control measure.
Democrats sought to trap the Republicans into blocking it, or giving up ignominiously.  [ Page A21. ]


When Grass Roots Lead to Ivy Halls
If he had studied politics at Columbia before becoming Mayor, David N. Dinkins was asked yesterday, what lesson would he have liked to learn?
"I wish I had learned how to get more votes than the other guy," Mr.
Dinkins replied cheerfully.


Review/Film; Irish, Unwed, Pregnant: Why Is She Glowing?
"The Snapper" was shown as part of the recent New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 8.
The film opens today at the Lincoln Plaza Cinemas, 63d Street and Broadway.
With "The Snapper," a small, joyful lark of a film, Stephen Frears rediscovers the essence of the comedy of mundane situation, a perfectly respectable genre before television took it over and turned it into the mass-produced, wafer-thin, low-calorie entertainment called the sitcom.
As demonstrated by Mr.
Frears and Roddy Doyle, who adapted his own novel for the screen, there are still wonderful comedies to be made when care is taken and attention is paid.


No Headline
Patricia Drylie, a dancer and an actress best known for her performance as a dancing waitress in the 1979 Michael Bennett musical "Ballroom," died on Nov. 11 at a nursing home in Brooklyn.
She was 69 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was lung cancer, said Celia Tackaberry, a friend.


No Headline
"Their taste is very today. They're not stuffy and pretentious and neither is their home." -- KAKI HOCKERSMITH, the Clintons' decorator.  [ A22:5. ]


In California, a Lab for the Brady Bill, The Debate on Guns Has No Winner
As looting and violence spread during last year's rioting, there was a near-riot at Art's Guns in suburban Canoga Park as scores of panicked people discovered they could not buy quick self-protection because of California's 15-day waiting period on gun sales.
At the same time, rioters were breaking into gun stores and pawn shops throughout Los Angeles and carting away what officials now estimate were thousands of weapons of all sorts.


OPEC Chief Warns of 'Dangerously' Low Oil Prices


Bruno Rossi, 88, Pioneer in Cosmic Ray Research
Dr.
Bruno Rossi, an authority on cosmic rays and a retired professor of physics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, died on Sunday at his home in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 88.
The cause was cardiac arrest, M.I.T. said.


Corrections
An entry on Sunday in the "Where to Complain" listing in The City (section 13) misstated the telephone number of the New York State Department of Agriculture and Markets.
Its number is (718) 722-2877.


A Perfect World; Where Destiny Is Sad and Scars Never Heal
In a perfect world, says one rueful character in Clint Eastwood's quietly devastating new film, the events that shape the story of Butch Haynes and Philip Perry wouldn't have to happen.
But the world in which "A Perfect World" unfolds is a place of sad, ineradicable scars that shape their characters' destinies.
Many of those scars have to do with the burdens and misapprehensions of manhood, as illustrated beautifully during the course of this eloquent road film and understood by Mr.
Eastwood in subtle, profoundly moving ways.
The time and place -- Texas, just before the Kennedy assassination -- tacitly heighten the film's sense of needless tragedy.
"A Perfect World," a deeply felt, deceptively simple film that marks the high point of Mr.
Eastwood's directing career thus far, could never be mistaken for a young man's movie.
Nor could it pass for a reckless, action-packed tale of characters on the run.
A lifetime's worth of experience colors the shifting relationship between Butch, superbly played by Kevin Costner with an unexpected toughness and passion, and Phillip (T. J. Lowther), the little boy who starts out as Butch's prisoner and winds up as his surrogate son.


Swedes Fear a Russian Invasion: Crime Gangs
After weeks of conflicting testimony, a Swedish court has delivered a mixed verdict in a bizarre kidnapping plot that has raised fears in Sweden about crime spilling over from Russia.
The case involved five defendants -- a Polish-born Swede and four Russians -- accused of attempting to kidnap Peter Wallenberg, the 67-year-old industrialist who heads the country's most powerful financial dynasty.


Corrections
A profile in The Home Section last Thursday about a 1960's leader of the Weather Underground movement misspelled her first name and omitted the surname of a child being reared by her and her husband.
The former leader is Bernardine Dohrn; she and her husband, William Ayers, are the legal guardians of Chesa Jackson Boudin.


LORD OWEN WARNS RIVALS IN BOSNIA
In a speech prepared for delivery on Thursday in London, the European Community's mediator on the Balkans warns that unless a peace accord on Bosnia and Herzegovina is reached soon, the United Nations may impose new sanctions and Britain and France may withdraw their troops from the peacekeeping force in the former Yugoslavia.
Lord Owen, the European negotiator, will spell out these warnings publicly when he delivers the Churchill lecture on Thursday at London's Guildhall, United Nations and European officials said.
They are intended to encourage Serbian, Bosnian and Croatian leaders to start up serious peace talks again when they meet with European Foreign Ministers in Geneva next Monday, the officials said.


More Than One Side to Thanksgiving


Pop and Jazz in Review
Arthur Blythe  Alto Saxophonist Bradley's 70 University Place, Through Saturday
Arthur Blythe's career has been one of the more dispiriting efforts of the last 10 years in jazz.
Mr.
Blythe, a product of the Los Angeles jazz world of the late 1960's, surfaced in late 1979 with a contract with Columbia Records and a reputation as a brilliant improviser and composer who moved between the lushness of his own oddly constructed ensembles and the standard jazz quartet.
His career fizzled in the 1980's, and since then he has been a lost figure.


Lima Journal; Dictator? President? Or General Manager of Peru?
Pen and paper at the ready, Peru's mathematician-turned-President likes to make quick calculations.
For an American visitor Tuesday night, he calculated that Peru's toll of 22,000 dead in 13 years of civil strife equals 250,000 dead in the United States.
"I am sure that with so many dead in your country, people would have demanded emergency measures," said President Alberto K. Fujimori, who seized emergency powers and shut down courts and Congress last year in the name of fighting Peru's Maoist guerrillas.


Hide It Well, Kiss It Goodbye
DONALD SMITH sometimes wakes up in the morning and thinks, "This is going to be the day." The day for what?
Not much.
Not a sweepstakes win or a rendezvous with fame.
What Mr.
Smith thinks, and hopes, on such mornings is that this will be the day he finds his gold ring, which has been missing for some months.
It wasn't stolen, and it's not exactly lost.
In fact, he knows its approximate location.
But none of this has done him a lot of good.
Mr.
Smith, who is a cabaret promoter, hid the ring somewhere in his Manhattan apartment.
His problem is not only that he can't remember where but also that numerous searches in both likely and unlikely places have yielded all kinds of odd things -- but not the ring.


Click, Click. Gobble, Gobble.
Steak is too expensive.
Pizza doesn't feel right.
Hot dogs, hamburgers, fried chicken and baked ham all have their moment at center plate, but not today.
On behalf of the 45 million birds roasting in ovens across America this morning, let us -- as they say -- talk turkey.


Essay; The Porn Is Green
Legal scholars are breaking their heads over a clash of rights: the right of children to be sheltered from pornography and violence vs. the right of adults to choose to watch what they want when they want it.
This week a Federal appeals court struck down Government regulations that permit "indecent" broadcasts only between midnight and 6 A.M., when children who know all too well how to work the videocorder are presumably asleep.
The court's reason: You cannot take away an adult's First Amendment rights of free speech to protect children.


Councilman's Mayoral Victory in Atlanta Is a Break With the Past
City Councilman Bill Campbell won the runoff election for Atlanta mayor on Tuesday, swamping his opponent and becoming the first black mayor in 20 years with neither deep roots in the city's civil rights community nor celebrity status drawn from it.
Mr.
Campbell, a 40-year-old lawyer, defeated Michael L. Lomax, the former chairman of the Fulton County Commission, by 48,600 votes to 18,155, or 73 percent to 27 percent.
Mr.
Campbell had come within 800 votes of winning outright in the Nov. 2 general election.


Mubarak and King Hussein End a Chilly Standoff
President Hosni Mubarak met officially with King Hussein of Jordan today, formally ending a three-year rift that began when the King refused to support the coalition effort to drive Iraqi occupiers out of Kuwait.
"I am happy to be here to visit Egypt and return as we were so we can discuss the important issues in this delicate period," King Hussein told reporters after the meeting.


An Unsung Caravaggio Finds Glory in Dublin
Sergio Benedetti stood behind the almost reverent crowd in the National Gallery of Ireland as it murmured admiration for the painting he expects will give the museum new status in the art world: a wide canvas of somber shadow and sparkling light showing Judas kissing Christ as a soldier grips Jesus's neck, ready to drag Him away for crucifixion.
"It's a Caravaggio," said Mr.
Benedetti, the gallery's senior conservator.
"I am 101 percent certain of it."


William C. Brinkley, 76, Writer Known for His Novels of the Sea
William Clark Brinkley, a novelist known for his books about the Navy and the sea, died on Monday at his home in McAllen, Tex., near the Gulf of Mexico.
He was 76.
The cause was an overdose of barbiturates, said Ralph Graves, a friend who edited some of Mr.
Brinkley's writings.
He said Mr.
Brinkley had been clinically depressed for a long time.


A Speed Burner From Saratoga
On a dark and rainy afternoon, the quiet of Saratoga Spa State Park is broken by a dozen teen-age girls, who run amiably on the snake-like trails.
Their shoes squish in the mud, their ponytails bounce behind them and their gloves are inscribed with "No. 1 in the Country."
Although the day is reserved for easy training, their pace is a brisk seven minutes per mile.
For one girl, Erin Davis, it is not fast enough.
She is full of energy and pulls ahead.
None of her companions goes with her.


GUN-CONTROL ACT WINS FINAL BATTLE AS G.O.P. RETREATS
The Senate today passed a mandatory waiting period for the purchase of handguns after Republican opposition to the measure collapsed.
It was an anti-climactic finish to seven years of Congressional battle.
The measure, the Brady bill, is the toughest gun-control bill passed by Congress since a ban on mail-order rifle sales passed in 1968, although even its supporters expect it to have only a modest impact on violent crime.
It is now headed to the White House, and President Clinton said he hoped to sign it soon.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
2.94
4.60
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.10
3.22
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.25
3.25
3.42
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.34
5.33
6.47
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.30
6.31
7.53
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.36
7.36
8.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.66
5.68
6.40
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Pop and Jazz in Review
Afghan Whigs  Irving Plaza
The songs were doleful but the band was jovial when the Afghan Whigs, a group from Cincinnati, performed on Friday night.
Greg Dulli, the Whigs' songwriter, sings like a desperate man, his voice raw and breaking.
In his lyrics he's an agonized Mr.
Wrong, using lovers and drugs with bleary compulsiveness.
"You want to scare me then you'll cling to me no matter what I do," he sings in "What Jail Is Like." The band seethes and pummels in songs based on minor chords and descending lines that threaten to drag the singer down with them.


Classical Music in Review
Continuum  Alice Tully Hall
Joel Sachs, co-director of Continuum and organizer of Juilliard's annual Focus festival, monitors compositional activity in the farthest-flung sectors of the globe.
His programs are routinely swamped by obscure and unknown names.
Looking over Continuum's extraordinary 28-year repertory, however, one notices that yesterday's esoterica have become today's dominant trends.


Assignment: Bring Asia To the Amex
The American Stock Exchange said yesterday that Lisa S. Y. Sun, a lawyer, had been appointed managing director of the exchange's newly created Asia division.
Her job will be to generate new listings on the Amex from among emerging Asia-based companies.
The exchange trades 900 stocks; of those, 27 are issues of foreign companies and only 2 are of Asian companies.


16-Ton Hoist Falls on Workers in a Queens Shaft
A 16-ton winch tumbled into a shaft in Queens yesterday, killing one construction worker and injuring seven others as it ricocheted off the walls of the dank 503-foot hole that is to tap into a new city water tunnel.
The worker who died, identified by co-workers as Anthony Oddo, was standing on a catwalk about 415 feet below the ground when part of the winch sliced through his body and threw him to the bottom of the shaft.
Seven other workers clung to the web of catwalks and debris until rescuers, who were lowered in a cage suspended from a crane, pulled them to safety.


Sears Faces Bias Suit on Buyout Offer
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company illegally required employees who accepted early retirement offers in the last two years to waive all age-discrimination claims against the company, according to a complaint filed here in Federal court by the United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
The commission maintained in its complaint, filed Tuesday, that Sears should be ordered to offer the package to all eligible workers who originally turned it down, along with monetary damages.


Barnes &amp; Noble
Shares of Barnes &amp; Noble, which went public in September, rose sharply yesterday after Morgan Stanley recommend purchases of the stock.
Earlier this week, the bookstore operator reported a 22 percent increase in third-quarter revenues.
And revenues and profits are expected to peak during the fourth-quarter holiday season.


CHRONICLE
SUSANA TORRUELLA LEVAL has been named director of El Museo del Barrio, which she joined in 1990 as chief curator.
She has been acting director for six months, since the resignation of Petra Barreras.
She takes over at a turning point for the museum, which is at Fifth Avenue and 104th Street and specializes in Hispanic art from pre-Columbian to contemporary.
Closed for renovations, it will reopen in spring in time to celebrate its 25th anniversary.


Durable Goods Orders Surge 2% to Record
The economy's manufacturing sector gained fresh momentum in October as orders for durable goods surged 2 percent, to a record level, the Commerce Department reported today.
It was the third consecutive rise for these big-ticket items, which range from lathes to yachts, providing a likely continuing source of strength in 1994 that analysts expect will cushion retrenchment by consumers.


Caution SIgnal for Corporate Boards
Shareholders won an important victory yesterday when Delaware's Chancery Court ruled that Paramount Communications had unfairly snubbed QVC Network Inc.'s hostile bid in favor of one from Viacom Inc.
If the decision stands on appeal, lawyers said it would send an unmistakable signal to boards of directors: companies agreeing to a transaction that results in a change of control will now have to think harder about putting themselves up for sale in an auction.


Review/Dance; Reveling in the Power of Clarity, Simplicity and Silence
The five dances presented by Benedette Palazzola on Sunday night at the Eden's Expressway studio in SoHo were modest.
But they were also impressively authoritative, given the relative inexperience of the choreographer and her performers, all recent graduates of the University of Michigan who trained with Peter Sparling, a former Martha Graham dancer.
There wasn't an inexpert moment in the program.
Ms.
Palazzola is clearly a very promising artist.
Each of the dances was short, mostly with pristine black, white or gray dance clothes for costumes.
Three dances were performed in silence.
Clear and simple without being spare, the choreography was often a matter of unadorned walks, thrusting arms, kneeling and bodies curling to wrap around each other.


2 Large Companies Make Cuts
Two blue-chip American corporations -- Philip Morris, the tobacco and food company, and NCR, the computer unit of A.T.&amp; T. -- announced yesterday that they planned to cut their payrolls by a total of as many as 21,500 workers, or as much as 8 percent at Philip Morris and 15 percent at NCR.
To be sure, the two cutback announcements are separate cases, but both underscore corporate America's determination to remain competitive through retrenchment, despite a gradually improving economy.


Review/Dance; Repression, Romanticism and Rebirth
Henning Rubsam united his company, Sensedance, with other dancers in "Dancegiving," a program presented on Monday night at St.
Mark's Church.
Bartok's mysterious "Music for Strings, Percussion and Celesta" accompanied Mr.
Rubsam's new "Kingdom," and the recorded score heightened the choreographic anxiety.
Although there sometimes seemed to be more music than Mr.
Rubsam needed, he devised many striking images in this work, which was inspired by the plight of oppressed people in his native Germany from the Nazi era to the end of the East German regime.


S. C. Tsiang, an Economist, 75; Helped Guide Taiwan's Economy
S.
C.
Tsiang, an emeritus professor of economics at Cornell University and a principal architect of Taiwan's economic miracle died on Oct. 21 in Chicago.
He was 75
He had suffered a series of strokes, his family said.


Arab Students, Foes of P.L.O. Pact, Win Key Vote
In the first significant electoral test for the P.L.O. since it signed a peace accord with Israel, backers of Yasir Arafat were defeated today in voting for the student council at Bir Zeit University, the West Bank's leading academic institution.
Although Palestinians generally disagreed on whether the vote was representative, political leaders in the West Bank saw it as a signal of dissatisfaction with the accord after several weeks of Arab-Israeli violence.


Peru's Peasant Victims Still Need Help
To the Editor:
Signs of economic recovery in Peru have drawn the world's attention.
While no one should begrudge Peru prosperity, given its travails, which have been marked by political violence and surging poverty, a too-speedy return to the rhetoric of economic recovery (as opposed to that of imminent collapse) masks the human toll of 13 years of war.
Today, Peru has more internal refugees than any other country in the hemisphere, calculated by humanitarian aid groups at 600,000.
The majority are peasant women and children who have fled both Government-sponsored terror and the terror of the Maoist Shining Path rebel movement.
As recently as last August, a Shining Path attack in jungle communities around Santa Rosa de Shiriari cost 62 lives and forced 700 Ashaninka Indians, along with settlers from the mountains, to flee.


Richter and Terri Lead Devils Past the Sabres
The Devils, led by Chris Terreri's stellar goaltending, extended their unbeaten streak on the road to six games by defeating the Buffalo Sabres, 5-3, tonight at the Auditorium.
Stephane Richer led the Devils' attack with two goals, including the game-winner early in the third period, and one assist.


Corrections
A report in the Currents column of The Home Section last Thursday misstated the address of T, an emporium and cafe expected to open in SoHo.
It is at 142 Mercer Street.


On This Subject, Bishops Speak for the Church; Approval for Name
To the Editor:
One of Anna Quindlen's many inaccuracies in "Authentic Catholics" (column, Nov. 18) is that the Catholic Campaign for America was not "granted" the title "Catholic" by the Roman Catholic Church.


2 British Boys, Both 11, Guilty of Murdering Toddler
Two chubby-cheeked 11-year-old boys were convicted today of abduction and murder in the beating death last February of a Liverpool toddler, James Bulger, and sentenced to serve a term of indefinite custody for what the trial judge later called "an act of unparalleled evil and barbarity."
As the boys stood on a special platform installed in the courtroom so they could better see the proceedings, Crown Court Judge Michael Moreland told them that they were both "cunning and very wicked."


A New York Thanksgiving
My mother's birthday, Nov. 25, has always got lost in the commotion of Thanksgiving.
She was too busy to care much, though, trying to please the 10 of us, especially her mother-in-law -- my formidable Irish grandmother -- from whose house in Queens the feast moved to ours, in the suburbs, during the 1960's.
My mother found that innovation was risky: it was years before we learned why my uncle Tom always looked queasy when she served canned fruit cocktail before the meal.
It turned out to have been a staple of his Army rations 20 years before in the South Pacific.
For all we knew, the poor man was having war flashbacks at the sight of those halved maraschino cherries.


Keenan Switches Gears, but the Rangers Roll On
Certain rules are supposed to be followed when a sports team is on a streak.
Don't talk too much about it.
Don't make any predictions.
And, most important, don't tinker with what's working.
Apparently, Coach Mike Keenan of the Rangers doesn't care much for rules.
On Tuesday, Keenan called the team's goals-against-average -- and by extension, goaltender Mike Richter -- the "recurrent thread" in the Rangers' league-leading unbeaten streak.
Today, saying he wouldn't let superstition interfere with his coaching, he started Glenn Healy in goal for the first time during the streak.


Corrections
A report in the Currents column of The Home Section last Thursday misstated the address of T, an emporium and cafe expected to open in SoHo.
It is at 142 Mercer Street.


Classical Music in Review
Philharmonia Baroque Orchestra  Avery Fisher Hall
Since taking over the leadership of the Philharmonia Baroque Orchestra in 1985, Nicholas McGegan has become one of the prime movers in Baroque music, issuing an acclaimed series of Handel recordings for the Harmonia Mundi label.
He has two great advantages over the competition: an expert, idiomatic period-instrument orchestra, based in that modern-day Baroque community of Berkeley, Calif., and an unfailing interpretive instinct for the just pace and telling accent.


Executive Changes
BOCA RATON CAPITAL CORP., Boca Raton, Fla., a business development company whose principal asset is an investment in Railamerica Inc., named Alan L. Jacobs president and chief executive.
CARTER HAWLEY HALE STORES INC., Los Angeles, appointed Robert J. Lambert executive vice president of human resources.


Regional Bank Rates
Following are average annual percentage yields, in percent, on money-market accounts and C.D.'s offered on November 24, 1993 by the 10 largest banks and savings institutions in each of the 10 largest metropolitan areas.
Money
6-Mo.
Mkt.
C.D.
New York
2.18
2.72
Los Angeles
2.27
2.75
Chicago
2.44
2.97
San Francisco
2.25
2.69
Philadelphia
2.35
2.63
Detroit
2.58
2.82
Boston
2.19
2.60
Houston
2.48
2.96
Dallas
2.50
2.93
Washington
2.56
3.03
Bank Rate Monitor Index*
2.38
2.81
*Annual percentage yields offered by 100 large institutions in the 10 largest U.S. markets.
Source: Bank Rate Monitor, N. Palm Beach, 33408


Classical Music in Review
Speculum Musicae  Merkin Concert Hall
Speculum Musicae presented an exceptionally broad range of new music on Monday night, everything from canonic Serialism (Milton Babbitt) to sensuous sound pictures of the European avant-garde (Kaija Saariaho) to aggressive Minimalism of the New York downtown school (David Lang).
The concert was dedicated to the pianist and composer Robert Black, a new-music specialist and longtime member of Speculum Musicae who died in California last week.
Eric Bartlett and Aleck Karis opened the program with a moving memorial, the Largo of the Chopin Cello Sonata.


UMass Jolts Tar Heels in Overtime; Kansas Wins
What a great run for the state of Massachusetts.
First, Boston College upset top-ranked Notre Dame in football last Saturday.
Then last night in a semifinal game of the Preseason National Invitation Tournament at Madison Square Garden, the University of Massachusetts, given virtually no chance at all against No. 1-ranked North Carolina, upset the defending national champions, 91-86, in overtime.
The Minutemen will face Kansas tomorrow in the championship game.
Kansas defeated Minnesota in the opener, 75-71.


RESULTS PLUS
FOOTBALL  Wolverines-Wolfpack  The bowl picture crystallized yesterday for Michigan, but not for Ohio State.
Michigan and North Carolina State, which have never met on the football field, accepted invitations to play in the Hall of Fame Bowl on New Year's Day in Tampa, Fla.
Both teams have 7-4 records.
The Wolverines will be making their 19th consecutive bowl appearance.
The Buckeyes' bowl options were narrowed to two during a conference call involving the Big Ten athletic directors, who reaffirmed the agreement to preclude consecutive appearances in the Florida Citrus Bowl.
Ohio State appeared in the Citrus Bowl last Jan. 1, so if Wisconsin goes to the Rose Bowl, Ohio State will play in the Holiday Bowl on Dec. 20 in San Diego.
The Buckeyes (9-1-1) will go to the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, Calif., on New Year's Day if Wisconsin (8-1-1) loses to Michigan State next weekend at Tokyo. (AP)


F.B.I. Shaken by Inquiry Into Idaho Siege
The bloody standoff between the F.B.I.'s elite paramilitary force and a white separatist in Idaho has produced one of the largest and most wrenching internal inquiries ever conducted by the Justice Department, threatening some of the country's top law-enforcement officials with criminal prosecution.
The far-reaching inquiry, which has been under way for weeks but has remained largely unknown, centers on the operation at a remote ridge in August 1992 by the Hostage Rescue Team, the Federal Bureau of Investigation's unit trained to capture terrorists, hostage-takers and other violent criminals with minimal casualties.
Fatal Confrontation
The rescue unit was sent to the Idaho mountain after a confrontation between the white separatist, Randall C. Weaver, and Federal marshals in which one Federal agent and Mr.
Weaver's 14-year-old son were killed.
The next day a sniper from the rescue team shot and killed Mr.
Weaver's wife, Vicki, who was in the doorway of their cabin holding their 10-month old daughter.
She was not considered a threat, and the F.B.I. later acknowledged that she had been shot by mistake.
After a 10-day siege, Mr.
Weaver surrendered.


After the Subtraction, Finally a Mets Addition
Howard Johnson left, and New York yawned.
Sid Fernandez exited, and the city, well, maybe burped.
Charlie O'Brien won't be back.
Eddie Murray is perhaps headed to Baltimore, and yesterday the Mets traded Dave Gallagher to the Braves for Pete Smith.
It is not the most exciting evacuation effort ever undertaken, and it certainly hasn't been completed.
It is appropriate, though, to take stock of what has been left in the wake.


Airlines Ask Clinton To Intervene in Fight On Los Angeles Fees
In a showdown pitting the struggling airline industry against a cash-starved city, the nation's major airlines asked the Clinton Administration today to prevent Los Angeles officials from banning their aircraft from the city's international airport.
Airport officials said on Tuesday that they would ban the major airlines beginning Dec. 4 because they refused to pay landing fees that the airport tripled last July.
But the airlines, which only this year began making money again after three years of record losses, say the higher fees are unfair.
Rights of Airports
It was not immediately clear what would happen after Dec. 4 if the airlines refused to pay the fees.
Robert Buckhorn, a spokesman for the Federal Aviation Administration, said that his agency directed air traffic in and out of airports and that no airport coulddeny a plane permission to land.


U.S. Now Turns to Soothing the Europeans
After weeks of declaring that the United States would increase its attention to the fast-growing markets of Asia and Latin America, the Clinton Administration is trying to mend fences with Europe.
In what could be viewed as the diplomatic equivalent of sending roses after a spat, Secretary of State Warren Christopher invited a group of European journalists in for interviews on Monday in which he stressed the crucial role Europe still has in American foreign policy.
Though he did not retreat from earlier statements that Washington is at times too focused on Europe, Mr.
Christopher, sounding like the lawyer he is, said he did not mean to "derogate" Europe.


Public &amp; Private; Death at an Early Age
Today is Thanksgiving and I won't be writing my column.
Norma Perkins-Murray, who runs a home day-care center in Aurora, Ill., wrote it for me.
Norma and I don't know one another, except as intimate strangers, reader and writer.
Today she is the writer.
These are excerpts from a letter she wrote to me that began "I feel as if I know you. . . . When you quit your job in 1988 to stay home with your daughter, Maria, I coincidentally quit mine to stay home with my newborn daughter, Erin.


DISCLOSURE URGED FOR SECRET BUDGET
The White House should disclose the multibillion-dollar budget for secret intelligence spending, senior members of Congress have urged President Clinton.
The secrecy shielding the spending, or "black budget," is a relic of the cold war and should be abolished, said a letter sent to the White House on Tuesday by the Speaker of the House, Thomas S. Foley of Washington; the Senate majority leader, George J. Mitchell of Maine; the House majority leader, Richard A. Gephardt, and nine present and former leaders of Congressional committees overseeing the nation's intelligence agencies.


U.S. to Finance Project to Study Breast Cancer On Long Island
On the day she learned she had breast cancer, Lorraine Pace began to gather evidence.
She drove home from her oncologist's office, filled a bottle with tap water from her kitchen sink and, hoping it might someday provide a clue as to how she contracted the disease, stored it in a cabinet above the stove.


WHERE TO FIND IT
WHEN the television set goes dead, the audio-cassette player eats tape or the camcorder fails to work, the next step is usually to buy a replacement.
But sometimes it pays to have an item repaired.
If a warranty has expired, customers usually choose to have only the most expensive items repaired, said Joseph Passaretti, the president of Pyramid Electronics, a 46-year-old authorized service center in Manhattan that repairs videocassette recorders, televisions and audio equipment.
"We usually advise to have only the top-of-the-line units serviced if the warranty is out," he said.


The Airline Settlement: Not a Solution
The families who gather around a dining room table eating turkey this Thanksgiving, instead of rushing through airports desperately seeking a flight, owe thanks to President Clinton for artfully ending the strike against American Airlines by its flight attendants.
But for all its popularity, Mr.
Clinton's can-do involvement barely masks the wrenching problem faced by the airline industry.
Full-service carriers like American are hemorrhaging.
If they are to survive they must cut costs drastically.
Labor isn't the only target.
But neither will it be spared.


Corrections
An article on Monday about the resignation of an editor at The Burlington County Times in New Jersey referred incompletely to the background of an article published there.
The theme of the article was Democrats' criticisms of Assemblywoman Priscilla B. Anderson, a Republican, because of her attendance record at her job as a high school guidance counselor.
The Democrats based their criticism on an article published by The Times of Trenton in June about the attendance records of Assemblywoman Anderson and other legislators who are also educators.


First Signs of Resistance To Nigeria Coup Appear
Almost a week after Nigeria's new military leader seized power in a bloodless coup, the first significant signs of resistance to his takeover have begun to emerge.
At a news conference, Wole Soyinka, the Nigerian author and human rights advocate, called for international sanctions against those who brought Gen.
Sani Abacha to power last week.


Moynihan and Kennedy Tangle on Health Bill
Months before they are to start scrutinizing any fine print in the Clinton Administration's plan to overhaul health care, some of the Senate's leading figures have fallen into a nasty squabble over who should hold the magnifying glass.
How the matter is resolved will influence the shape of the legislation ultimately sent to the full Senate.


Review/Pop; Baby Boomers' Exorcism and Picnic
In American pop culture, these are the days of regression.
As baby boomers cling to the sitcoms and artifacts of their adolescence, alternative rockers in their 20's hurl themselves back to the traumas of childhood.
With Smashing Pumpkins (who opened a sold-out two-night stand at Roseland on Tuesday night), Pearl Jam and Nirvana, the Top 10 has been populated by rockers trying to exorcise troubled childhoods for themselves and their fans.
"What's a boy supposed to do?" Billy Corgan sang in an anguished wail on Tuesday night.
As the crowd sang along, he continued: "The killer in me is the killer in you."
In their music, Smashing Pumpkins look back to the psychedelic late 1960's.
The Chicago-based band has revived the viscous guitars and the stately, sometimes explosive drumming of groups like the Jimi Hendrix Experience and Pink Floyd.
The music rushes out, a sonic avalanche of double-time drums and hard-riffing guitar, then suddenly pauses and floats, cymbals tapping lightly above a sustained chord.
A delicate, finger-picked guitar line may appear, twinkling quietly; a few moments later, guitar power chords come crashing back, with blotches of unruly feedback.


Nassau Residents Offer Ideas for New Legislature
Nassau County residents are presenting a long wish list to the commission that a Federal judge assigned to reinvent the county's government to comply with the Constitutional requirement of one person, one vote.
"Taxes is the biggest issue," said John B. Kiernan, the commission's chairman.
"The next concern is how many people will be in the new county Legislature, how much they'll be paid and how long their term will be."


Why Make Fellini the Scapegoat for New Cultural Intolerance?
To the Editor:
"Excuse Me; I Must Have Missed Part of the Movie" (The Week in Review, Nov. 7) cites Federico Fellini as an example of a film maker whose style gets in the way of his storytelling and whose films, as a result, are not easily accessible to audiences.
Broadening that argument, it includes other artists: Ingmar Bergman, James Joyce, Thomas Pynchon, Bernardo Bertolucci, John Cage, Alain Resnais and Andy Warhol.
It's not the opinion I find distressing, but the underlying attitude toward artistic expression that is different, difficult or demanding.
Was it necessary to publish this article only a few days after Fellini's death?


For Movie Industry, Thanksgiving Means A Box-Office Feast
With concerns about those inevitable turkeys, movie-style, Hollywood is bracing for the most crowded Thanksgiving season in film history.
No fewer than seven films opened today in New York, including "Mrs. Doubtfire," starring Robin Williams; "A Perfect World," starring Kevin Costner and Clint Eastwood, and "George Balanchine's 'The Nutcracker,' " with Macaulay Culkin.
At least seven others opened between Nov. 12 and today, among them major studio releases like "Addams Family Values" (Paramount Pictures) and more specialized films like "The Piano," directed by Jane Campion, both of which opened last week.


Math Teacher Hurt In Classroom Attack
A teacher at Brooklyn Technical High School was assaulted yesterday by three masked intruders who entered his classroom and repeatedly punched and kicked him, the police said.
The teacher, Evan Wagshul, suffered bruises and was treated and released at Brooklyn Hospital.


Albert Collins, Guitarist, Dies; Influential Blues Stylist Was 61
Albert Collins, a Grammy-award winning blues guitarist, died Wednesday after a three-month fight against cancer.
Mr.
Collins died at his Las Vegas home, according to a statement from Alligator Records, a label he had recorded for.
He was 61.
Mr.
Collins made his reputation by combining savage, unpredictable improvisations with an immediately indentifiable tone, cold and pure.
His shows were often wild rides, intense performances that burst with his almost endless imagination.
He was a master of the ecstatic moment, and made use of his imagination, the volume of his playing, and his chilly sound.


When Security Becomes a Struggle; Demand Is Acute as Neediest Cases Fund Begins 82d Appeal
A year ago, Anthony G. Brown and his son, Charles, shared a spacious two-bedroom apartment with a terrace on the top floor of a brownstone in the North Bronx.
The $700-a-month rent was comfortably within Mr.
Brown's reach as a presentations specialist, a clerical job at the brokerage firm of Shearson Lehman Brothers, where he had worked for two years.
Then came a corporate downsizing and another dip in the Northeast's relentless recession, leading to a pink slip for Mr.
Brown in November 1992.
Regular income gave way to spotty checks from temporary jobs.
Within months, the roomy apartment was a memory, replaced by four rooms in public housing.


On This Subject, Bishops Speak for the Church; Not a Democracy
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen's"Authentic Catholics" (column, Nov. 18) displays a lack of command of the institution she is trying to discredit, namely, the Roman Catholic Church.
The Roman Catholic Church has never been and, it may be hoped, never will be a democratic institution.
Rather, the Roman Catholic Church bases its positions on such controversial issues as abortion and homosexuality on Scripture and tradition.
Neither lend themselves well to the pressures of democratic society.
Why does Ms.
Quindlen find it so necessary to attack the American Catholic bishops?
I can postulate only that such people (including groups like Catholics for a Free Choice) are frustrated by their inability to engineer the church in the same way they have been able to engineer society.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  WORKER KILLED IN TUNNEL ACCIDENT
A 16-ton winch tumbled into a shaft in Maspeth, Queens, killing one construction worker and injuring seven others as it ricocheted off the walls of the dank, 450-foot hole that is to tap into a new city water tunnel 670 feet below the ground.
The worker who died was standing on a catwalk about 350 feet below the ground when the winch sliced through part of his body and threw him to the bottom of the shaft.
Seven other workers clung to catwalks until rescued.
A1.


Not the First Park Inspired by History
To the Editor:
"A Disneyland of History Next to the Real Thing" (news article, Nov. 12) reports the Walt Disney Company's plan to build an American history amusement park near the Civil War Bull Run battlefield in Virginia.
You state that there has never been a park like it anywhere else.
Not so.
On June 19, 1960, Freedomland U.S.A., then the world's largest amusement park, opened its doors.
It cost more than $60 million to build and was shaped like the continental United States, taking up more than 200 acres.
You could visit Old New York, the Great Chicago Fire, the Barbary Coast, the Old West and, yes, even the Civil War.
Where was this?
It was in the northeast Bronx, on the banks of the Hutchinson River (which doubled as the mighty Mississippi).


No. 2 Man at F.B.I. to Quit For Job With Financier
Floyd I. Clarke, the No. 2 official at the Federal Bureau of Investigation who operated for most of this year as the agency's de facto director, said today that he would retire in January to join a New York company led by the financier Ronald O. Perelman
Mr.
Clarke said he would become vice president for corporate integrity at MacAndrews and Forbes Holdings Inc., the investment group led by Mr.
Perelman, the one-time corporate raider whose financial empire includes Revlon, Consolidated Cigars and the Marvel Entertainment Group.
Regarded as Leader
As the F.B.I.'s deputy director, Mr.
Clarke rose from a street agent to become the agency's chief day-to-day operating officer, overseeing the agency's worldwide criminal investigative operations, budget and administrative operations.
He was deeply involved in planning the ill-fated tear gas assault on the Branch Davidian compound in April.
Officials said his departure was not related to a Justice Department inquiry into a 1992 standoff between the F.B.I. agents and a white separatist in Idaho.


Business Digest
Companies
Many legal obstacles that Paramount had hoped would stop QVC's hostile takeover bid were swept away by a Delaware court.
The ruling was a blow to Viacom, which had agreed to a friendly merger with Paramount.  [ Page A1. ]  The ruling could help shareholders by forcing companies to sell to the highest bidder.  [ D6. ]


Parent &amp; Child
WHEN Dr.
Jeanne Brooks-Gunn came home from a hospital stay a year ago, she expected her 3-year-old son to be upset but to quickly get over his concerns once he realized she had returned.
She was wrong.
"He was clingy for several months afterwards," said Dr.
Brooks-Gunn, a professor of child development at Columbia University.
"It took him much longer to process his feelings than I'd anticipated."


Green Point Reprimanded for Vote Action
The planned initial public offering by the Green Point Savings Bank ran into more difficulty yesterday when the New York State Banking Department ordered the bank to stop asking depositors who voted against its plan to change their votes.
Green Point must receive the approval of 75 percent of those voting before a depositors' meeting on Dec. 10 to go ahead with its plan.
Green Point, based in Flushing, Queens, is the country's largest mutual savings bank -- meaning it has no shareholders -- and is trying to convert to stock ownership in a $700 million offering.


Thanksgiving Visitor Arrives Early


An Unsung Caravaggio Finds Glory in Dublin
Sergio Benedetti stood behind the almost reverent crowd in the National Gallery of Ireland as it murmured admiration for the painting he expects will give the museum new status in the art world: a wide canvas of somber shadow and sparkling light showing Judas kissing Christ as a soldier grips Jesus's neck, ready to drag Him away for crucifixion.
"It's a Caravaggio," said Mr.
Benedetti, the gallery's senior conservator.
"I am 101 percent certain of it."


This Season, Retail Experts Can't Seem to Agree
Never mind that holly boughs, tinsel and blinking lights have festooned store windows and shopping malls since Halloween.
Tomorrow, the annual holiday shopping season officially begins, the most profitable time of year for retailers.
But there is little consensus about just how strong sales will be this year.
In the past, estimates of holiday sales have tended to converge as Thanksgiving approached.
What started out as very different predictions in September following back-to-school sales usually ended up as very similar estimates as Christmas drew nearer and a herd mentality seized the financial community.


CHRONICLE
When Tiffany &amp; Company unveils its Christmas windows on Dec. 3, it will be a milestone for GENE MOORE, the store's display director: he will have produced 5,000 windows for the famed jewelry and silver emporium.
"I don't keep count," Mr.
Moore said, expressing surprise about the event.
He added that William R. Chaney, the chairman of Tiffany, had told him about it at a luncheon.


16-Ton Hoist Falls on Workers in a Queens Shaft
A 16-ton winch tumbled into a shaft in Queens yesterday, killing one construction worker and injuring seven others as it ricocheted off the walls of the dank 503-foot hole that is to tap into a new city water tunnel.
The worker who died, identified by co-workers as Anthony Oddo, was standing on a catwalk about 415 feet below the ground when part of the winch sliced through his body and threw him to the bottom of the shaft.
Seven other workers clung to the web of catwalks and debris until rescuers, who were lowered in a cage suspended from a crane, pulled them to safety.


Bridge
A star German player made a strong bid for a second major title at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals here today.
Sabine Zenkel, who lives in Chicago but won a silver medal for her native Germany in the World Championships in Chile in September, won the Life Master Women's Pairs here Saturday.
Today she was leading into the semifinal stage of the Blue Ribbon Pair Championships, playing with Tom Sanders of Nashville, long one of America's top-ranked players.
The qualifying standings in the Blue Ribbon were: 1st, Zenkel and Sanders, 1265.62 match points; 2d, Richard Katz of Rancho Mirage, Calif., and Robert Levin of Orlando, Fla., 1249.77; 3d, Roy Fox of Chicago and Ralph Katz of Burr Ridge, Ill., 1221.62; 4th, Joan Jackson and Petra Hamman of Dallas, 1207.32; 5th, Jack Oest and Steve Garner of Chicago, 1200.04.


Islanders, After Winning 3 in Row, Tie Stars
Islanders 2, Stars 2
Ron Hextall turned aside 37 shots for the Islanders, who had won their three previous games, but New York could earn only a 2-2 tie last night with the Stars in Dallas.
The Stars' Darcy Wakaluk stopped 47 shots and Dean Evason scored the tying goal in the second period.


Justice Delayed: Caseload Cripples an Appeals Court
In 1987 an 8-year-old girl was run over by a school bus in Queens and suffered what doctors said would be permanent damage to her reproductive system.
Her family sued the bus company and the Board of Education.
In April 1991 a jury awarded her $3 million for past and future pain and suffering.
The defendants appealed, and both sides were ready to argue the appeal in March 1992.


On This Subject, Bishops Speak for the Church
To the Editor:
"Authentic Catholics" by Anna Quindlen (column, Nov. 18) is a good example of why the United States bishops had to state clearly that Catholics for a Free Choice is not a Roman Catholic organization.
Ms.
Quindlen has apparently been persuaded by that organization's claim that support for abortion is as authentically Catholic as the church's clear and constant teaching that abortion is a grave moral wrong.
She is apparently further persuaded that Catholics for a Free Choice has as much right to speak "for the church" as the Catholic bishops.
For her, speaking "for the church" seems to mean reflecting popular opinion, rather than faithfully interpreting the truth found in divine revelation and a proper understanding of natural law.
However, the truth is the truth, whether popular or not.


Horse Carriages Don't Obstruct Traffic
To the Editor:
"Spare the Horses," the headline on your Nov. 16 editorial about New York City carriage horses, is misleading.
What exactly are we sparing the horses from?
Animal rights activists would have you believe that there are consistent and chronic problems that no amount of legislation can solve.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
Don't take my word for it.
Take the word of the New York City Department of Transportation, which has repeatedly testified that moving horse carriages do not obstruct traffic.
Take the word of the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, which in 1988 conducted more than 7,500 inspections and found only some 200 violations.
As the leading proponent of stronger regulations, the A.S.P.C.A. ticketed only 10 percent of drivers for time-area restrictions and animal health codes in the last 12 months.


Adoptions That Lack Papers, Not Purpose
NATHAN AND JANET RILEY married three years ago and immediately took a little boy named Charles Johnson 3d into their home in Philadelphia.
The Rileys are now learning about P.T.A.'s, French-horn lessons and temper tantrums -- the realities of raising a son.
They fret over private concerns when the child, Mr.
Riley's great-nephew, is out of earshot: are they hugging him enough?
Should they say "I love you" more?
There were no legal papers, no social workers, no Government involvement when the newlyweds informally adopted Charles in a long-accepted practice of African-American life.
Mr.
Riley said he just knew that it was his job to raise the boy to manhood.


Excerpts From Ruling in Paramount Case
Following are excerpts from an opinion yesterday in Delaware Chancery Court by Vice Chancellor Jack B. Jacobs in the Paramount Communications case:
. . .
The critical circumstances are these: The Paramount board has committed the company to a transaction that will shift majority control from Paramount's public shareholders to Mr.  [ Sumner ]  Redstone  [ the principal owner of Viacom ] .


Cool, Astute Leader Takes Flight Union to Victory
As Denise C. Hedges steered into the parking lot of a hotel where the press anxiously awaited her, the engine of her corroded 1985 Renault died.
As president of the 21,000-member union of American Airlines flight attendants, she had a news conference beginning in minutes.
But there was no panic, no curses, no pounding on the steering wheel.
"Would you push me into that parking space?" Mrs.
Hedges asked her two passengers, as calmly as if she had been following the flight attendants training manual.
Then she went on to a meeting with the press that came off as smoothly as beverage service in first class.


Nets Succumb at The End; Coleman is Hero and Goat
Timberwolves 107, Nets 106
Chuck Person's 18-foot jumper with 3.7 seconds left capped his season-high 21-point game and lifted the Minnesota Timberwolves to a 107-106 victory over the Nets last night in Minneapolis.


Rap Star and 2 Friends Indicted in Sexual Attack
Amid a throng of curious hip-hop fans jostling for space with television cameras, the whirl of accusations surrounding the rapper Tupac Shakur spiraled yesterday into a Manhattan courtroom, where Mr.
Shakur and two friends learned that they had been indicted on charges of sexually attacking a fan.
Melissa Mourges, an assistant district attorney, informed Judge Michael A. Gross of Criminal Court that a grand jury has handed down indictments against all three men on charges that could bring a sentence of up to 8 1/3 to 25 years in prison.
The judge allowed all three to remain free on bail.
Surrounded by Bodyguards
Like a running back following the blocks of his linemen, Mr.
Shakur, 22 years old, entered and exited the dingy downtown courthouse surrounded by bodyguards who towered over him, his face buried in the back of one of them.
He refused to acknowledge either the shouted questions of reporters or words of encouragement offered by his fans.


East German Spy Spews Anger as Trial Ends
By CRAIG R. WHITNEY
Markus Wolf, the former head of East Germany's spy service, today denounced his seven-month treason trial as a political farce staged by the authorities of united Germany in triumph over the state they absorbed in 1990.
"This court is going to find me guilty," the 70-year-old spymaster told judges and spectators at the end of his trial today.
Though the verdict is not due until Dec. 6, for Mr.
Wolf the only question was how long his sentence would be.


United Airlines Unions Resume Bid to Gain Control
Pilots' and machinists' unions at United Airlines are resuming their effort to gain control of the carrier.
The two unions said yesterday that United executives had asked them to meet next Wednesday, and that Felix G. Rohatyn, the New York investment banker with a strong track record in resolving sticky disputes, would join the discussions.


Classical Music in Review
Vivaldi Orchestra  of Moscow  Alice Tully Hall
Don't let its name fool you: although the Vivaldi Orchestra of Moscow included works by Vivaldi and Bach on its New York debut program on Monday evening, it is not an ensemble of Baroque music specialists.
The program also included works by Mozart, Rossini, Tchaikovsky and Shostakovich, with the most gratifying results at the later end of the spectrum.


No Headline
"Our message to the international community is that it should not say or do anything to give hope to this regime. It is a regime of infamy and it should be isolated. " -- WOLE SOYINKA, referring to the Government of Nigeria.  [ A10:1. ]


Review/Dance; A Very Mixed Bag, Choreographically
How resourceful dancers can be!
That was demonstrated on Friday night by Ballet Inc., an organization directed by Charles David Anderson that encourages new choreographers.
The program offered premieres by Mr.
Anderson, a former member of the New York City Ballet, and Carld Jorel Jonassaint, a member of American Ballet Theater.
The cast was to include Mr.
Anderson and young dancers from City Ballet, Ballet Theater, Dance Theater of Harlem and the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater.
But Mr.
Anderson limped onto the stage on crutches to announce that he had broken a foot half an hour before curtain time at Clark Studio Theater at Lincoln Center.
The order of the program was reshuffled, and while ballets in which Mr.
Anderson was not to appear were performed, he taught Ben Bowman, James Fayette and Todd Williams his roles in the others.
Everyone danced smoothly, making the evening a fine choreographic showcase.


Officer Quits Post at Novell
Novell Inc., the leading maker of software for local area networks, said yesterday that Darrell L. Miller was retiring as executive vice president for corporate marketing and strategy effective on Dec. 9.
Mr.
Miller, who is 47, is leaving after six years at Novell, based in Provo, Utah, to provide consulting to the venture capital community.
"Darrell's customer and technology perspective has been a valued factor in the growth of Novell over the last six years," Raymond J. Noorda, Novell's president and chief executive, said in a statement.
"His role was important in our becoming a systems software company that thinks of our software as building blocks, or components, for advanced network-based information systems."


Four Years Later, Pinstripes May Finally Suit Langston's Taste
The Yankees' quest for a quality starting pitcher might not be as bleak as it appeared in recent weeks.
There's one out there the Yankees may actually be able to acquire.
Mark Langston, whom the Yankees unsuccessfully tried to lure to New York four years ago when he was a free agent, would seriously consider the Yankees if the circumstances were right, a close friend of the 33-year-old left-hander said yesterday.


Man Who Killed 2 Is Indicted on 2 Gun Charges
A Brooklyn man who used an unlicensed gun to kill two teen-agers who he said were robbing him at gunpoint was indicted yesterday on gun-possession charges by a grand jury that rejected possible charges of murder, manslaughter and assault.
The man, Arthur Boone, a 41-year-old sugar-refinery worker, "is relieved and grateful he's not being charged with murder," said his lawyer, Stephen Flamhaft.
But the lawyer said he himself believed that the charges were still more serious than warranted because one of the two counts charges Mr.
Boone with carrying his gun with "intent to use" it "unlawfully against another" person.


Markets Closed For Holiday
All banks and financial markets in the United States are closed today in observance of Thanksgiving.
But markets in other countries are open.
Tomorrow, there will be limited trading on the American financial markets.


NCR Says Its Intention Is to Be 'Competitive'
Struggling with brutal price competition at home and sluggish markets overseas, A.T. &amp; T.'s NCR Corporation stepped up its effort yesterday to reduce costs by trying to cut its work force by 7,500 people.
The computer company, based in Dayton, Ohio, has said it intends to reduce its worldwide work force of 51,000 people by as much as 15 percent and hopes to do it through voluntary leaves rather than layoffs.


CHINESE FACTORIES GREET CAPITALISM
Next year China's Communist leaders will select 100 big state-owned factories, take their managers aside and tell them that they will now answer to "owners" in the Western sense of the word.
After four decades of Communism, the success of China's overall economic reform program may well hinge on the outcome of the experiment, the most sweeping effort to date to change China's system of state enterprise.


CHRONICLE
MARIA LAURINO, the chief speechwriter for Mayor David N. Dinkins, and ANTHONY SHORRIS, the first deputy executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, were planning to marry in June -- with the Mayor officiating.
"I told him that I was seeing Maria," Mr.
Shorris said yesterday, "and he said if a nuptialation -- only the Mayor would use a word like that -- were required, he would be happy to oblige."


High Hopes for Low Interest Rates
Despite a recent upturn in interest rates, many economists and market analysts believe that the United States has entered an era of rates far lower than in the 1980's that is likely to last for many years -- thanks to a host of forces ranging from an inflation-fighting Federal Reserve to a slow-growing world economy.
"We really are in an environment of lower interest rates," said Joel L. Prakken, an economist at Laurence H. Meyer &amp; Associates, a forecasting firm in St.
Louis that predicted the sharp decline in rates earlier this year.
"We call it, 'Back to the 60's.' "


Pop and Jazz in Review
Vincent Herring  Alto Saxophonist Village Vanguard
Vincent Herring's first set on Tuesday night was all about energy.
He and his band may have played a ballad, but it was quickly forgotten in the onslaught of notes.
Unstoppable and tumultuous, the music was dedicated to the sort of driving, deep swing that's exciting for both the audience and the musicians.


QVC Network Wins Court Round In Its Bid to Take Over Paramount
A Delaware Chancery Court yesterday swept away many of the obstacles that Paramount Communications had put in place to stop QVC Network Inc. in its hostile takeover of the giant entertainment company.
The ruling, which was highly critical of the Paramount board, was a blow to Viacom Inc., which had agreed to a friendly merger with Paramount.


Eisenreich Re-Signs With Philadelphia
Outfielder JIM EISENREICH, who batted .318 in 153 games this past season, re-signed with the Philadelphia Phillies yesterday, agreeing to a one-year contract worth $1.4 million.
Eisenreich is 34 and made $675,000 in 1993.
He will earn $1.2 million next season and the Phillies have an option for 1995 at $1.2 million with a $200,000 buyout.
Another outfielder, SHANE MACK,avoided arbitration with the Minnesota Twins when he agreed to a $3.25 million contract for 1994, the year he becomes eligible for free agency.
Mack, 29, made $3.05 million in 1993, when he was limited to 128 games because of injuries.
He finished with a .276 average, 10 home runs and 61 runs batted in.


Sales of Domestic Vehicles Rose 20.5% in Mid-November
Sales of domestically built vehicles rose 20.5 percent in mid-November, a sharp increase from the corresponding period a year ago and a robust rate that presaged even stronger sales through the early part of next year.
Sales of cars built in North America rose 16.4 percent, to 183,320, for the period Nov. 11-20, while sales of light trucks, which include mini-vans and sport utility vehicles, rose 26 percent, to 146,489.
Total vehicle sales were 329,809, up from 273,717 during the corresponding period last year.


Corrections
An article in Science Times on Nov. 9, about a study showing that being cautious and somewhat dour is a key to longevity, misidentified the issue of The Journal of Personality and Social Psychology in which it appeared.
It was the issue of August, not October.


Clemson Coach Quits
Clemson Coach KEN HATFIELD, whose team posted an 8-3 season and was looking toward a probable trip to the Peach Bowl, resigned yesterday.
He chastised fans and university officials for their lack of support.
Hatfield, who had three years left on his contract, said he and his wife "leave behind much disappointment. Disappointment in the so-called fans who did not support their team. We're also disappointed in several people who work here at Clemson who worked hard against us."
Hatfield did not identify those university officials.


Uncovered Short Sales Grow by 1.2% on Nasdaq
The bets that Nasdaq stocks will tumble continue to grow larger.
The National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday that the total short interest in Nasdaq stocks rose to a record 671.3 million shares for the month that ended Nov. 5.
The monthly increase was just 1.2 percent, the smallest climb of 1993.


Knick $26 Million Man Ready to Earn His Keep
He has been the $26 million invisible man.
While Patrick Ewing and John Starks have grabbed the headlines, Charles Smith's name has been relegated to injury updates.
No one much asked where he was or when he would be back.
No one much missed him, either.
No one, that is, except the Knicks.


2 Companies Plan Sharp Payroll Cuts
Two corporations announced plans to cut thousands of workers -- 14,000 at Philip Morris and 7,500 at NCR.
Both are trying to streamline to stay competitive, doing their work with fewer employees.


Economic Scene; A four-day workweek plan is optimistic, not realistic.
READY for the 4-day, 33-hour workweek?
The idea is sweeping Western Europe in general, and France in particular, much the way "supply side" tax cuts took Washington by storm in the early 1980's.
And for good reason.
According to proponents, the European Community would be able to solve its seemingly intractable double-digit unemployment problem and give parents more time with the children -- without raising production costs or even asking any real financial sacrifice from workers.


A SALVADOR DENIAL ON DEATH SQUADS
Vice President Francisco Merino of El Salvador today denied allegations that he was involved in plotting and financing death-squad activities in 1990, as reported in recently declassified United States intelligence documents.
The documents are among more than 12,000 State Department, Defense Department and Central Intelligence Agency documents declassified and made public this month.
They include detailed information about death squads and their links to the Salvadoran Government and military since the late 1970's.


Chester Santon; Radio Announcer, 78
Chester Santon, a radio announcer for 44 years, 38 of them at WQXR in New York, died last Thursday at Dobbs Ferry Hospital.
He was 78 and lived in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.
The cause was pneumonia, his family said.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Bougainvillea in Winter
Q.
I was recently given a bougainvillea.
Can you tell me how to care for it through the winter? -- Marie Pitaresi, Hasbrouck Heights, N.J.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Claimed Turner Ward, outfielder, off waivers from the Toronto Blue Jays.


Art of Glass Blowing Finds a Home in Brooklyn
In the reaches of an old vaudeville theater in Brooklyn, where the balcony once hung, stands a three-story-high maze of girders and cables, intake pipes and exhaust ducts that nurse an incessant roar from four white-hot furnaces.
Through a porthole-like opening into one of those furnaces, Dante Marioni poked a five-foot-long blowpipe, collected a fist-sized "gather" of molten glass on its tip and began the delicate process of literally breathing a work of art from the glowing glob.


NBC Names New Host For 'Later'
NBC has selected Greg Kinnear, a 30-year-old cable-channel performer, as the new host of "Later," the latest of the network's late-night programs.
"Later" is broadcast Tuesdays through Fridays at 1:35 A.M.
NBC also said Wednesday that it would shut down production of "Later" in New York and move the program to Los Angeles.


'Six or Seven Seconds,' Then Clinging to Hope
It was just another work day.
And like all the others before, Charles T. Berberich and his co-workers gathered in the morning chill, climbed into a small cage and were lowered into the darkness of a construction shaft below.
He is a "sandhog," drilling and blasting away underground.
Later yesterday he would remember standing on a platform, chipping away at concrete.
Then he heard a deafening sound, turned his face heavenward and saw blackness where the sky was supposed to be.


Review/Dance; City Ballet Honors Broadway and Hollywood
George Balanchine, Jerome Robbins and Peter Martins all choreographed Broadway musicals, and Mr.
Robbins and Balanchine even toiled briefly in Hollywood.
At other times, these past or present artistic directors of the New York City Ballet created works for the company with show business themes that used classical technique.
With these ideas in mind, the City Ballet opened its fall season on Tuesday night with a gala benefit called "The Magic of Broadway and Hollywood." Balanchine, Mr.
Robbins and Mr.
Martins were represented on the program and the scores, as expected, came from composers associated with musicals.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
Scouting the Top Teams  Here are the scouting reports for the top high school football games today and tomorrow in Long Island, Connecticut and New Jersey.
Long Island  Garden City (9-0) vs.
Mepham (8-1) at C.W.
Post, 10 A.M., Conference II final.
Key Players: Mepham Coach Kevin McElroy said that he hoped that the forecast for cold weather today is accurate.
"A little wind wouldn't hurt either," he joked.
Mepham's defense will need all the help it can get against Matt Fischer's passing game.
Fischer, who completed 62 of 119 passes for 1,110 yards, has thrown 14 of his 15 scoring strikes to two receivers: Mark Drakos (30 catches for 506 yards, 7 touchdowns) and Tim Glisker (16 catches for 350 yards, 7 touchdowns).
Kevin McCoughlin (115 carries for 693 yards) paces Garden City's rushing attack, which averages 5.7 yards a carry.
Mepham's big-play athlete is Amos Zeroue, who has rushed 221 times for a Nassau County-record 1,915 yards.
His 28 touchdowns is a Long Island record.


Stocks Rise, With Dow Up by 13.41
Stocks closed higher yesterday in modest trading, propelled by favorable economic news and a bond market that kept a lid on interest rates.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed at 3,687.58, up 13.41.
Early in the day, the Government reported that durable-good orders, a sign of a manufacturing revival, rose 2 percent in October to reach the highest level on record.
This caused stocks to rally across the board, led by computers, semiconductors, automobiles and consumer goods.


Tunnel Likened to Brooklyn Bridge in Complexity and Scale
It has been likened to the Brooklyn Bridge and other monumental public works in its scale and complexity of construction.
"The Third Water Tunnel is considered one of the most complex and intricate engineering projects in recent memory," a New York City Department of Environmental Protection report to Mayor David N. Dinkins stated last year.
The report cited "the size and length of the tunnel, its sophisticated control system, the placement of its valves and the depth of excavation."


Sonics' Gill Is Sidelined
Seattle SuperSonics guard KENDALL GILL, who suffers from recurring cluster headaches and who collapsed at practice on Tuesday, did not play at Sacramento last night.
"He will remain in the Seattle area to undergo testing in an attempt to determine the cause and treatment for the headaches," said the team's spokesman, BILL EVANS.


Giants' Walking Wounded Are Glad to Be Walking
Jumbo Elliott's back.
The throwing shoulder of Phil Simms.
And David Meggett's broken rib.
Potentially, these could be damaging injuries to the Giants since they involve three of their best players.
Of the three, Elliott and his back could be the biggest problem.
The Giants have been secretive about Elliott's situation, saying only that he has back spasms.
But there may be more to it than that.
Elliott, who missed last week's game against Philadelphia and could miss this week's against Phoenix, would not talk much today about the injury.
Privately, Giants officials think there might be some minor disk irritation, something he has had before.
If that is the case, Elliott's full recovery might take longer than expected.
Standing Becomes Tough
When he was asked to go into detail about his back problems, Elliott said: "I've got some things in there but I don't want to get into that. We'll wait and see." Elliott did acknowledge that it was tough for him to stand and watch on the sideline without feeling some stinging pain.


Man Who Killed 2 Is Indicted on 2 Gun Charges
A Brooklyn man who used an unlicensed gun to kill two teen-agers who he said were robbing him at gunpoint was indicted yesterday on gun-possession charges by a grand jury that rejected possible charges of murder, manslaughter and assault.
The man, Arthur Boone, a 41-year-old sugar-refinery worker, "is relieved and grateful he's not being charged with murder," said his lawyer, Stephen Flamhaft.
But the lawyer said he himself believed that the charges were still more serious than warranted because one of the two counts charges Mr.
Boone with carrying his gun with "intent to use" it "unlawfully against another" person.


European Trade Official Hints at Mollifying French
The European trade commissioner raised the possibility here today that some aspects of a negotiated agreement on world trade liberalization might be modified to satisfy French objections, particularly to allow a continuation of subsidies for French farmers.
But the official, Sir Leon Brittan, would not disclose any details, and French officials, including Prime Minister Edouard Balladur, continued to warn that they would need more concessions before they could sign a comprehensive new agreement being negotiated under the authority of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.


INSIDE
11-Year-Old British Boys Convicted in Toddler Slaying
A jury of nine men and three women found the two boys guilty of abduction and murder in the death in February of a Liverpool toddler, James Bulger.
The boys were sentenced to a term of indefinite custody.
Page A3.
Resistance to Nigerian Coup
A prominent Nigerian writer called for sanctions against those who brought yet another general to power last week.
Page A10.


Books of The Times; Second Chances: Madison County Goes to India
Slow Waltz in Cedar Bend
By Robert James Waller
197 pages. Warner Books. $16.95.


Officer Quits Post at Novell
Novell Inc., the leading maker of software for local area networks, said yesterday that Darrell L. Miller was retiring as executive vice president for corporate marketing and strategy effective on Dec. 9.
Mr.
Miller, who is 47, is leaving after six years at Novell, based in Provo, Utah, to provide consulting to the venture capital community.
"Darrell's customer and technology perspective has been a valued factor in the growth of Novell over the last six years," Raymond J. Noorda, Novell's president and chief executive, said in a statement.
"His role was important in our becoming a systems software company that thinks of our software as building blocks, or components, for advanced network-based information systems."


Tobacco's Role in Philip Morris Plan
The Philip Morris Companies said yesterday that it would cut 14,000 jobs, or 8 percent of its total work force, and close or scale back 40 facilities.
The job cuts, the latest in a series of restructurings taken by the company in the last several years, will take effect during the next three years.
The restructuring is intended to lower the food and tobacco giant's operating costs in 1994 and to create after-tax savings of about $600 million a year by 1997.


'Red Shoes' Opening Postponed Until Dec. 16
The Dec. 2 opening of "The Red Shoes," the musical based on the 1947 movie about the ballet, at the Gershwin Theater, has been postponed until Dec. 16, the show's producer, Martin Starger, announced yesterday.
Mr.
Starger said extra time was needed to assimilate changes made during previews.
The show's lead, Roger Rees, was replaced on Nov. 16 by his understudy, Steve Barton.


Amid Holiday Hubbub, American's Pace Is Slow
The day before Thanksgiving always means one thing at O'Hare International Airport: controlled chaos.
By 3 P.M. one of the world's busiest airports becomes one of its biggest headaches, with long lines and stories about missed connections.


Witnesses in Trade Center Trial Tell of Inquiries for Hydrogen Gas
The prosecution in the World Trade Center case presented evidence yesterday indicating that one of the four men on trial used bogus company names in an effort to have hydrogen gas cylinders delivered to the storage rental locker where the material for a bomb was assembled.
Two witnesses in Federal District Court in Manhattan representing two manufacturers of industrial gas testified that they received inquiries or orders for gas.
One of them, Evans Humenick, a salesman for Liquid Carbonic Industries in Bethlehem, Pa., said that one of the defendants, Nidal A. Ayyad, a chemical engineer who worked at the Allied-Signal Corporation in New Jersey, called on the telephone to ask about buying gas.
The date of the call was Feb. 9, Mr.
Humenick said, or 17 days before the trade center explosion.


John Butler Memorial
A memorial service for the choreographer John Butler is to be held on Monday at 7 P.M. at the Bruno Walter Auditorium of the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, 111 Amsterdam Avenue, at 65th Street.
The two-hour program is to include filmed excerpts from Mr.
Butler's ballets and reminiscences by colleagues, including Glen Tetley, Mary Hinkson, Carmen de Lavallade and Judith Jamison.
Mr.
Butler died on Sept. 11 at the age of 74.


Thanksgiving Day
NEW YORK
PARADE Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade begins at 9 A.M. today at 77th Street and Central Park West.
The parade will continue to Columbus Circle, south on Broadway to Herald Square, and east on 34th Street to Seventh Avenue.
TRAFFIC ALERT All streets along the parade route will be closed today until 2 P.M., including cross streets.
Also closed from 3 A.M. to 2 P.M.: Central Park West between West 86th Street and Columbus Circle; West 77th Street between Columbus Avenue and Central Park West; Seventh Avenue between 34th and 40th Streets, and 34th Street between Seventh and Ninth Avenues.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION No pickups or street cleanings; areas with Thursday pickup will be served on Friday.
SCHOOLS Closed today and tomorrow.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Sunday schedule for New York City buses and subways; Long Island Rail Road will operate on a Sunday schedule, with 10 additional trains today; weekday schedule tomorrow.
Off-peak fares will be in effect today and tomorrow.
For information: (516) 822-LIRR or (718) 217-LIRR.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed today and tomorrow.
POST OFFICES Closed.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed today, local option for tomorrow.
TRANSPORTATION New Jersey Transit buses and trains will operate on a Sunday schedule today, with added service on the Northeast Corridor Line between New Brunswick and New York.
For information: (201) 762-5100.
CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Closed.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed today and tomorrow.
TRANSPORTATION Today, Metro-North will offer additional Manhattan-bound service between 6 and 10 A.M. and 6 and 8 P.M.; also, added outbound service between 10 A.M. to 2 P.M.
Tomorrow, Metro-North will operate on a weekday schedule, with 6 added trains.
Off-peak fares will be in effect today and tomorrow.
For information: (212) 532-4900 or (800) 638-7646 outside New York City.


Sports of The Times; Some '93 Holiday Thoughts
IN the Phillies' dugout before one of the World Series games, John Kruk learned that the man he was talking to had purchased him in a rotisserie league last season.
"How much did you pay for me?"


A Teacher Who Lives His Lessons of Design
A BARE table -- or wall, or floor -- makes Stanley Barrows very nervous.
In nearly 79 years of living, he has collected 4,000 books, 45 framed paintings and engravings, 60 pieces of porcelain and, in various sinuous positions of sniffing and leaping, a dozen small bronze whippets and greyhounds.
"It's a difference only of size," Mr.
Barrows said of his 19th-century pets, which appear to be chasing each other across the glass dining table.


EMI to Pay Michael Jackson $70 Million to Manage Music
The pop singer Michael Jackson said through his lawyer yesterday that EMI Music Publishing would begin managing his 6,000-title music catalogue, which includes most early Beatles hits, in a deal being described as the most lucrative in music publishing.
Mr.
Jackson will receive $70 million in advance against revenue that EMI expected to generate managing the publishing rights to ATV Music.
The catalogue, acquired by Mr.
Jackson in 1985 for $47.5 million, includes the classic Lennon-McCartney Beatles compositions, as well as songs from Little Richard, Elvis Presley and the Pointer Sisters.


Mary Luke Is Dead; Author, 74, Wrote On Elizabethan Era
Mary Luke, a biographer who wrote about Tudor and Elizabethan figures, died yesterday at Yale-New Haven Hospital.
She was 74 and lived in Ridgefield, Conn.
She died after a brief illness, her family said.


Whitman's Brother Gives Answers in 2 Inquiries
Gov.-elect Christine Todd Whitman's brother, Webster B. Todd Jr., gave sworn testimony today in separate appearances before a Federal grand jury and lawyers for the Democratic Party, both of which are looking into allegations that Republicans paid to suppress the urban black vote in the Governor's race.
Mr.
Todd spent just over three hours before the grand jury at the justice complex in downtown Newark and then went to the Seton Hall Law Center, where he spent almost three hours answering questions from the Democrats.
The second round of questioning ended about 5 P.M., and lawyers for both sides said Mr.
Todd would return on Friday to continue the deposition.


COMPANY BRIEFS
FIRST UNITED CORP., Oakland, Md., said its acquisition of the Myersville Bank unit of Hometown Bancorp Inc. had been approved by the shareholders of both institutions.


U.N. to Expand Street Patrols in Mogadishu
With bandit attacks on civilians becoming more frequent, United Nations military officials have agreed to put more soldiers on the streets to protect their workers despite misgivings that their presence might provoke confrontations with Somali militiamen.
Officials from the political and military wings of the United Nations in Somalia agreed today that, whenever available, armoured personnel carriers should escort civilian personnel.


AROUND TOWN WITH: Breyten Breytenbach; Writing in English, Crying in Afrikaans
IN the easy iconography of politics and fame, Breyten Breytenbach, the long-exiled South African writer, is captured in a recent Richard Avedon photograph.
His face is serene; his gaze is beatific; his hands, one layered gracefully over the other, seem to float in front of him; all that's missing is a halo.
Mr.
Avedon's ordinarily savage eye has taken the former political prisoner -- who served seven years in a South African jail for anti-apartheid activities -- and turned him into a saint.
"That's a terrible problem I have," Mr.
Breytenbach said of the saintly image, which he cheerfully admits is quite off.
"People expect that somebody who has been to prison, and who came out more or less together, must be some form of a saint or some superman. Or people expect if you are of white background and you're fairly intelligent -- in other words, not totally stupid -- and became involved with the struggle of the black people, where apparently you had nothing to gain, you must be some kind of a saint.


At Last, the Brady Law
Congress has finally stood up to the intimidating lobby of weapons peddlers and passed the simple, fair Brady handgun control bill.
Public pleas to tone down society's violence, and the moral claim for slowing down the domestic small arms race, have overwhelmed a potent gun lobby that in the end went down with a whimper.
The National Rifle Association fully understood the consequences of this humiliating loss, its first Congressional defeat in a generation.
That defeat means more than the Brady bill itself, which after all provides only a modest five-day waiting period so authorities can check for criminal records.
The N.R.A. must now face the prospect of more comprehensive gun controls.


Parcells Aims at Jets Again
It was New England's fourth game of the season.
Bill Parcells didn't know very much about his team, but he expected it to be competitive against the Jets.
He was returning to Giants Stadium for the first time since retiring as Giants coach in 1990 and it was a homecoming for the Oradell, N.J., native.
Instead, it was a nightmare.
Parcells stood helplessly on the sideline as the Jets humiliated the Patriots, 45-7, in the nationally televised game.
Parcells called it the worst defeat of his career.


Amid All Those Books, There Must Be Lights, Especially Now


A Jewel-Box Library Dream
"IN Russia, it's an old saying," said Vicky Nicholas.
"If you really hate someone, you tell them, 'May you renovate your apartment every hour.' "
Vicky and David Nicholas had a one-bedroom apartment to divide by two professional adults and three grown children who visit frequently.
Cleverly, they employed the power of words rather than numbers to solve the problem.


Bond Prices Continue a Climb Back
The bond market continued its small rally yesterday, with prices bouncing back for the second consecutive day after more than a week of steep losses.
But the jump in Treasury prices came on a holiday-shortened trading day, with the market closing at 2 P.M.
There is no trading on Thanksgiving, and the market will close at 2 P.M. tomorrow.


Fossil Dealers in Tyrannosaur Seizure Are Indicted
A group of South Dakota fossil dealers whose tyrannosaur skeleton was seized by Federal agents in 1992 has been indicted on 39 charges of trafficking in fossils illegally taken from Federal land.
A grand jury in Rapid City, S.D., returned indictments last Friday against the group, the Black Hills Institute of Geological Research of Hill City, in a case that lawyers say is likely to go on for years.
The tyrannosaur fossil that prompted the case, nicknamed "Sue," was not mentioned in the indictment, although the Justice Department has said that it does not intend to return the fossil to the institute.


Events: Shows, a Sale, An Auction and a Talk
Design Exhibitions  Cooper-Hewitt Museum, 2 East 91st Street; (212) 860-6862.
"Living With AIDS: Education Through Design," an exhibition of posters, buttons and other printed material, starts on Wednesday and runs through Jan. 2.


Among Amish, Suspect In Arson Is Well Known
State prosecutors last week charged the grandson of a local Amish bishop with setting fires that burned $1 million worth of barns and livestock last year on six Amish dairy farms here in the lush Kishacoquillas Valley, 70 miles northwest of Harrisburg.
Since only Amish buildings were burned, there was widespread speculation that the arson was some novel kind of hate crime, and Federal authorities joined the investigation.
They reasoned that the arson death of 139 cows had interrupted interstate commerce in dairy products.


Young Divers Wish Kimball Well as He Starts New Life
In an emotional parting Tuesday night at the Swimming Hall of Fame pool before about 100 well-wishers, the United States' Olympic diving coach, Ron O'Brien, told Bruce Kimball that he has a full-time job waiting for him with the Fort Lauderdale Diving Club.
Less than 12 hours later, at about 6 A.M. today, Kimball walked out of a halfway house here, completing his incarceration for killing two teen-agers in a drunken-driving accident in 1988.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  CLINTON MEETS WITH RUSHDIE
President Clinton met with Salman Rushdie as part of an effort that the White House said was intended to convey U.S. abhorrence of Iran's refusal to lift a death threat against the novelist, who has been in hiding for nearly five years.
A1  BOYS CONVICTED IN TOT'S DEATH
Two 11-year-old boys were convicted of abduction and murder in the beating death last February of a Liverpool toddler, James Bulger, and were sentenced to serve a term of indefinite custody.
A3  NEW WARNING ON BOSNIA
In a speech prepared for delivery on Thursday in London, the European Community's mediator on the Balkans warns that unless a peace accord on Bosnia is reached soon, the United Nations may impose new sanctions.
A6  CLINTON REACHES OUT TO EUROPE
After weeks of declaring that the U.S. would increase its attention to the fast-growing markets of Asia and Latin America, the Clinton Administration is trying to mend fences with Europe.
A8  CHINA MOVES TOWARD CAPITALISM
Next year China's Communist leaders will select 100 big state-owned factories, take their managers aside and tell them that they will now answer to "owners" in the Western sense of the word.
A7  SIGNS OF RESISTANCE IN NIGERIA
Almost a week after Nigeria's new military leader seized power in a bloodless coup, the first significant signs of resistance to his regime have begun to emerge including a call for sanctions by Wole Soyinka, the Nigerian author.
A10  DENIAL ON DEATH SQUADS
Vice President Francisco Merino of El Salvador denied allegations that he was involved in plotting death-squad activities in 1990, as reported in recently declassified U.S. documents.
A11  ARAFAT BACKERS LOSE VOTE
In the first significant electoral test for the P.L.O. in the occupied territories since it signed an accord with Israel, backers of Yasir Arafat were defeated in voting for the student council at Bir Zeit University.
A12  EGYPT AND JORDAN MEND FENCES
President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt met officially with King Hussein of Jordan, formally ending a three-year rift that began when the King refused to support the coalition to drive Iraq out of Kuwait.
A12  Lima Journal: Peru's leader has critics but no regrets.
A4  A former spy for East Germany called his trial a farce.
A9  National A16-25, B14-18  SENATE PASSES BRADY BILL
The Senate passed a mandatory waiting period on the purchase of handguns after Republican opposition collapsed.
A1  F.B.I.
FACES INTERNAL INQUIRY
A standoff between the F.B.I.'s elite paramilitary force and a white separatist in Idaho has spawned one of the largest internal inquiries ever conducted by the Justice Department.
A1  RULING HELPS QVC BID
Legal obstacles by Paramount to stop QVC's hostile takeover bid were swept away by a Delaware court.
The ruling was a blow to Viacom, which had agreed to a friendly merger with Paramount.
A1  COMPANIES CUT PAYROLL
Two American corporate giants -- Philip Morris and NCR -- plan to cut their payrolls by a total of as many as 21,500 workers.
D1  SHOWDOWN OVER L.A.
AIRPORT
The nation's major airlines have asked the Clinton Administration to prevent Los Angeles officials from banning their aircraft from using the city's international airport.
A1  ATLANTA HAS NEW MAYOR
City Councilman Bill Campbell won the runoff election for Atlanta mayor by a wide margin, becoming the first black mayor in 20 years with neither deep roots in the city's civil rights community nor celebrity status drawn from it.
A16  ARREST IN AMISH FIRES
State prosecutors charged the grandson of a local Amish bishop with setting fires that burned $1 million worth of barns and livestock last year on six Amish farms.
A16  FOSSIL DEALERS ARE INDICTED
A group of South Dakota fossil dealers whose tyrannosaur skeleton was seized by Federal agents in 1992 has been indicted on 39 charges of trafficking in illegal fossils.
A17  FIGHT OVER HEALTH CARE SCRUTINY
Months before they are to start scrutinizing the Clinton health care plan, some leading Senators are fighting over who should hold the magnifying glass.
A18  PUSH TO REVEAL SPY BUDGET
Senior members of Congress have urged the White House to disclose the multibillion-dollar budget for secret intelligence spending.
A20  A different kind of union leader in American Airlines strike.
B14  At O'Hare, American Airlines was still recovering.
B14  Metro Digest B1  FALLING WINCH KILLS WORKER
A 16-ton winch tumbled into a shaft in Queens, killing one construction worker and injuring seven others as it ricocheted off the walls of the dank, 450-foot hole that is to tap into a new city water tunnel 670 feet below the ground.
A1  Arts/Entertainment C11-22  Box-office feast for Hollywood.
C11  A "new" Caravaggio in Dublin.
C11  Music: Smashing Pumpkins.C11  Dance: City Ballet gala.
C11  A mixed choreographic bag.
C14 Books: "Slow Waltz in Cedar Bend," by Robert James Waller.
C20  Business Digest D1  Obituaries D19  Sports B19-26  Baseball: Yankees have shot at Langston.
B19  Home Section C1-9  Adoptions that lack papers, not purpose.
C1  Breyten Breytenbach: writing in English, crying in Afrikaans.
C1  Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27  Editorials  Click, click.
Gobble, gobble.
At last, the Brady law.
Airline settlement: not a solution.
Letters  William Safire: The porn is green.
Anna Quindlen: Death at an early age.
Thomas Mallon: A New York Thanksgiving.
Jim Heynen: The turkey farmer.
Bridge C20  Chronicle B12  Crossword C16


Nebraska Has Point To Prove To Polls
They have a wealth of football history and tradition going back to 1912, but when Nebraska takes on Oklahoma for the 74th time tomorrow, it will be a meaningless game -- freighted with significance.
On one level, the game in Lincoln, Neb., will be classic anticlimax.
Nebraska (10-0) clinched the Big Eight title two weeks ago and, win or lose, the Cornhuskers are going to the Orange Bowl.


Morceli Athlete of Year
NOUREDDINE MORCELI, who set the world mile record and was unbeaten at that distance and 1,500 meters in 14 races, has been selected Track and Field News's male athlete of the year for 1993.
Morceli, from Algeria, lowered the mile record to 3 minutes 44.39 seconds, ran the second-fastest 1,500 meters ever at 3:29.20 and successfully defended his 1,500-meter title at the world championships.


An Unsung Caravaggio Finds Glory in Dublin
Sergio Benedetti stood behind the almost reverent crowd in the National Gallery of Ireland as it murmured admiration for the painting he expects will give the museum new status in the art world: a wide canvas of somber shadow and sparkling light showing Judas kissing Christ as a soldier grips Jesus's neck, ready to drag Him away for crucifixion.
"It's a Caravaggio," said Mr.
Benedetti, the gallery's senior conservator.
"I am 101 percent certain of it."


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about President Clinton's intervention in the American Airlines strike misidentified James J. Reynolds, a Johnson Administration official who intervened in a strike in 1966.
He was an Assistant Secretary of Labor and then Under Secretary of Labor; he was not the Labor Secretary.


Classical Music in Review
Lakshmi Shankar  Hindustani Singer Rousseau Room Barbizon Hotel
Lakshmi Shankar brought the sound of reverence and devotion to an intimate audience on Sunday evening, singing Hindustani classical pieces that expressed love for Lord Krishna in tones of tenderness, yearning and unassuming but virtuosic display.
Mrs.
Shankar, who may be best known in the West for her performance on the soundtrack of "Gandhi," was accompanied by Kadar Khan on tabla and Madhu Vora on harmonium.
Both deferred to the poised authority of her voice.


Merry-Go-Round to Take a Charge
Merry-Go-Round Enterprises Inc., the beleaguered operator of specialty stores, said yesterday that it would take a noncash charge against its third-quarter earnings, mostly to account for markdowns on poorly selling merchandise, but also to cover the costs of closing 30 stores.
Meanwhile, factors and other financing companies are continuing to caution Merry-Go-Round's suppliers, but some are approving small orders pending the retailer's Christmas performance.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Anchor Glass Container Corp., Tampa, Fla., a unit of Vitro Sociedad Anonima, is offering $200 million of senior subordinated notes due in 2008, at 100 to yield 9.875 percent, through Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
Noncallable for seven years, the issue is rated B-2 by Moody's Investors Service and B by Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.


Pop and Jazz in Review
The Leonard Bernstein Revue A Helluva Town!
Rainbow and Stars 30 Rockefeller Plaza Through Jan. 1
If you diagrammed the history of the American musical as a family tree, the branch that began with George Gershwin would lead directly to Leonard Bernstein.
In his music for Broadway, Bernstein shared Gershwin's passion for New York as a cultural melting pot.
Like Gershwin, he swirled vernacular and classical styles together into something that was at once brash and grand, progressive and romantic.
And in "The Leonard Bernstein Revue: A Helluva Town!," which opened a six-week run on Tuesday evening, that vision is realized with a ferocious power and energy.


Clinton and Aides Meet Rushdie At White House in Rebuke to Iran
President Clinton met today with Salman Rushdie in a gesture that the White House said was intended to convey America's abhorrence of Iran's refusal to lift the death threat against the novelist.
Mr.
Rushdie also conferred at length with Secretary of State Warren Christopher and Anthony Lake, the national security adviser.
Their hourlong conversation, in an office at the White House, represented a sharp shift from the Bush Administration's refusal to meet with Mr.
Rushdie on the ground that it "might be misinterpreted" in the Muslim world.
Message Against 'Intolerance'
Mr.
Rushdie, 46, has lived in almost perpetual hiding since Feb. 14, 1989, when his novel "The Satanic Verses" was condemned as blasphemous by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini of Iran, who called for his death.
President Hashemi Rafsanjani of Iran said this year that since the Ayatollah had died, the death sentence could not be lifted.


Diner's Journal
Gauguin in the Plaza
Trader Vic's, that pu-pu platter paradise in the Plaza Hotel in Manhattan, slipped off into the sunset a few months ago and was replaced by the Plaza Lounge.
Same decor, same parasol-laden drinks.
But not for long.
In the spring, the space will be occupied by a new restaurant, Gauguin.
Behind this project are Mark and Alan Fleishman, who own Tatou, a restaurant and supper club on East 50th Street in Manhattan.
Scott Cohen, the chef at Tatou, is the consulting chef for Gauguin, which he described as having a French-Polynesian theme with big drinks in big glasses but more serious food than Trader Vic's, French with Polynesian overtones.
It will have 240 seats in 8 areas.
Truffles in High Gear
In September, as soon as the first white truffles arrive from Italy, restaurants start shaving them over pasta and risotto.
But early truffles are not the best truffles.
Now they are larger, with more fragrance and flavor and better texture, and this is the peak of the season.


Hunter to Return
His 21-game suspension over, DALE HUNTER returns to the ice tonight when the Washington Capitals play the visiting Pittsburgh Penguins.
The last time Hunter played, on April 28, he hit PIERRE TURGEON from behind after Turgeon scored a goal in the final game of a playoff loss to the Islanders.
Turgeon missed six games with a separated shoulder.


Review/City Ballet; New Gloss On Motifs Romantic And Gypsy
One of the legacies of the New York City Ballet's mammoth Balanchine Celebration of last spring was the superb state to which many of George Balanchine's works were restored to the repertory.
The 1966 "Brahms-Schoenberg Quartet," rarely performed and often subject to indifferent performances, was the prime example.
The ballet returned again Wednesday night to the New York State Theater with some members of the Celebration's exhilarating new cast.
But there were also fresh debuts: Nilas Martins and Margaret Tracey, notably, stepped with affecting ease into the second section's drawing-room romanticism.


Jailed by Hanoi, Shut Out by Washington
More than 20 years after the last American troops left Vietnam, a sullen shadow war still rages.
Psyches on both sides remain haunted by extravagant suspicions, diplomats barely communicate, and unfortunate people trapped in the middle can pay a heavy price.
One such person is Do Ngoc Long, imprisoned and persecuted by Hanoi for his associations with anti-war Americans -- and now rebuffed by Washington in his quest for political asylum in the U.S.
It would be particularly appropriate if President Clinton intervened directly in the asylum case and spared Mr.
Long further torments.


Slipshod Play: Cowboys Give Game to Dolphins
On a 32-degree afternoon of drizzle, sleet, snow and rain, and on a field covered with enough snow that the hash marks could barely be seen, the Miami Dolphins and the Dallas Cowboys played a Thanksgiving Day game here today.
The table could not have been set with more unusual drama.
Dallas thought it had won the game.


Ban on Some Ammunition Won't End Violence
To the Editor:
When will we learn that calls to ban specific types of guns and ammunition that might have an illegal purpose or a grotesque outcome will never solve the problem?
In "High-Tech Death From Winchester" (editorial, Nov. 13), you call for the Olin Corporation's Winchester Ammunition Division to stop manufacturing Black Talon handgun cartridges because of their grisly effectiveness.


Shorter Hours For Markets
All financial markets in the United States were closed yesterday in observance of Thanksgiving.
But markets in other countries were open.
There will be limited trading on the American financial markets today.


After Tourists' Deaths, Florida Works to Recover
The homicide statistics seemed to spell disaster for the $31 billion tourist industry in Florida: since the beginning of last winter's tourist season, nine visitors, all of them foreigners, have been killed near some of the state's most popular resorts.
Yet as visitors begin to stream into the state this week, Government and private tourism officials say that Florida is unlikely to suffer the economic disaster that had been foreseen by some as recently as two months ago.


Ban on Some Ammunition Won't End Violence; Voice of Gunmakers
To the Editor:
All too often the news media report the National Rifle Association's implacable opposition to the most modest proposals for gun control as if the association's leaders spoke for its members.
They do not.
Polls consistently show that most members support many gun control measures more than the association's lobbyists.


Alabama Governor Plans Educational Overhaul to Address Ruling
Gov.
Jim Folsom Jr. has proposed a sweeping set of overhauls to address a state judge's ruling that Alabama's schools violate the State Constitution by failing to provide an adequate education.
The proposal, the Plan for Academic Excellence Act of 1994, will be introduced in the Legislature next year.
Based on recommendations by an educational task force, the plan is intended to improve the accountability of educators and raise student performance.


Tajik Civil War Fades, but the Brutality Goes On
It was just after dusk when a car with five men drove into this small village on a collective farm in southern Tajikistan.
The men were armed and drunk, and they were looking for women, villagers recalled the following morning.
When a crowd gathered, the intruders began shooting, wounding three people, the villagers said, pointing to patches of blood on the pavement.


Review/Photography; The Mapplethorpes: Gallery, Artist and Model
It's both fitting and not surprising that the Guggenheim Museum's first exhibition in its new photography gallery is devoted to the work of Robert Mapplethorpe.
When the museum announced that it would begin collecting photographs, it did so on the strength of a 1992 gift, including both artworks and cash valued by the museum at $5 million, from the foundation the photographer set up a year before he died in 1989.
The new gallery, on the fourth floor of the addition to the Guggenheim's familiar spiral building, is also named after Mapplethorpe.
To inaugurate the space, Germano Celant, the museum's curator of contemporary art, has selected 46 self-portraits from throughout Mapplethorpe's career.
The show begins with his Polaroids from the early 1970's when, fresh out of art school, he began to explore photography.
It concludes with his searing images from the late 80's, when he was afflicted with AIDS.


LUTHERANS BALK ON A SEX POLICY
A four-year effort by the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America to write a statement on human sexuality has nearly foundered since reports of a first draft alarmed members of the 5.2 million-member denomination.
"The proposed statement as written is mortally wounded," wrote the Rev.
Edgar R. Trexler in the current issue of The Lutheran, the church's monthly magazine, which he edits.


11 Firefighters Hurt Battling Queens Factory Fire
Eleven firefighters were injured yesterday while battling a roaring fire at a Queens metal-processsing factory, the Fire Department said.
Lieut.
Dennis Mojica, a Fire Department spokesman, said the blaze started shortly after 11 A.M. in the first floor of a four-story building that houses Bright Star Industries, at 4-09 26th Avenue in Astoria.


Review/Art; Amid Depression Sorrow, a Celebratory Message
Six decades ago, with America in the grip of the Depression, Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal Administration began to pay artists to illuminate the walls of schools, hospitals and government waiting rooms.
The artists weren't always top of the line, though some, like Stuart Davis, were among the best of their time.
The work was often didactic, with a positive, even celebratory, spirit.
Most important, it was showing up in the overcrowded institutional spaces where many Americans spent a chunk of their lives being educated, getting well and learning to wait their turn.
Stuart Davis is one of the eight artists in "A New Deal for Public Art: Murals From Federal Work Programs," an exhibition of murals from the Depression years, at the Bronx Museum of the Arts.
The show was organized in cooperation with the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation Public Art Program, which, along with such initiatives as the New York City Art Commission's Adopt-a-Mural program, has spent a decade tracking down and restoring murals that had been either covered up or folded away in storage.


Some Western Germans Finding Better Financial Rewards in East
When the Berlin wall was breached by crowds of ecstatic East Germans in November 1989, Albrecht Wendt saw his chance.
He held a good job managing a farm in the west, but had for years dreamed of being his own boss.
More than a million eastern Germans saw unification as a chance to escape the frustration and limited opportunity of the east and emigrate to western cities full of color, action and success.
But a smaller and less visible group of about 250,000 pioneers moved in the opposite direction.
They abandoned the comfort and security of western Germany to seek their fortunes in what they call "the wild east."


Universities Biased Against Religion, Scholar Says
A leading historian of American religion has accused the nation's major universities of excluding scholarship that reflects religious viewpoints, especially traditional Christian ones.
"What is ironic about such discrimination is that it is typically promoted in the name of tolerance, pluralism and diversity," the historian, George M. Marsden, said in a speech on Sunday to the American Academy of Religion.


Restaurants
The women at the next table are examining the plates.
One by one they pick them up, turn them over, scrutinize the labels.
"I wonder if they sell them at Bloomingdale's," says one, tossing her tangled red mane past her pale, powdered face and looking in the direction of the store, a block down the street.
"Who do you think does the flowers?" muses her companion, picking up the little vase of wild blossoms with her well-manicured fingers and dreamily reciting their names.
"I just love this look." She snaps out of her reverie, looks around the airy room and says crisply: "I wish Fred would get here. I wanted him to see this restaurant. It's exactly the look I'm aiming for in the apartment."


Kafr al-Ilw Journal; Industrious Egypt Is Choking Its People to Death
When the students at the Kafr al-Ilw primary school begin to cough uncontrollably they are sent home.
They are also dismissed early when their sores spread and fester, when they begin to faint in the classroom, when they lose clumps of hair and when the stinging in their eyes makes it impossible to read.


Whenever Opportunity Knocks, Jets' Rookie Murrell Comes Out Running
In the fourth quarter of the Jets-Bengals game last Sunday, Johnny Johnson was sitting on the sideline nursing bruised ribs, Richie Anderson was out with a severely sprained ankle, Brad Baxter was trying to get his broken chinstrap reattached to his helmet and Jets Coach Bruce Coslet was about to flip his wig.
Coslet looked around and summoned his only available running back, the rookie Adrian Murrell, and sent him into the game where quarterback Boomer Esiason was waiting with some simple instructions.


Mum's the Word on Deals, Michael Says
Because he has done more talking than trading, the Yankees' general manager said yesterday that he would stop talking until he began trading or signing.
"I'm not going to talk about anything," Gene Michael said when reached at home by telephone.
"Too much talking helps the agents."


Ruling on QVC Bid Faces an Expert Review
Whether a Delaware court ruling for QVC Network Inc. in its bid to gain control of Paramount Communications survives a review by the Delaware Supreme Court next month depends on how the higher court interprets previous cases pitting the discretion of corporate boards against the rights of shareholders.
At the very least, however, lawyers for QVC and Viacom Inc., QVC's rival for Paramount, will have the advantage of arguing before what many experts consider the most knowledgeable judges in the country on corporate law.


Plans for an Irish Cultural Center Divide a Village; Opposition by a Residents' Group Brings Claims of Bias From the Project's Proponents
When Edward Sheeran proposed creating the largest Irish cultural center outside Dublin on a college campus in this Westchester village, the reaction of many residents was swift and negative.
At a series of heated public hearings last summer, some expressed fears that the center, with its proposed 2,200-seat Gaelic football field and 800-seat catering hall, would snarl traffic and elevate noise levels in their tranquil, wooded community.


Passing Blame at Paramount Over a Meeting a Court Assailed
There was finger-pointing yesterday within Paramount Communications about whether the company's board should have held a crucial meeting during which, according to a Delaware court ruling, it did not give proper consideration to a takeover bid from QVC Network, several people with knowledge of the situation said yesterday.
One adviser to the Paramount board, who refused to be identified by name, said yesterday that he had told a board member to delay the Nov. 15 meeting.


CHRONICLE
The man known as Captain Kangaroo thinks television has gotten too commercial, MEL ALLEN thinks sportscasters talk endless gibberish, and VIRGINIA GRAHAM thinks talk shows are not substantive.
All are television pioneers to be honored for their careers on Monday when they will be inducted into the Silver Circle of the New York chapter of the National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences.


EDUCATION PANEL STATES ITS MISSION
To ease fears about Federal intrusion into local school systems, the National Education Goals Panel said last week that the educational standards being adopted in various subjects were not intended to become a national curriculum.
It was the strongest and clearest statement of intentions yet offered by the 14-member bipartisan panel, which said in its Nov. 15 meeting that it was not in the business of dictating to local schools what they should and should not teach.


Nets Are Perfecting the Last-Minute Loss
Timberwolves 107, Nets 106
When Chuck Person left the Minnesota Timberwolves' huddle, Coach Sidney Lowe had a feeling that the play he drew up would end when Person got his hands on the basketball.


Oil Companies Tread Warily Into Russia's Decrepit Fields
There's a fish in the hole at well 7551 in the vast Siberian oilfield here.
To hook that fish -- an oilmen's term for stray tubing or other gear blocking the flow of oil -- a team of American and Canadian rig hands and engineers led by Texaco Inc. is braving below-zero temperatures and stiff winds to feed drill pipe 8,000 feet down to the blockage, hoping to hoist it to the surface or ram it out of the way.
The prize for success: a chance to restart the flow of 250 or more barrels of oil a day from the well, which has been out of commission since March.


It Should Be Called the Grossman Health Care Bill
When Bill and Hillary Clinton said they had "no pride of authorship" in their legislative proposal to overhaul the nation's health care system, there was good reason: neither they nor anyone else in the White House wrote it.
Most of the bill's 240,000 words are those of Edward G. Grossman, an inconspicuous, self-effacing lawyer who translates bold visions and vague ideas from the fevered brains of politicians into the cool, precise, bloodless prose of statutes.


Uncaging the Alter Ego, Briefly
THE premise was simple.
I would rent some kind of super-whiz-bang sports car and take my 55-year-old alter ego out for a spin and see what happened.
Automotively speaking, I have always been a short back and sides sort of human.
I have, to be sure, had occasional yearnings for fins, aerodynamic curves, speed and power, but whenever faced with choosing a new car I always went with fuel economy, safety features, modest price and something you could drive to a funeral.


Art in Review
Sean Landers
Andrea Rosen Gallery  130 Prince Street  SoHo  Through tomorrow
Sean Landers may not be able to stop talking about himself, but at least he is making his stream-of-consciousness, art-as-autobiography narration of artistic ambition and its attendant neuroses more interesting to look at.


Review/Art; Turning Back to the World
Throughout his nearly 40-year career, Alex Katz has played a friendly game of one-upmanship with Abstract Expressionism, the style that held sway when he was coming of age as an artist in New York in the 1950's.
In his often enormous close-ups of heads and in his more complex paintings of groups of people indoors or out, he has specialized in turning the scale, austere composition and all-over unity of Abstract Expressionism back toward reality, suffusing its formal advances with the facts of life and light and the actual experience of looking at the world.
This goal is even clearer in his current show at the Marlborough Gallery, which is dominated by landscapes devoid of people or faces.
The best paintings among these 20 new canvases, most of which date from 1991 and '92, are big abbreviated images of trees or beaches, severely cropped or seen in close-up, and shown at different times of day or year.


Keenan Magic Makes Doubt Vanish
It was after a Ranger loss against the Devils at Byrne Meadowlands Arena late last season when the veteran Mike Gartner and General Manager Neil Smith admitted what every outsider had already seen.
The Rangers didn't believe in themselves.
They didn't have any confidence.
And, because of it, they were playing erratic, hesitant and ineffective hockey.
"They have no confidence right now," Smith said after that loss.
"These are mental problems, not physical problems."


Art in Review
Josef Sudek  'Poetic Images'
Sander Gallery  19 East 76th Street  Manhattan  Through Jan. 8
The atmosphere is palpable in Josef Sudek's misty, romantic photographs.
The Czech master, who died in 1976, is represented here mostly by still lifes and landscapes made in the early 1950's.


For Children
'International Children's Television Festival'
Museum of Television and Radio  25 West 52d Street  Manhattan  (212) 621-6800  Recommended ages: 4 and up
Through May 29
Alfred J. Kwak is a soft-hearted duck whose lady friend falls rudely in love with a Michael Jackson look-alike duck.
Siyabonga is an African boy who "dream-travels." Matt, from Finland, endures his parents' divorce.
These are among the characters children will encounter, and probably wish they could see on American television, at the Second Annual International Children's Television Festival.


Zulu Leads Unlikely Alliance In Facing Post-Apartheid Era
By uncanny coincidence the Friday night movie on television last week, after South Africa's political rivals had signed a new constitution, was "Zulu," a 1964 film about the Zulu struggle against British colonialists in the last century.
Viewers who paid close attention may have recognized the man portraying Cetshwayo, the Zulu king who led his people in a valiant but calamitous war that ended the Zulus' hopes of independence.
The amateur actor was Cetshwayo's great-grandson, Chief Mangosuthu G. Buthelezi.


Review/Cabaret; Susceptible To Romantic Infections
Nobody knows better than the cabaret singer Andrea Marcovicci how a seemingly harmless popular song can infect your life by instilling romantic expectations that can never be met.
That is a running theme of Ms.
Marcovicci's popular cabaret act.
And on Wednesday evening, it dominated her debut concert at Carnegie Hall.
Like someone bingeing on chocolate sundaes, Ms.
Marcovicci loves to wallow in old-fashioned romantic ballads and then poke fun at a guilty pleasure that she assumes is shared by her audience.
Accompanied by a 12-member ensemble made up of players from the American Symphony Orchestra and led by her musical director, Glenn Mehrbach, she offered several sundaes worth of delicious overindulgence.


Deciphering State's Takeover of Jersey City Schools
Four years ago, convinced that the Jersey City schools were hopelessly mismanaged, the State of New Jersey seized control of the city's school system, the second largest in the state.
Since then, high-ranking school officials have been dismissed, curriculums rewritten, schools painted and repaired.
In one instance, a high school swimming pool, once filled with furniture and debris, was returned to use.
To some, the flurry of changes signaled the seeds of a real turnaround for Jersey City, where more than 40 percent of children entering high school failed to graduate and where standardized test scores were among New Jersey's lowest.


Bears Take Black-and-Blue Bowl
The Chicago Bears, playing tough, mean and inspired defense, upset the Detroit Lions today, 10-6.
As Coach Wayne Fontes of the Lions put it, "Their defense strangled our offense."
As if their second straight defeat was not bad enough, the Lions also lost Barry Sanders, the National Football League's leading rusher, for three to five weeks.
In the third quarter, the stumpy tailback sprained the medial collateral ligament of his left knee.


Balloons, Floats, Bands And (Rip!) Lots of Wind
A clown, his cheeks smeared crimson with greasepaint and his belled jester's cap tinkling faintly, turned his back on the line of giant balloons bobbing down Broadway, hurled one last wad of confetti into the winter breeze, and paused, for a moment, to confront the curbside crowd.
"Happy Thanksgiving!" he shouted, his voice tinged with delirium.
Hundreds of voices, an immense, steaming, madcap chorus, roared back in holiday merriment, "Haaaappppppy Thaaaanksgiving!"


New Churchill Papers, but No Pearl Harbor News
The Government has begun releasing documents from Winston Churchill's secret wartime intelligence archive, but so far they do not shed light on one of the war's greatest mysteries -- whether Churchill knew in advance of the impending Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941.
One document, dated Dec. 4 -- three days before the attack -- is a record of a message that had been sent on Dec. 2 from the Japanese Foreign Minister in Tokyo to the Japanese Ambassador in Washington ordering him to destroy secret documents, ciphers and related materials.
Such a step presumably would be taken just before the outbreak of war.


Gulf War Veteran's Widow Is Charged in Murder
Detroit's grim image got a national battering in March 1991, when a newly returned veteran of the Persian Gulf war was shot to death in front of his in-laws' home in an apparent robbery attempt.
Everyone from the Rev.
Jesse Jackson to a Senate subcommittee cited the slaying as more proof of a social crisis in the streets of urban America.
Within days, however, the city got a different kind of shock when the police arrested Toni Cato Riggs, the wife of the Army veteran, Specialist Anthony Riggs, and her 19-year-old brother, Michael Cato, and charged them with murdering the 22-year-old soldier for $175,000 in insurance money.


Review/Film; A Home That Was Far From Sweet
To judge from "El Pisito" ("The Little Apartment"), an excessively noisy, dark comedy directed by the Spanish film maker Marco Ferreri, New York City's real estate squeeze in the 1980's was nothing compared with Madrid's in the 1950's.
In the movie's vision of real estate hell, middle-class people who can't afford modern housing -- and that seems to be almost everyone -- often live eight to an apartment in a space that is more appropriate for two.
Because of overcrowding, thin ceilings and frequently raised voices, apartment living often borders on bedlam.
Rodolfo (Jose Luis Lopez Vazquez), a novelty-store clerk, is a typical victim of the squeeze.
Along with several others, he leases a room in the four-room apartment of Dona Martina (Concha Lopez Silva), a crotchety woman in her 80's who is dying.


In Inwood, It Began With a Slip Of the ZIP
ON the outskirts of New York, where city and suburb become one, the border between this small Nassau County town and Far Rockaway, Queens, is almost indistinguishable.
The neighborhoods of capes, ranches and colonials blend into one another; the storefronts and gas stations on Sheridan Boulevard could fit easily in either county, and the same sorts of factories and warehouses are found on both sides of the boundary.


Ban on Some Ammunition Won't End Violence; To Make Streets Safer
To the Editor:
There is a plague on our streets.
Weapons with frightening firepower are killing individuals, destroying families and, in turn, threatening the fabric of our social order.


Boston Globe Cuts Agency Search to 3
The Boston Globe has narrowed the review on its estimated $4 million account to three agencies from five.
The account had been at Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos of Boston for 15 years.
The newspaper and the agency decided to part ways last month.


New York Shop Gets New Name in Merger
The agency being created by the merger of the New York office of Hal Riney &amp; Partners and the New York agency Angotti, Thomas, Hedge will no longer carry the Riney name.
The merger forms a shop with $150 million to $160 million in billings and more than 110 employees.
Since September, it has gone by the name of Riney, Angotti, Hedge.


Paris Opera Reduces Its President's Role
Pierre Berge, the Yves Saint Laurent executive whom President Francois Mitterrand appointed president of the Paris Opera, will lose control of the opera after February.
The announcement was made by Jacques Toubon, the French Minister of Culture, at a news conference this morning.
Mr.
Toubon had already appointed Hugues Gall, the director of the Geneva Opera, to become the director of what is now called the National Opera of Paris in August 1995.
Today, Mr.
Toubon released a comprehensive report that he had asked Mr.
Gall to submit on the organization and future policy of the company.


Day of the Shoppers
Some people think the Christmas season in New York City begins the moment somebody pushes the button that lights up Rockefeller Center's Christmas tree.
Those people are wrong.
The season starts today.
Today, still muzzy from turkey overload, countless shoppers will pull out their lists, get into their cars and bring new meaning to the word "gridlock." The shoppers who will be riding the buses and subways will be resting their chins on the shopping bags on their laps.
The rest of us will be tripping over the ones they've put in the aisles.


Knicks' Davis: The Choir Boy With the Killer Shot
Hubert Davis learned about physical basketball long before he joined the Knicks.
He learned playing one-on-one against his father.
Hubert Davis Sr. gave no quarter.
He would knock his son down.
Talk trash to him.
Foul him.
Whatever it took to win.
Davis's mother would look out the window in anguish, and inevitably she would run outside and stop the game, sparing her son any more lumps.


TRANSACTIONS
Hockey  National Hockey League
EDMONTON OILERS -- Fired Ted Green, coach.
Named president and general manager Glen Sather coach and Green assistant to the president.


Bowie Admitted to Club
The former Kentucky basketball star SAM BOWIE has been voted into the Lexington (Ky.) Country Club, becoming the first black member in the club's 91-year history.
The club has nearly 500 members.


Art in Review
'25 Years, Part I'
Paula Cooper Gallery  155 Wooster Street (at Houston Street)  SoHo  Through tomorrow
This impressive group show celebrates the Paula Cooper Gallery's first quarter-century as a prominent showcase for new art.
It offers a well-selected, sensitively installed, if random, survey of Minimalism and Post-Minimalism, the intertwining styles with which the gallery has especially been associated.


For Children
'International Children's Television Festival'
Museum of Television and Radio  25 West 52d Street  Manhattan  (212) 621-6800  Recommended ages: 4 and up
Through May 29
Alfred J. Kwak is a soft-hearted duck whose lady friend falls rudely in love with a Michael Jackson look-alike duck.
Siyabonga is an African boy who "dream-travels." Matt, from Finland, endures his parents' divorce.
These are among the characters children will encounter, and probably wish they could see on American television, at the Second Annual International Children's Television Festival.


Art in Review
Robert Longo
Metro Pictures  150 Greene Street (at Houston Street)  SoHo  Through tomorrow
With their apocalyptic gadget-freak weirdness, Robert Longo's monumental sculptures in the late 1980's looked like a cross between Wagnerian opera and "Star Wars." They were the product of a politically minded, highly theatrical sensibility, but one in restless search of an icon around which to concentrate its energy, an icon like the one, in fact, that Mr.
Longo had already produced in the 70's with his black-and-white drawings of figures twisting in space as if hit by an electrical charge.


Review/Art; Turning Back to the World
Throughout his nearly 40-year career, Alex Katz has played a friendly game of one-upmanship with Abstract Expressionism, the style that held sway when he was coming of age as an artist in New York in the 1950's.
In his often enormous close-ups of heads and in his more complex paintings of groups of people indoors or out, he has specialized in turning the scale, austere composition and all-over unity of Abstract Expressionism back toward reality, suffusing its formal advances with the facts of life and light and the actual experience of looking at the world.
This goal is even clearer in his current show at the Marlborough Gallery, which is dominated by landscapes devoid of people or faces.
The best paintings among these 20 new canvases, most of which date from 1991 and '92, are big abbreviated images of trees or beaches, severely cropped or seen in close-up, and shown at different times of day or year.


Anthony Burgess, 76, Dies; Man of Letters and Music
Anthony Burgess, the prolific British novelist, composer, librettist, essayist, semanticist, translator and critic, whose best-known novel, "A Clockwork Orange," offered a bleak vision of a violence-ridden future, died yesterday in London Hospital.
He was 76 and lived in Monaco and Lugano, Switzerland.
The cause of death was cancer, said a spokeswoman for Hutchinson, his publisher, adding that he had been ill for some time.


At the Bar; Last year the Government brought a law firm to its knees. Should it have?
Peter M. Fishbein was not one of those Wall Street figures led away from work in handcuffs who, quite apart from their guilt or innocence, came to personify the greed and irresponsibility of the 1980's.
But as counsel to the most spectacularly irresponsible savings and loan association in the savings and loan crisis, he suffered almost equal ignominy.
On front pages everywhere last year, Federal regulators depicted Mr.
Fishbein as an advocate run amok who had withheld information from them in order to protect his notorious client, Charles H. Keating Jr., founder of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association.
They made Mr.
Fishbein agree never to represent another savings association or bank, and by tying up its assets they forced the law firm he had long led -- Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler -- to its knees.


Struggling Oilers Drop Their Coach
TED GREEN, who made a National Hockey League career out of bashing opponents into the boards, was discharged yesterday as head coach of Edmonton.
The Oilers are 3-18-3, the worst start in the team's history.
"It's one of the most difficult decisions I've had to make," said GLEN SATHER, the team's president and general manager, who will return as coach.


Aggies Make Big Plays And Land in Cotton Bowl
Texas A&amp;M 18, Texas 9
No. 8 Texas A&amp;M made the most of its big plays against Texas to win its third straight Southwest Conference title and Cotton Bowl berth.
Freshman Leeland McElroy jump-started the Aggies' offense with a 100-yard kickoff return last night in College Station, Tex., spicing an explosive second quarter in an 18-9 victory that gave A&amp;M an S.W.C.-record 22d straight league victory.


U.S. TO ENCOURAGE LEGAL IMMIGRANTS TO GET CITIZENSHIP
The Clinton Administration says it will actively encourage legal immigrants to become United States citizens, a new policy intended to counter hostility to immigrants.
The effort could enfranchise millions of people who have lived in this country for years without seeking citizenship.
When immigrants become citizens, they gain the right to vote, to hold public office and to serve on juries.


CHRONICLE
The singer STEVIE WONDER brought the spirit of the holidays to Public School 189 in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, on Wednesday, and he spoke in support of Charge Against Hunger, a food aid campaign sponsored by American Express and Share Our Strength, a nonprofit relief organization.
Mr.
Wonder is donating $50,000 to the group, while American Express is donating 2 cents for each credit card purchase made through the end of the year.
They hope to raise $5 million for the campaign.


No Headline
"Most people here are still afraid to be independent, to start out on a risky project like this. Risk is not something they understand very well." -- ALBRECHT WENDT, a West German who has moved east.  [ A12:1. ]


CHRONICLE
In the early hours of Thanksgiving Day, viewers of television's "Late Night With Conan O'Brien" saw New York City Mayor DAVID N. DINKINS put in a telephone call to Gov.
MARIO M. CUOMO.
Mayor Dinkins made the call -- much earlier, actually, when the show was taped -- after he was asked by the talk show host whether he could still get politicians to answer his calls since losing the Nov. 2 mayoral election to RUDOLPH W. GIULIANI.


TV Weekend; On Point in a War Zone Called Urban America
"There Are No Children Here," a book by Alex Kotlowitz, formerly a reporter for The Wall Street Journal, chronicles the lives of two boys growing up in a Chicago housing project.
The children are black.
They live in what has come to be known as the other America, one often bearing a terrifying resemblance to a war zone.
An adaptation of this best-selling nonfiction account is being brought to television by a unit of Oprah Winfrey's Harpo Productions.
Packaged as an "ABC Theater" presentation, "There Are No Children Here" will be broadcast on Sunday at 9 P.M.


In a Sea of Troubles, Their Gratitude Thrives
This land of gutted brownstones and constant sirens is home for Carole Shuler and her three children.
Although the glass in the front door of their building is missing, it is better than the homeless shelter where they lived for a spell, and for now the police have shooed away the crack dealers.
Yesterday a turkey roasted in the oven.
For those and other reasons, Ms.
Shuler felt blessed this Thanksgiving.
That is how things are in this patch of Harlem, where thanks can be great for blessings that to others seem small.
In a neighborhood saturated with hunger, disease and violence, there is gratitude for a warm apartment in the winter, a friend who manages to get a job, and for another birthday or anniversary.


After Murder, Britain Asks Why? Why?
A day after a jury found two 11-year-old boys guilty of the abduction and murder of a Liverpool toddler, the police, politicians and psychiatrists across Britain were pondering questions the trial did not answer: how is it that two otherwise normal children could commit such a barbaric crime?
At the end of 18 days of hearings in this industrial town 25 miles northeast of Liverpool, even Crown Court Judge Michael Moreland wondered aloud at what went so terribly wrong, describing the conduct of Robert Thompson and Jon Venables -- both 10 years old at the time of the slaying in February -- as "cunning and very wicked." He even suggested that violent video films may have been influential.


Body of Man Is Recovered From Tunnel
The body of a worker killed by a huge winch that plunged into a deep shaft at a water-tunnel construction site in Queens was recovered yesterday as New York City and Federal officials planned an extensive joint investigation to determine the cause of the accident.
With the inquiry set to start today, officials said it was too early even to speculate on why the 16-ton winch -- one of three spools coiled with steel cable and used to lower steel concrete-making forms into the hole -- had parted from its anchoring on Wednesday and tumbled in, injuring eight workers, one fatally.


Elliott Unlikely for Cardinals
The back problems that have plagued Giants offensive tackle Jumbo Elliott will probably keep him from playing on Sunday against Phoenix.
Elliott practiced sparingly for the second consecutive day today and Coach Dan Reeves said his chances of playing in the late afternoon game at Giants Stadium were "very slim."
Reeves said that Elliott would dress for the game only in case of an emergency.
In the last several weeks, he has been bothered by what the team officially describes as back spasms.
But some people in the organization think that he could have minor disk irritation in his lower back, meaning that a full recovery could take longer.


Art in Review
Claire A. Khalil
Nancy Hoffman Gallery  429 West Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through Wednesday
Claire A. Khalil's art is not great, but it certainly is fun.
The artist, whose last exhibition was 15 years ago, combines the skills of painter, cartographer and children's book illustrator in her meticulous, if somewhat brittle, images of cities and towns and in elaborate art-filled interiors.


Gullit Finds His Separate Peace
Ruud Gullit lives 200 yards from the Ligurian Sea, where another world traveler named Christopher Columbus began his peregrination five centuries ago.
This may or may not be an omen.
Gullit has never felt the need to take even a vacation in the United States -- and why should he?
It is a very big world out here.
But Americans would feel very much at home with the Dutchman with dreadlocks.
He has come back from major knee surgery with the inner-directed intensity of Bernard King, and his presence on the soccer field is sweetly extraterrestial, a cross between Earl (the Pearl) Monroe and Earvin (Magic) Johnson.


Calvin and Hobbes and John Paul
Many people find philosophy boring and theology frightening.
They would rather read the comics.
And so would I: I can't imagine starting a day without studying "Calvin and Hobbes." But whether we notice it or not, that comic strip is often about the fundamental moral issue of our time.
Here is a little boy (implausibly given the name of a stern Protestant theologian) asserting that what he wants -- fame, luxury, diversion, staying out of school, hitting Susie with a snowball -- is all that should matter.
I am the center of the universe, he says; values are what I say they are.
And then there is the tiger (paradoxically given the name of an English philosopher who pretty much defended the little boy's view) who offers the sober judgment of mankind about this self-centeredness, all in the language of gentle irony.
Periodically, just to prove that mankind is in charge, not little boys, Hobbes beats up on Calvin.
And periodically, just to prove that the life of a solitary egoist is inadequate, Calvin blissfully nuzzles the tiger's fur.


Review/Theater; A Political Morality Tale On the McCarthy Era
Few calumnies have had a more lasting effect on the national psyche than the witch hunt for Communists instigated and pursued in Congress by Senator Joseph R. McCarthy in the 1950's.
Its smoldering residue gives off varying degrees of heat and light in such diverse works as Tony Kushner's "Angels in America" and Neil Simon's "Laughter on the 23d Floor" on Broadway, and Laurence Holder attempts to stoke it into a full blaze downtown in his new play, "Red Channels," at Theater for a New City.
Unfortunately, "Red Channels" fails to provide much heat or light.
The play focuses on the efforts by the junior senator from Wisconsin, goaded and abetted by J. Edgar Hoover and Richard M. Nixon, to use his red-menace campaign to discredit leading black intellectuals and artists, specifically W. E. B. Du Bois and Paul Robeson.
Mr.
Holder compresses real events into a fictionalized chronology that aims at the documentary effect Eric Bentley achieved in "Are You Now or Have You Ever Been," a dramatization of actual Congressional testimony, which was staged in New York in 1978.


Cuomo Drives the Lane as He Runs the State
What may be most remarkable about Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's relationship with the game of basketball is not the way the beefy 61-year-old sprints up and down the floor, or even his patented fade-away hook shot.
It is the sheer amount of time he spends plotting, strategizing and otherwise obsessing about his staff's deadly serious intramural league, as if he finds victory on the court far more satisfying than any legislative conquest.


RESULTS PLUS
BASKETBALL  Reid Leads St. Raymond's
Kareem Reid's 23 points helped St.
Raymond's of the Bronx defeat Anchorage East, 80-65, on Wednesday night and capture the high school championship in the Great Alaska Shootout in Anchorage.
The Ravens (3-0), ranked fourth in the nation by the ESPN/ High School Coaches poll, began defense of their New York City and state Catholic High School Athletic Association titles by defeating West Anchorage on Monday and Science Hill (Tenn.) on Tuesday in the prestigious Alaskan tournament.


From Political Rivals to Marital Partners
Leading a dancing, swaying jazz parade of guests in evening dress through the French Quarter, James Carville and Mary Matalin consummated their improbable union on Thanksgiving evening in the noisy style of New Orleans.
Mr.
Carville, the Democratic political strategist, and Ms.
Matalin, his Republican rival, led the public parade of about 150 people who had attended the private civil marriage ceremony at the Omni Royal Orleans Hotel in the French Quarter.
The ceremony was performed by Justice Kitty Kimball of the State Supreme Court, a law school classmate of Mr.
Carville, to the accompaniment of a string quartet.
Jazz Music and Beads
Attending were family members, White House aides, friends, and a mixture of Democratic and Republican officials.
The marriage was a finale to the couple's well-publicized relationship during the 1992 Presidential campaign, when she was the political director for President George Bush and he was Bill Clinton's top strategist.


People
*
Bruce Campbell has rejoined Ketchum Advertising San Francisco, as executive vice president and chief creative officer, assuming some responsibilities from Millie Olson, who continues as executive vice president and executive creative director and assumes a more active role in new business.
Mr.
Campbell was previously a senior vice president, creative director and partner at Hal Riney &amp; Partners, San Francisco, which he joined in 1979 from Ketchum.


Critic's Notebook; Sampling Art In Sound Bites
FOR many people who listen to Acoustiguides, going to an art museum is like plunging into the ocean without knowing how to swim.
The Acoustiguides are their cruise ships and Philippe de Montebello, the voice that launched a thousand exhibitions, is their captain.
I had never listened to an Acoustiguide until this week, when I spent a few hours at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Guggenheim Museum and the Museum of Modern Art letting Mr. de Montebello, the Met's director, and an assorted crew of fellow directors, curators, vocal stand-ins, artists and artists' relatives navigate me through several shows.
I don't know how much I heard that couldn't be gleaned from the wall labels and accompanying brochures and a little extra effort, but I do have more of an inkling of what it feels like to sail on a Carnival cruise.


Lawyers Have to Take the Complaints of Clients More Seriously
To the Editor:
The American Bar Association called together in Washington on Nov. 8 bar leaders from all over the country to look at the disturbing evidence of public dissatisfaction with the legal profession.
While this is not a new problem, the extent and depth of that discontent have changed.
In recent polls not only are clients unhappy with lawyers as a group, but also many have had an unsatisfactory experience with their own lawyer.


Albert Collins, 61, Blues Guitarist Whose Wild Style Affected Rock
Albert Collins, a Grammy-winning guitarist and the foremost exponent of the Texas blues tradition, died on Wednesday at his home in Las Vegas, Nev.
He was 61.
Mr.
Collins died after a three-month fight against cancer, according to a statement from Alligator Records, for which he had recorded.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Volkswagen reached agreement with the metal workers union on a plan to reduce costs by putting production workers at six German plants on a four-day workweek and cutting their pay nearly 10 percent.
The plan reflects growing acceptance in Europe of the idea of shorter workweeks.  [ Page D11. ]


Tomato Gene That Resists Disease Is Cloned
Using a technology developed for the Human Genome Project, scientists at Cornell University have for the first time isolated and cloned a gene responsible for disease resistance in a major crop: tomatoes.
Transferring the gene into susceptible tomato plants through genetic engineering gave them the same protection possessed by naturally resistant plants.


About SportsFriday And Business Day
To accommodate holiday weekend news and advertising, SportsFriday starts on page D1 today.
Business Day begins on page D11.


Mexico Planning to Loosen Foreign Investment Rules
Mexico announced a long-awaited loosening of its restrictions on foreign investment today, extending to the rest of the world many of the rights that will be accorded to American and Canadian concerns under the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Under new foreign investment legislation sent to the Congress by President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, Mexico will allow foreign companies to own coastal and border property for the first time.
The law, which is expected to be approved without change, will maintain some restrictions on the ownership of residential property in those areas by non-Mexicans.


Home Video
The video as gift has proved a bankable concept over the last few holiday seasons, and this year distributors are responding with stacks of releases.
What they want most, of course, are lots of fresh hits priced under $25.
What they are getting are the few hits Hollywood will release at that price, and this season that amounts to "Aladdin," "Home Alone 2" and "Free Willy." Not that this is any selection to scoff at ("Aladdin" could become the best-selling tape ever), but some dealers say that the choice isn't large enough at a time of year when people are buying more tapes.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend
WILLIAM WEGMAN, Pace/MacGill Gallery, 32 East 57th Street, Manhattan.
New photographs.
Through tomorrow.
Hours: Today, 9:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.; tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 759-7999.
"THE FIERY FURNACE," Lucille Lortel Theater, 121 Christopher Street, Greenwich Village.
A drama by Timothy Mason about a mother (Julie Harris) and her two adult daughters, who are struggling to find independence during the Eisenhower era.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Information: (212) 239-6200.


Brazil May Have 26 Different Foreign Policies
Representing a state with an economy twice the size of Argentina's, Governor Luiz Antonio Fleury Filho of Sao Paulo has become accustomed to red-carpet treatment on his foreign tours, to the United States, Europe and Taiwan.
But on his trip to Washington last month, Mr.
Fleury found the city a bit crowded because six other Governors from Brazil were also in town.


Art in Review
David Humphrey
McKee Gallery  745 Fifth Avenue (at 58th Street)  Through Dec. 4
Family snapshots continue to provide the grounds, emotional and physical, for David Humphrey's smart paintings.
For several years, Mr.
Humphrey has based his work on photographs from his parents' wedding album; he paints excerpts from these pictures onto his canvases, then adds cartoon figures and other images to create works that blend autobiography with references to social rituals, personal gestures and photographic conventions.


A New Course for Russian Aerospace
Four years ago, the Ilyushin Design Bureau, one of Russia's largest aerospace companies, received a proposal from a group that included Armand Hammer and Robert Maxwell for a project to combine Western and Russian aviation technology in a new commercial jetliner.
Both Mr.
Hammer and Mr.
Maxwell died, and the proposal never came to fruition.
But from those unlikely beginnings has grown the first large-scale attempt by aerospace companies from the United States to help Russia pursue a piece of the worldwide market for commercial aircraft.


Homeless Ask Court to Halt City Crackdown
A citywide campaign to reduce the number of homeless people on the streets was challenged this week in a lawsuit filed here by civil rights groups on behalf of the homeless.
It is the first legal challenge to the program, begun in August by Mayor Frank M. Jordan, a former police officer who was elected two years ago.


Giuliani Hints Backer May Get Post
New York City Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani suggested strongly yesterday that he would appoint Ninfa Segarra, a member of the conservative majority on the Board of Education, to a position in his administration even as she remained on the board.
Mr.
Giuliani acknowledged that his aides had scoured the City Charter and found a provision that would allow Ms.
Segarra to finish the final months of her term, which ends on June 30, even after taking a job at City Hall.
Normally the charter prohibits a person from holding two city jobs at the same time.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL
Clifton and Passaic played a 0-0 game today in the meeting between the longtime Passaic County high school football rivals.
It will go down as a tie in the standing, but this was clearly an effort for Clifton to brag about.
Not only did the Mustangs (3-5-1) maintain their overall series advantage (31-30-5) over Passaic, but they also tied a Passaic Indians team (8-2-1) that has been ranked among New Jersey's top 10 this season.


Children Give Their Time to Help Others Celebrate Thanksgiving


In Spain, the Unemployed Are Just Too Busy
With around 23 percent of its labor force officially out of work, Spain has the highest unemployment rate in the European Community.
But while 2.6 million men and women are collecting benefits, it is hard to find anyone sitting at home with nothing to do.
Over the last 18 months, as economic activity has slumped and the number of unemployed has soared, jobs taken by people on Government assistance have become one of Spain's few growth industries.
Unemployment fraud may not be new, but Spain's main business confederation believes that at least one-third of those on the dole now have jobs.


Ambulance Workers Were Forced Into Drug Raid, Union Says
In an incident they say compromised the safety and credibility of emergency medical workers in a sometimes dangerous neighborhood, officials of the union for the New York City Emergency Medical Service have charged that two workers were ordered on Tuesday to assist the police in a drug bust.
In the incident, according to the union, two female E.M.S. workers were ordered by an officer in their own department to ring a doorbell at a Bronx housing project in a ruse intended to gain entry for housing police and Federal officers.
The emergency medical workers were standing by in case anyone was hurt in the raid, a normal procedure.


Pursuing Facts After Rollins Debacle
In the two weeks since Edward J. Rollins the astute campaign strategist became Edward J. Rollins the notorious liar, New Jersey's political landscape has been littered with contradiction and uncertainty, but nothing approaching verifiable fact.
Was there any truth to Mr.
Rollins's boast that the campaign of Christine Todd Whitman paid out $500,000 to black ministers and campaign workers to help suppress the black vote on Nov. 2?
Or was his retraction the truth?
Or was there some truth to both accounts?


Bozell Promotes 3 Detroit Executives
Bozell Worldwide has revamped its Bozell Detroit office in Southfield, Mich., promoting three top executives to additional posts.


Sounds Around Town
Gogo Guitarist
Chuck Brown, Tramps, 51 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
This is as good a way to dance off the Thanksgiving fat as possible.
Chuck Brown helped invent gogo, the great dance rhythm from Washington, and he's capable of letting a tune run on for half an hour, just to have dancers dance.
He's a fine jazz guitarist, and his sets don't ever really stop, he just segues from tune to tune.
Tomorrow's shows are at 8:30 P.M. and midnight; there is a $10 cover.
PETER WATROUS


On My Mind; 3 Israeli Warnings
One Israeli Jew killed by an Arab car-bomber, a couple of Jewish hikers murdered, a Jew here, a Jew there -- nine dead, many others left bleeding since Yasir Arafat and Yitzhak Rabin arrived in Washington to shake hands.
Arab terrorists killed Israelis before the handshake.
They have been doing that since the founding of the country.
And nine dead -- a fairly quiet weekend for New York City or Washington.


Market Place; Baxter hints it may sell stock in some intriguing but risky lines.
BURIED in last week's seemingly routine announcement of a restructuring at Baxter International were hints that Baxter might sell stakes to the public in some of its most exciting -- and riskiest -- new-product projects.
Among the spinoffs being considered by Baxter, the world's largest hospital-supply company, are a unit that makes a heart pump that could serve as an alternative to heart transplants and one that makes artificial blood for transfusions in emergency rooms and special situations.


Rescuing County From Road Name Mix-Ups
There are eight School House Roads, five Church Roads and a Singing Bridge in Columbia County.
In the summer, one town alone swells from a population of 3,000 to 12,000, and a lot of those people are not quite sure where they are.
That is why rural Columbia County, in its effort to institute a 911 universal emergency service number, has hired an outside administrator, Robert Ost, to unravel 643 square miles of rural road disorder.


There's No Shortage Of Math Doctorates
To the Editor:
A new report from the Department of Education, "National Excellence: A Case for Developing America's Talent," refers to a United States "shortage of graduate students in mathematics and science."


Square Rooting
To the Editor:
"U. of Chicago Earns Its Funless Ranking" (letter, Nov. 16) carries a cheer to spur on that school's "athletes." Far superior to that cheer is this one, popular in bygone days at the University of California when chanted by its engineering students:
E to the X, dy! dx!
E to the X, dx!
Secant, cosine, tangent, sine,
Three-point-one-four-one-five-nine;
Square root, cube root, Q.E.D.,
Slip stick! Slide rule!
'ray, U.C.! GENE SHALIT West Stockbridge, Mass., Nov. 16, 1993


Cardinals and Their Coach Losing the Numbers Game
Before taking a head-coaching job with the Phoenix Cardinals, be sure to have plenty of food in the refrigerator and some unemployment insurance.
The Cardinals have provided a coaches graveyard over the years.
In fact, some coaches jokingly call the team's owner, Bill Bidwell, "the nutty professor" because of his horn-rim glasses and what they say are some of the zany things he puts his coaches through.
Joe Bugel knows all about that.
At the beginning of the year, Bidwell made the proclamation that Bugel had to win nine games this year.
Hint, hint: Though there was no "or else" in the statement, clearly Bidwell wasn't going to give Bugel some nice silverware if he didn't reach the magic number.
More like a pink slip.


Hatfield's Clarifications
Clemson's former football coach, KEN HATFIELD,issued a statement yesterday about his departure from the school.


Review/Music; Into the Mind and Heart Of Jazz's Chameleon Man
In his first set on Wednesday night at the Blue Note, the pianist Herbie Hancock gave a glimpse of how his musical mind works.
He announced that his trio -- with Dave Holland on bass and Gene Jackson on drums -- would play Cole Porter's "I Love You," adding, "You'll never recognize it." Beyond the first few melodic phrases, he was right; the tune slipped behind odd harmonies, dissolved into streams of single notes, fanned out into two-handed tremolo chords and dispensed salvos of dissonance.
Afterward, a smiling Mr.
Hancock played the tune slowly and explained what he had done: a key change here, and here, and again, turning Porter's harmonies into his own.
Mr.
Hancock delights in transformations.
He toys with rhythms, turning conventional off-beat chords into a game of syncopated hide-and-seek; he reworks harmonies, adding notes until the original implications are warped.
He investigates silences and subtleties; he revels in high-speed runs and splashy, gospelly chords.
His playing carries him to the hazy borderline between improvisations that can be explained by harmonic theory and those that are pure dramatic gesture.


Prayer Won't Balance the Budget
Senator Robert Byrd calls the proposed balanced-budget amendment "a precatory expression of pious hope" -- a prayer that something nice will come of a fantasy.
The Senator from West Virginia may be concerned that the amendment would curb his authority over spending as chairman of the Appropriations Committee.
But, as the meticulous guardian of proper procedure, he is more certainly alarmed by the threat to the Constitution: In the specious name of balancing the books, this amendment would unbalance government.
Sponsored by Senator Paul Simon of Illinois, with 49 co-sponsors, this pernicious amendment would remove the Federal budget from majority rule.
It would do so by declaring that Congress must adopt a balanced budget each year, starting in 1999, unless America is at war, or unless three-fifths of the members of both houses approve a deficit.


The Spoken Word
TALKS AT THE WHITNEY, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"Vija Celmins," tomorrow at 2 P.M.; "In a Classical Vein," tomorrow and Sunday at 3:30 P.M.; "Mike Kelley," Sunday at 2 P.M.
The lectures, by Margaret Sundell, are free with museum admission: $6; $5 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3611.
TALKS AND WALKING TOURS, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, near Delancey Street.
Today: "The Streets Where We Lived," a tour of the Lower East Side, at noon.
Sunday: "How We Lived: Life in a New York City Tenement," a lecture, at 11 A.M.; "Sacred Sites," a tour of temples and churches, noon; "Jewish Lower East Side: A Heritage Tour," 1 P.M.
"The Streets Where We Lived," at 2 P.M.; "House of Heritage," a slide show recounting the history of 97 Orchard Street, at 3 P.M.
Lecture and slide show: $4; $3 for children.
Walking tours: $12; $10 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 431-0233.


Serbs and Croats Try to Build Bridge to Peace
Under heavy security, Serbian and Croatian scholars, artists and political figures have gathered here to seek reconciliation between their republics, which have been at war since April 1991.
In a joint statement issued on Monday night, the participants said the three-day meeting was intended to begin "a civil dialogue" to overcome "mistrust, hatred and war" between the two largest republics of the former Yugoslavia.


A Factory in the Business of Candy Canes
Michael Briglia knows why schools, Scout troops and clubs are always asking for tours of his little factory here.
"We bring them into heaven," he said immodestly.


Ferrari Shows the Way From Racer to Road Car
The connection between racing car and passenger car has evolved over the last 30 years into more of a fantasy -- well sustained by auto manufacturers' advertising agencies -- than a nuts-and-bolts reality.
But as fanciful as that bridge may be, the Museum of Modern Art's department of architecture and design has found such a walkway.
It is "Designed for Speed: Three Automobiles by Ferrari," the fifth car-related exhibition in the museum's history.
This one tries to show the influence of racing on passenger-car design.


METRO DIGEST
CUOMO: ON THE BALL EVERYWHERE
What may be most remarkable about Gov.
Cuomo's relationship with the game of basketball is not the way the beefy 61-year-old sprints up and down the floor, or even his patented fade-away hook shot.
It is the sheer amount of time he spends plotting, strategizing and otherwise obsessing about his staff's deadly serious intramural league, as if he finds victory on the court far more satisfying than a legislative conquest.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Restaurant Worker Who Resists Robbery Is Slain
A woman working at a Chinese take-out restaurant in the Bronx was shot in the head Wednesday evening for refusing to surrender $19 from the cash register, the police said.
Yesterday, she died.
The woman, identified by the police as Siew Kin Yeo, 30, was taking food orders behind the counter in Lee's Chinese Kitchen, at 806 Burke Avenue in the Bronxdale section, when two teen-agers walked in around 9 P.M.
Wednesday, said Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman.


Colombia Court Says Ransom Can Be Paid
A high court's decision to overrule a series of laws designed to curb kidnappings in Colombia, which has one of the highest abduction rates in the world, has generated controversy among officials and proponents of the legislation.
In January, Congress approved legislation that sought to eliminate the financial incentives of kidnapping.
Under the law, victims' families were forbidden to negotiate with the kidnappers and authorities were required to monitor the family's funds and prevent them from paying ransom.


Art in Review
Oleg Vassiliev
Phyllis Kind Gallery  136 Greene Street (near Houston Street)  SoHo  Through Wednesday
The third New York show of work by Oleg Vassiliev, who emigrated from Russia to the United States last year, is by far his most convincing.
For one thing, the artist has dispensed, at least momentarily, with the hard-edged geometric shapes that used to disrupt his somewhat conservative realism.
Here he gives free rein to that realism, whose refinement and somewhat blurry precision may remind viewers of artists like Veja Celmins and Mark Tansey.


Inside Art
Modern Buys Collection
It is not unprecedented for big institutions to swallow up the holdings of smaller ones.
And sometimes it's a welcome relief.
That, at least, was the case for Franklin Furnace, the alternative and performance artists' space in TriBeCa, when it recently sold its collection of artists' books, magazines and audio tapes to the Museum of Modern Art.


That Indelible Moment
To the Editor:
How many times in the last 30 years have we seen images of John F. Kennedy's assassination?
There have been movies, books and documentaries all analyzing the tragedy, with different theories and conclusions.
Yet, there is one truth that the images capture: Jacqueline Kennedy reaching back for help to the Secret Service agent behind the limousine.


Anthony Burgess Is Dead
The British writer and composer, best known for his novel "A Clockwork Orange," was 76.
Page B23. (Jonathan Player, 1991)


Ailing UMass Seeks Another N.I.T. Upset
Amid all the pre-game speculation that top-ranked North Carolina would crush the undersized Massachusetts Minutemen in a semifinal matchup of the Preseason National Invitation Tournament, Roy Williams issued a warning that went unheeded.
After his Kansas team defeated Minnesota on Wednesday night to earn a berth in this evening's championship game, Williams deflected questions about facing his mentor, North Carolina Coach Dean Smith, and whether he was looking forward to a rematch of last April's Final Four game with the Tar Heels.
It might not happen, he said, warning people not to discount Massachusetts.


Hard Times Dilute Enthusiasm for Clean-Air Laws
One of the few things about life in Southern California that has improved in recent years is the air.
The air is indisputably cleaner and clearer and the region's notorious alerts for lung-searing smog are all but history.
But the prospects for further progress are clouded.
Just when other states are emulating California's strict controls on auto emissions and other pollutants, the state may have begun to retreat on air quality.


Sounds Around Town
Just Plain Folk
Arlo Guthrie and Pete Seeger, Carnegie Hall, (212) 247-7800.
Arlo Guthrie and Pete Seeger, two folk music legends who have known each other for four decades and toured together on and off since 1975, will be joined by members of their families for two holiday concerts.
Joining Mr.
Guthrie are his son Abe (with his band Xavier) and Abe's daughters Cathy, Annie and Sarah.
Mr.
Seeger will be joined by his grandson, Tao Rodriguez Seeger.
The two folk stars will perform highlights from their careers, including "Amazing Grace," "Wabash Cannonball" and songs written by Tom Paxton, Leadbelly, Lee Hays and Harry Chapin, among others.
Shows are at 8 tonight and tomorrow and ticket prices range from $16 to $26.
STEPHEN HOLDEN Tribute to a Trio
"Eddie, Bix and Bing," Michael's Pub, 211 East 55th Street, Manhattan, (212) 758-2272.
Working in an informal round-robin style, the jazz guitarist Frank Vignola, the cornetist Peter Ecklund and the singer Eddie Byrd rekindle memories of Eddie Lang, Bix Beiderbecke and Bing Crosby.
The appealing musical revue deftly sketches the pre-swing musical era when Paul Whiteman was considered the king of jazz, and the music is young, lilting and uncomplicated.
Shows are at 9 and 11 tonight and tomorrow.
Admission is $20, and there is a two-drink minimum.
S.
H.
San Francisco Stylist
Weslia Whitfield, the Algonquin Hotel, 59 West 44th Street, Manhattan, (212) 840-6800.
An intelligent, understated pop-jazz stylist, Weslia Whitfield, from San Francisco, made her New York City club debut last April at the Algonquin, and she is back already with a brand-new show, "Two for the Road, Travels Through American Song." In addition to the title song from the Audrey Hepburn movie, Ms.
Whitfield's program includes such road songs as "Gypsy in My Soul" and "Let's Take the Long Way Home." High points include a medley of songs from the Alan Jay Lerner-Burton Lane show "Royal Wedding," and "Photographs," a little-known gem by Fran Landesman and Alec Wilder.
Performances are at 9 and 11:30 tonight and tomorrow.
There is a $30 music charge and a $15 minimum.
S.
H.


Anthony Burgess, 76, Dies; Man of Letters and Music
Anthony Burgess, the prolific British novelist, composer, librettist, essayist, semanticist, translator and critic, whose best-known novel, "A Clockwork Orange," offered a bleak vision of a violence-ridden future, died yesterday in London Hospital.
He was 76 and lived in Monaco and Lugano, Switzerland.
The cause of death was cancer, said a spokeswoman for Hutchinson, his publisher, adding that he had been ill for some time.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-19  GO EAST, SOME SAY IN GERMANY  About 250,000 pioneers have abandoned the security of western Germany to seek their fortune in what they call "the wild east." A1  Chancellor Helmut Kohl's candidate for the presidency withdrew.
A12


Art in Review
Tobi Kahn
Mary Ryan Gallery  24 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through tomorrow
Over the years, Tobi Kahn has gradually moved from painting dark, Ryderesque landscapes to bold organic forms, although crucial features of his work have not changed.
One is a complex but luscious palette of darkened mustards, pinks and bottle-greens; another, surfaces so intensely worked that texture becomes part of the image itself.


Sports of The Times; Strike News: Hockey Subs Look Goofy
I knew it was a bad idea to let Disney into hockey.
I knew it, I knew it, I knew it.
You start calling a hockey team a cutesy name like the Mighty Ducks, and things start to fall apart.
The first thing you know, Lemieux pops his back again.
Then Lindros gets hurt.
Then the officials go on strike.
This has all happened since the National Hockey League put a new team in the shadow of the concrete Matterhorn.


On Stage, and Off
Food in the Genes
Thanksgiving week. Let's talk about food.
There's a Jackie Mason routine from "The World According to Me" about gentiles, Jews and their meals that's as good a way of introducing Broadway's week as any.
This is the one where Mr.
Mason claims that gentiles are essentially indifferent about what they eat but that for Jews it's a matter of fierce concentration.
To wit: On Sunday, "Cyrano," the musical imported from Amsterdam, opened at the Neil Simon Theater, and afterward, the producers rolled a red carpet across 52d Street so the elegant first-nighters -- many of whom were blonde and speaking Dutch, but who also included Robert Klein and the Mayor-elect, Rudolph W. Giuliani -- could stroll in style to the party at Roseland.
There, a spectacular buffet was laid out, attended by a populous, ladle-wielding staff.
This was just after 9 o'clock, but the hungry (who were few, it seemed) were told that food would not be served until 10:15.
No one complained.


Millions Without a Home
According to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the number of people seeking asylum worldwide has now swelled to 19.7 million.
That staggering figure does not include an estimated 24 million people dislocated in their own homelands because of war and persecution.
No single country can accept, protect or provide financial support for all those who leave home.
But the international community, as a whole, could put the U.N.H.C.R. on sounder financial footing, and it could muster more will to protect the persecuted.


Release Pollard and Vanunu Together; Jewish Unanimity
To the Editor:
"Clinton Is Asked by Rabin to Cut Spy's Jail Term" (front page, Nov. 11) leaves a wrong impression of division in the Jewish community over wanting to see Jonathan Pollard released from prison immediately.
In response to the Justice Department's promise not to seek the severest punishment, Mr.
Pollard pleaded guilty to one count of giving classified information to Israel -- mostly information on the military schemes of Arab nations to destroy Israel.
But based, at least in part, on a secret memorandum from Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger, the judge sentenced the prisoner to jail for life.


Now There's No Doubting West Virginia's Coach
Vindication.
That is a word that might suit Dan Simrell these days.
Yet the quarterbacks coach at West Virginia prefers to take success in the same low-key manner he took rejection.
The Mountaineers are among college football's elite at 10-0, led by an offense that has churned out an average of 38.4 points and nearly 500 yards a game.


French Coach Resigns
France's soccer coach, GERARD HOULLIER, resigned yesterday, eight days after the national team was eliminated from the 1994 World Cup.


Bridge
Two little-known players from Berkeley, Calif., Michel Schneider and John Fout, led into the two final sessions of the Blue Ribbon Pair Championship here this afternoon, but several famous players are in hot pursuit.
Fout is a junior player who represented the United States in the World Junior Team Championship in Denmark in August.
The standings at the end of semifinal play Wednesday were: 1st, Schneider and Fout, 1706.68 match points; 2d, Sabine Zenkel of Chicago and Tom Sanders of Nashville, Tenn., 1653.31; 3d, Richard Katz of Rancho Mirage, Calif., and Robert Levin of Orlando, Fla., 1640.84; 4th, David Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., and Larry Cohen of Little Falls, N.J., 1626.14; 5th, Ira Cohen and Wafik Abdou of Bakersfield, Calif., 1608.8; 6th, Roy Fox of Chicago and Ralph Katz of Burr Ridge, Ill., 1565.24.


Release Pollard and Vanunu Together
To the Editor:
A Nov. 19 advertisement signed by 1,000 rabbis calls for the release of Jonathan Pollard, the convicted spy for Israel who has spent eight years in United States prisons.


Accounts
Shaw Industries, Dalton, Ga., to  Tucker Wayne/Luckie &amp; Co., Atlanta, as the first agency to handle the carpet manufacturer's Trustmark Carpet Selection System account.
Though billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at $30 million. *
CIT Group Holdings, Livingston, N.J., to Bloom FCA, New York, as the first agency to handle the account of the financial-services company's consumer finance division.
Billings were estimated at $6.5 million.





Abroad at Home; An American Story
Fifteen years ago this Thanksgiving weekend a 10-year-old Vietnamese boy named Viet Dinh arrived in this country as a refugee.
He was with his mother, four sisters and a brother.
They had $200, which they spent on used winter coats.
They were boat people.
They had left Vietnam on a small fishing boat, which lost its engine in a storm.
They drifted for days until they made it to Malaysia -- swimming in at night to avoid patrol boats that had fired at them.
After months in a refugee camp they were cleared for admission to the United States and flown to Portland, Ore.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; In creating a spot, many say there's nothing like the real thing.
IS reality in advertising like Samuel Goldwyn's definition of sincerity, in that once you can fake it, you've got it made?
For the last several years, reality has been one of the hottest creative trends along Madison Avenue.
The so-called real people school of casting eschews the glamour and glitz of actors and models for the genuineness and imperfections of ordinary consumers.


RUSSIA WARNS NATO ON EXPANDING EAST
Russia's foreign intelligence service warned NATO today that any move to incorporate Eastern European countries would force Moscow into "fundamental" military countermeasures and heighten anti-Western sentiments.
Some of the countries of Eastern Europe formerly under Soviet domination, like Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic, have asked to join the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
While the Russian President, Boris N. Yeltsin, reacted calmly to the idea in late August, the Russian military has pushed him to reconsider.
On Sept. 30, Mr.
Yeltsin wrote Western leaders warning them against expanding the alliance eastward.


Israelis Wound 37 in Violent Gaza Street Protests
In the most serious eruption of unrest in the Gaza Strip since the signing of the Israeli-Palestinian peace accord, Israeli soldiers shot and wounded 37 Palestinians today in violent street protests set off by the killing on Wednesday of a militant Muslim commander.
The rioters were protesting the killing of Imad Akel, 23, by Israeli soldiers.
Mr.
Akel was the Gaza Strip commander of the Qassam Brigades, the armed wing of Hamas, Islamic Resistance Movement.
He had been wanted by the Israeli Army for two years.


Mediterranean Fruit Flies Return to California
The Mediterranean fruit fly has returned to Southern California, threatening many crops and rekindling a debate over how best to eradicate the stubborn pest.
The new outbreak has largely been unnoticed because officials have not yet resorted to aerial spraying, the most obtrusive and controversial eradication method.


EGYPTIAN PREMIER ESCAPES CAR BOMB
The Muslim militant group Holy War set off a powerful car bomb in a northern Cairo suburb today in an attempt to assassinate Prime Minister Atef Sedki, according to Egyptian officials and a communique from the group.
An 11-year-old girl was killed in the blast and 18 people were wounded, including another child who was seriously hurt, the police said.


After Flood, Giving Thanks Simply
For Ken and Sandi Crim, this was Thanksgiving without the harvest, or home.
All that they had sown last spring -- thousands of rows of corn, soybeans and wheat -- had been lost in the flood.
They had been forced to sell their hogs, all 400 head, since they no longer have a shed, a pen or anywhere else to keep them.
The two-story white clapboard house where they had lived for 17 years is a mud-caked shell.
Who knows when they will be able to move back?


Jane G. Judge, 91, an Educator And Noted Expert on Childhood
Jane G. Judge, who spent five decades as a social worker, educator and child advocate, died on Wednesday at her home in Bronxville, N.Y.
She was 91.
She suffered a brief illness, her family said.


Review/Music; An Austrian Blend By the Philharmonic
THE music of Franz Schmidt reverses, in a way, the 20th century's customary view of itself.
History would have us believe that this has been a time of revolution: tonality overthrown, Romantic forms reduced to Classical ones, heart-on-sleeve effusion tempered to accommodate wit and discretion or else sarcasm and despair, even violence.
If Schmidt's Fourth Symphony -- which the New York Philharmonic under Franz Welser-Most brought to Avery Fisher Hall on Wednesday night -- is to be believed, Wagner never died and the 20th century is only a postscript to the 19th.
It is astonishing to think that this serenely confident turn-of-the-century piece actually belongs to the year 1933.


Books of The Times; The Portrait of a British Serial Killer
Killing for Company
The Story of a Man Addicted to Murder
By Brian Masters
Illustrated. 324 pages. Random House. $24.
The crimes were grotesque, and eerily similar to the grisly deeds committed by Jeffrey Dahmer: between the years 1978 and 1983, a British civil servant named Dennis Nilsen lured 15 men to his apartment in north London and strangled them while they slept.
He buried the corpses beneath the floorboards of his apartment; later, he hacked the bodies to bits and either burned them in the backyard or flushed them down the toilet.
He was arrested in February 1983, when the plumbing in his building backed up and workmen discovered that the pipes were clogged with human flesh.


Kohl's Candidate for President Pulls Out
In a sharp blow to Chancellor Helmut Kohl's political standing, his candidate for the German presidency withdrew today and said another man from eastern Germany should get the job instead.
The former candidate, Steffen Heitmann, had been plucked from relative obscurity as the Justice Minister of the eastern state of Saxony last summer as a gesture by Mr.
Kohl to the disgruntled and largely unemployed voters of the formerly Communist part of the country.


Editorial Notebook; 1938's 'Great Storm'
When the woman on the TV screen, the one whose family had had a summer house in South County, Rhode Island, spoke of how the sky was yellow and the birds silent on Sept. 21, 1938, I nodded my head.
I remembered that sky and the silence, and the sting of tiny pebbles as they flew against my bare legs.
I remembered enormous trees, elms I think, toppling soundlessly, and hissing electric wires writhing on the sidewalk.
My grandmother got out her kerosene lamps, I know that, and roasted potatoes on the edge of the coal furnace; dishes were washed and toilets flushed with water from a neighbor's well.
But until I watched a recent PBS documentary on the Hurricane of '38 -- always called by New Englanders "the Storm" or "the Great Storm" because "hurricane" seemed foreign, even pretentious -- I had no real idea of the horror of a storm for which there'd been no warning and against which there were no defenses.
I was very young; there was no television, and even if there had been, the electric lines were down for days.


BONN SHUTS DOWN KURD SEPARATISTS
Germany banned a Kurdish separatist party today accused of attacking Turkish diplomatic offices in Western Europe and raided offices and homes of suspected supporters in 11 German states.
The police closed the offices of the Kurdistan Workers Party, known by the Turkish initials P.K.K., and seized property belonging to the group and 35 associated organizations in Berlin, Bonn, Munich and other cities.
Among the targets were a Kurdish news agency, the Kurdistan National Liberation Front and various solidarity groups.


Healy Visits Coliseum But Doesn't Want Seat
Last summer, when Glenn Healy moved in a roundabout way from the Islanders to the Rangers, the joke often repeated around New York was that the Rangers had finally found a goalie who can win at Nassau Coliseum.
Perhaps Healy will get a chance to prove that Saturday afternoon when The two local rivals will have their first meeting of the season, at 1 P.M., before a capacity crowd at the Coliseum.
The last Ranger victory there in the regular season came on Oct. 28, 1989.


An American Diplomat Is Abducted in Yemen
An American diplomat on assignment in Yemen was abducted on Thursday, State Department officials said today.
They said the kidnapping appeared to be connected with local issues rather than politically motivated.


Is It an Emergency? Forget the Hat; Kelly Lets Officers Respond With Guns Drawn, Heads Bare
Bullets may be flying, a building could be burning, perhaps robbers are fleeing a crime, and here come the police officers to the rescue.
They bound from their cars, adrenaline pumping, minds racing -- but first they have to reach.
For their guns?
No.
Their nightsticks?
No.
They reach for their hats.
Their hats?


Tattoos Have Long Served as Charms
To the Editor:
Arkady G. Bronnikov's "Body Language" (Op-Ed, Nov. 6), on tattooing by criminals in the former Soviet Union, confirms criminology studies.


Q and A
Using Wills as Safeguards  Q. Is it necessary for a widow or widower with two grown children, equally loved, to make out a will, thus avoiding probate?
Won't the state just divide all proceeds between the two?
HELEN STENBERG, Merrick, L.I.


Leader's New Image Saps Shining Path's Strength
Pacing his prison cage after his arrest last year, Abimael Guzman was the portrait of a revolutionary: a bushy Karl Marx beard, a clenched fist and a diatribe exhorting his Shining Path guerrilla group to celebrate Mao Zedong's 100th birthday with car bombs.
One year later, Peruvians are stunned by a new image: trim and mustachioed, Mr.
Guzman pens letters from prison appealing to guerrillas to suspend the war, and to the Government to start peace talks.


Coming: Soccer, The Religion
ONE of my jobs around here 30 years ago was taking London bureau chauffeurs to baseball games and recording their inane queries ("Has it begun yet? Why does that chap just stand there?") without making invidious comparisons to cricket.
It gave me a pragmatic, philistine world view; if you don't wrinkle your nose at my potatoes, I won't spit in your rice.
But it didn't fully prepare me for the coming Big Soccer incursion.
Will I be a terrible person if I don't get swept away by the World Cup?


Charles Miller, Hobby Executive, 78
Charles D. Miller, a retired executive of the hobby and modeling industry, died on Thursday at his home in Litchfield, Conn.
He was 78.
The cause of death was heart failure, according to Dick Ebersol, Mr.
Miller's son-in-law, who is the president of NBC Sports.


Cuomo Signs Bill on Control of School Custodians
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo announced today that he had signed a bill giving greater control over New York City school custodians to principals and the Board of Education.
The new law enables the Board of Education to set performance standards for the cleanliness and maintenance of the schools and allows principals to evaluate custodians by those standards.
The evaluations will be used to determine promotions and demotions.


Call Brooklyn the Home Of the Family Doctor
To the Editor:
Re your Nov. 13 article about family doctors in New York City:


Honeycutt to Rangers
RICK HONEYCUTT , a 39-year-old left-hander who relieved for Oakland last season, has signed a one-year contract with Texas, his second stint with the Rangers.
Honeycutt was 1-4 with a 2.81 earned run average and one save in 32 appearances with the A's.
He signed for $900,000 after making $725,000 with Oakland last season.
Honeycutt won the American League e.r.a. title at 2.42 with the Rangers in 1983, when he was 14-8. (AP)


Exotic Securities Cause Losses at Some Funds
AS interest rates have fallen to remarkably low levels in the last few years, bond mutual funds have searched for ways to pump up their yields.
Some managers saw a ray of light in derivative securities, though skeptics warned that these complex financial products posed a danger if rates rose.
Those fears were at least partly borne out in September, when three publicly traded bond funds of Hyperion Inc. stumbled.
The funds, which had significant amounts of exotic securities derived from mortgages, lost 15 to 20 percent of their value from mid-September through mid-October.


Sonics Keep the Ledger Spotless
SuperSonics 110, Timberwolves 92
Ricky Pierce scored a season-high 28 points on 10 of 14 shooting in Minneapolis last night as the undefeated Seattle SuperSonics beat the Minnesota Timberwolves, 110-92, for their 10th consecutive victory.


Don't Hitch Faster Train Service to Fantasies; How About Airports?
To the Editor:
You report on Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's call for a high-speed rail route from New York to Boston by way of Albany, which would take two hours (news article, Nov. 10).
This is terrific.
I'd like to know why, if the state can do this, it can't come up with a rail system to get people to and from the New York airports.
The other day it took two hours from Kennedy to midtown.
PETER I. DREYER New York, Nov. 18, 1993


Mountaineers Say: Bring On Cornhuskers
West Virginia scored two touchdowns in the fourth quarter today, beat Boston College, 17-14, and then immediately called for a showdown with Nebraska, the only other undefeated and untied bowl team in the nation, to decide just who really is No. 1.
Moments after the Mountaineers had won their 11th game of the season, Coach Don Nehlen made a plea on national television that his team be matched with Nebraska in the Orange Bowl on New Year's night, with the victor to be acclaimed as college football's best.
The picture cannot be clarified just yet because Florida State (10-1), which plays at Florida on Saturday, is also in it.


No Headline
"When you look at state-to-state migration, you see that people are moving to the South, because that's where all the jobs are." -- MARK VITNER, a banker in Charlotte.  [ A1:4. ]


The Day After Thanksgiving, and Shopping Begins in Earnest


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-6  ISRAEL MAY MISS PULLOUT DEADLINE  Yitzhak Rabin said Israel might be unable to meet a deadline of Dec. 13 for starting its troop pullout and the assumption of Palestinian rule in the Gaza Strip and Jericho.1  IRAQ AGREES TO U.N.
INSPECTIONS  Iraq agreed to let the United Nations start long-term monitoring of its industries to insure it does not build weapons of mass destruction.  1


Light Trading In the Markets
The stock and bond markets were open in the United States yesterday, although trading ended several hours early because of the Thanksgiving holiday weekend.
The futures exchanges in Chicago were also open for a shortened trading session.


Review/Theater; Memories of the 1960's In a Very Personal Voice
In "Olivia's Opus," at the TriBeCa Performing Arts Center, Nora Cole, the star of the almost one-woman play as well as its author, is bathing in nostalgia for teen-age years in the 1960's.
But she is very generous; she takes the audience right into her experiences, and the warm nostalgia feels wonderful.
Ms.
Cole is a cunning writer.
The fictional Olivia of the title shares her memories, from the very earliest to the time she turns 16, and Ms.
Cole has knitted them together with a few simple rhetorical devices that give some of them wonderful resonance.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN EXPRESS TRAVEL RELATED SERVICES CO.
INC., New York, a unit of the American Express Co., appointed John I. Williams Jr. senior vice president and general manager of the company's Consumer Travel Network in the United States.
KAY-BEE TOY STORES, Pittsfield, Mass., a unit of the Melville Corp., named Gary Stewart senior vice president of marketing.


Review/Music; Allegorical Bell-Ringer By Poe
As a gloss on Poe, Anne LeBaron's "Devil in the Belfry," for violin and piano, proved diverting in its New York premiere on Tuesday evening, by the St.
Luke's Chamber Ensemble at Merkin Concert Hall.
Poe's delightful little allegory concerns the distinctly odd but fastidiously ordered Dutch borough Vondervotteimittiss.
Far from ever having to vonder vot teim itt iss, the townsfolk are in utter thrall to their clocks (not to mention their cabbages) until, one noon, the devil enters the belfry.
Adding a 13th ring to the hour, he throws the dull citizenry into hopeless disarray.
It was fun to listen for the stultifying regularity of the civic rhythm and its swift demise, and for the Irish tunes dredged up by the triumphant devil on his fiddle, "scraping, out of all time and tune, with both hands." But what all the rather ordinary musical gestures might have meant, or how they might have hung together, for a listener not privy to the tale is hard to say.
Krista Bennion Feeney, violinist, and Stephanie Brown, pianist, gave a strong performance.


Asbury Park Press Poll Does Something Right
To the Editor:
I would like to clarify a misimpression of The Asbury Park Press poll in the New Jersey governor's race created by a Nov. 4 article.


Cities and Suburbs Battle Over Distribution of Aid
When Christine Todd Whitman takes office next January, she will face an issue that has plagued New Jersey governors for a quarter century and that helped bring down Jim Florio, her predecessor.
The issue is equality of education in the public schools: how the schools can serve the poor children of the cities as well as they serve the more affluent children of the suburbs.
Typically, the dispute is couched in money: how much school districts spend per pupil and how much they can collect in property taxes.


Bridge
Two world-class players celebrated Thanksgiving Thursday by capturing the Blue Ribbon Pair Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals.
Bob Hamman of Dallas, the top player in world ratings, won his 29th national title.
His partner was Michael Rosenberg of Manhattan, who was winning his fourth.
He was born in the United States, went to Scotland at the age of 4 months and returned at the age of 24.
He is one of the few who have represented both Britain and the United States in international competition.
The final standings were: 1st, Hamman and Rosenberg, 825.24 match points; 2d, Steve Price of Safety Harbor, Fla., and Martin De Bruin, Cologne, N.J., 781.54; 3d, Ron Sukoneck of Annandale, Va., and Russ Ekeblad of Providence, R.I., 771.58; 4th, Allan Falk of Okemos, Mich., and Margie Gwozdzinsky of Manhattan, 768.97; 5th, Zia Mahmood of Manhattan and Gaylor Kasle of Boca Raton, Fla., 755.73; 6th, Chuck Burger of West Bloomfield, Mich., and James Cayne of Manhattan, 755.7.
A Convincing Victory
Hamman and Rosenberg led into the final session and held on to win convincingly by a margin of a board and a half.
On the diagramed deal many players opened the South hand with an artificial two clubs, and West bid his clubs in the teeth of the vulnerability.
Hamman chose a conservative two no-trump and reached the normal four-spade contract.


Meulens to Play in Japan
A promising young player the Yankees didn't trade away has ended his effort to justify their decision.
The Yankees announced yesterday that they have sold Hensley Meulens, once a can't-miss star of their future, to a Japanese team.
Rob Butcher, the Yankees' media relations director, quoted General Manager Gene Michael as saying: "Hensley requested it and we made the deal. It's a good deal for both sides." The Chiba Lotte Marines of Japan's Pacific League paid about $1 million for Meulens.


Nice Profits, Hard Ethics For Political Correctness
"IT'S much harder to do good than to do well." In the field of socially responsible investing, the old saying seems to be right on the mark.
Social investing has long been dogged by fears that do-good investors will do poorly in terms of profit.
Naturally, professionals have worked hard to prove these fears unfounded.


Economic Pulse: The Southeast; In Race to Outrun Recession, Southeast Sets Dazzling Pace
The Southeast is outpacing the rest of the country as the nation climbs out of recession, reflecting a long, slow process of growth in the South and the changing balance of economic power in America.
Whether in increasingly prominent areas of growth like Atlanta, Nashville or Charlotte or more obscure ones like the Greensboro/ Winston-Salem/High Point area here, the Southeast is adding jobs and people substantially faster than the nation and cementing its status as the nation's favored location for new manufacturing plants.


Clinton Plans Change in the Law Banning Military Aid to Pakistan
The Clinton Administration is proposing the repeal of a law that has barred American military aid to Pakistan because of that country's efforts to develop a nuclear bomb.
But State Department officials insisted today that they did not intend to lift sanctions against Pakistan.
The Administration proposal, in a draft of a new foreign aid bill recently sent to Congress, would repeal the so-called Pressler Amendment, which bans military aid to Pakistan unless the President can certify that Pakistan neither possesses nuclear weapons nor is trying to develop them.


Isn't It Time to Stop The India-Bashing?
To the Editor:
It is irresponsible to give readers the impression that some sort of state-supported ethnic cleansing is going on in India in "After Bombay's Violence, Fear and Finger-Pointing" (news article, Nov. 19).


Lett's Lapse Helps Clear the Playoff Path for the Giants
For the Giants, it's as if Agatha Christie were writing the script for their season.
Just as in her novels, when people are knocked off one by one, the Giants' conference rivals are falling by the wayside and clearing a path for the Giants right into the playoffs.
Their biggest boost came on Thursday when, on a snowy and icy day outside Dallas, Leon Lett did something the Giants haven't been able to do: beat the Cowboys.
The Giants will be sending Lett a Thanksgiving thank-you, a football with a note attached that reads, "Go ahead, pick it up." Actually, the Giants wouldn't be that cruel, but they are the biggest beneficiaries of Lett's goof because Dallas's defeat has given them sole possession of first place in the National Football Conference's Eastern Division.
Seizing a Second Chance
Dallas lost to Miami on Thursday after Lett tried to jump on a blocked field-goal attempt in the final seconds of the game when all he had to do was leave the ball alone.
If he had, the ball belonged to Dallas, and so did the game.
Instead, Lett touched the ball, could not control it, and Miami recovered.
The Dolphins, having been given a second chance, then kicked a 19-yard field goal as time expired and walked off the field with a 16-14 victory.


William H. Borders, Civil Rights Leader In South, Dies at 88
The Rev.
William Holmes Borders Sr., a civil rights leader in Atlanta and the pastor emeritus of the Wheat Street Baptist Church there, died on Tuesday at the Southwest Community Hospital in Atlanta.
He was 88.
He died of heart failure, hospital officials said.


Black Children, White Parents
Is it better for black children to be adopted by families of another race than not to be adopted at all?
Debate over this question has raged for two decades, since black social workers took a strong stand against such adoptions.
Clearly, matching adoptive parents with children of the same race is a good idea.
And more aggressive recruitment of black families to adopt black children is needed.
But in the long run, a permanent home is better than foster care, and even as a last resort it's better to raise a black child with a white family than with no family at all.


Belfast Journal; British Soldiers: Friend or Enemy and to Whom?
Maj.
Nick Everard of the 9th/12th Royal Lancers, elements of which fought at Waterloo, the Khyber Pass and in relief of the Light Brigade in the Crimea, sat in an armored Land-Rover on the Crumlin Road dividing Roman Catholic and Protestant neighborhoods here.
Two troopers stood up through an opening in the roof of the vehicle, aimed their automatic rifles, drawing beads on roof tops and down alleys, where an I.R.A. guerrilla might hide.
The last soldier killed in the area was shot in the neck in August as he stood in the same position in a Land-Rover.
The killer, assumed to be an Irish Republican Army sniper, has not been found.


Dallas Deal For Alltel And GTE
The Alltel Corporation said today that its mobile communications unit had agreed to buy a 10 percent limited partnership stake in the GTE Corporation's Dallas cellular telephone system for $120 million in cash.
Alltel, whose mobile communications business is based in Little Rock, Ark., said its minority position in the Dallas limited partnership represented a potential customer base of 425,000 people and gave it a stake in one of the nation's top cellular markets.
The GTE Dallas partnership also operates a cellular system in Sherman and Denison along the Texas-Oklahoma border.


Virginia Woolf, Her Inner Circle And Inner Self
Pity the future literary historian who has to rely on the promised new wizardry of vast computer networks for facts.
Instead of discovering self-revealing handwritten letters, casual notes, first drafts and intimate diary entries, a biographer may be left with little more original material than lists of cellular phone calls, impersonal second-sight faxes and E-mail: all useful only as electronic confetti for a shredding machine.
This thought comes to mind while walking through a captivating new show -- "Virginia Woolf and Her Circle" -- in the Berg exhibition room on the third floor of the New York Public Library, Fifth Avenue and 42d Street.
The Berg Collection of English and American Literature has more Woolf manuscripts and letters than any other institution, including those in England.
For the first time, the Berg is displaying its holdings in a solo show that features the cult author and her famous friends.


Four Weeks, 7,000 Trees And Three Guys' Future
"I GUESS I am about as petit bourgeois as you can get," said Scott Lechner as he sat in the Pizza Club and explained his entrepreneurial adventures in the Christmas tree business.
Mr.
Lechner, who is 36 years old, is one of three partners in the Pizza Club, a happy-looking, sit-down and not-so-very-fast food establishment on Avenue U in the Marine Park section of Brooklyn that was built with Christmas tree profits.


Review/Theater; The Young In a Time Of Holocaust
If great history made great drama, there would be no dearth of great plays.
But great drama is the work of gifted playwrights.
And in such human endeavor, the most awesome history -- the Holocaust, for example -- surely poses the most daunting challenge.
To say that "The Survivor," at the Manhattan Performing Arts Company Theater, falls far short of meeting that challenge is by no means to belittle its timeless purpose.
Susan Nanus's play, based on the memoirs of a Holocaust survivor, Jack Eisner, who was present on opening night, is another effort to bear witness to one of the most awful and mysterious of inhumanities.


Livery-Cab Driver Slain in Bronx
In the 40th killing of a cabdriver in the city this year, a livery driver was shot dead in the Bronx last night, the police said.
The spate of killings has led to drivers' protests demanding more protection.
The latest victim was identified as Peter Buddan, 30, of 1902 Nereid Avenue in the Wakefield section of the Bronx, near the Westchester County border.


Candidates Take to Airwaves As Russian Vote Approaches
From slick ads splicing pop stars and small children with pictures of a smiling President Boris N. Yeltsin, to a mini-documentary accusing the Government of robbery and incipient Stalinism, Russians are getting their first taste of the rough campaigning that will dominate the airwaves each night until the eve of parliamentary elections on Dec. 12.
The campaign kicked off formally on Nov. 8, but for most voters it began Monday evening with chunks of free air time distributed to each political party on two state-owned television channels.


Joint Production Takes 'The Joy Luck Club' To China's Stages
A stage version of "The Joy Luck Club" prepared for audiences in China and Hong Kong has solved a great problem of Amy Tan's best-selling novel of mothers and daughters: how to keep track of all those Chinese names when the author rips through time from one family's set of memories to another's.
In this co-production of the Shanghai People's Art Theater and the Long Wharf Theater of New Haven, adapted by Susan Kim, the costume designer, Susan Tsu, gives the audience an ingenious solution that could have been conceived at Kmart.


INSIDE
American Diplomat in Yemen Is Seized From Car in Capital
An official of the United States Information Service was abducted in Sana.
State Department officials said that the kidnapping appeared to be linked to local issues and that he was reported to be in good health.
Page 5.
U.S.
May Lift Pakistan Ban
The United States is proposing the repeal of a law that bars American military aid to Pakistan because of its nuclear weapons effort.
Page 5.
Peru Counts Gains in Revolt
With the capture of Peru's top guerrilla leader, the country is returning to a semblance of normal life, but the rebellion is still potent.
Page 3.
Facing Danger Hatless
In a break with tradition, New York City police officers responding to emergencies will be allowed to leave their hats in the car.
Page 21.
No Advance in Vote Inquiry
Testimony by the New Jersey Governor-elect's brother did not advance a vote-suppression inquiry.
Page 21.


Don't Hitch Faster Train Service to Fantasies
To the Editor:
Your report of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's call for a high-speed rail link using magnetic levitation between New York City and Albany illustrates the appeal of high-tech, high-budget projects to politicians, particularly if they involve large Federal research grants to local constituents (news article, Nov. 10).


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY Hunter Returns With Bang Dale Hunter got two assists last night in his return from a record 21-game suspension, helping the Washington Capitals gain a 4-4 tie with the Pittsburgh Penguins at Landover, Md.
Hunter, playing in his first game since April 28, missed a chance to do further damage when he got into a scuffle with Rick Tocchet with 8 minutes 43 seconds remaining in regulation and was given a 10-minute misconduct.
He did not return.
Hunter, 33, was fined and suspended for a late hit he delivered against the Islanders' Pierre Turgeon in last season's playoffs.
It was the longest suspension for a non-stick-related incident in National Hockey League history. (AP)


A Solution to a Life Insurance Riddle
Among the most perplexing financial decisions are whether to buy life insurance, how much, what type and from whom.
For breadwinners concerned about who will meet their financial obligations in the event of an untimely death -- particularly younger people with children -- term life insurance provides a backstop.
Businesses also may want term insurance to cover a person whose sudden death could seriously disrupt their operations.


A Manhattan Court Explores Service-Oriented Sentencing
When asked their reaction to the Midtown Community Court, New York City's shiny new experiment in handling low-level crimes, Marla Wilson and Rosie Cruz appeared deeply underwhelmed.
True, they were exhausted.
Ms.
Cruz, in black fishnet stockings, a lime-green minidress and a fringed suede jacket, had been arrested for prostitution at 29th Street and 10th Avenue at 3:45 A.M.
Ms.
Wilson, in a striped jacket with cutaway shoulders, matching miniskirt, lace midriff camisole and thigh-climbing stiletto-heeled boots with two strands of fake pearls wrapped around one ankle, was arrested on the same charge at 58th Street and the Avenue of the Americas at 4:35 A.M.


Growth in China and Asia Draws Investors
Investor interest in China and Southeast Asia is strong because of the economic growth prospects there.
One way to invest is through the new Ivy China Region Fund, which buys stocks of companies in China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, South Korea, Singapore and other Southeast Asian countries.
Investments in this part of the world should be long term because of the risks in emerging markets.
Most tax-free funds own long-term issues, exposing shareowners to capital depreciation if interest rates rise.
Shorter-term funds are less risky but lower yielding.
The new Blanchard Flexible Tax-Free Bond Fund can lengthen or shorten its average portfolio maturity depending on market conditions; today its maturity is 20 years.
The fund yielded 5.45 percent in October, which is the equivalent of 8 percent for taxpayers in the 31 percent bracket, or 8.5 percent for those in the 36 percent bracket.


Critic's Notebook; A Contest Matures, With Pain And Gain
The Thelonious Monk Institute of Jazz's annual instrumental competition, which ended with a sold-out concert this week at the Kennedy Center in Washington, has turned into jazz's version of the Van Cliburn competition: an event that starts careers and raises all sorts of questions about the aptness of judging creativity.
The site of the competition this year, its flock of high-level corporate sponsorships and its ties to the Clinton White House show that it is taking on new significance in those circles.
And as the Monk Institute extends its promotion of jazz by adding a scholarship program at the New England Conservatory of Music and a new composition contest, the seven-year-old performance competition is taking on weight in the jazz world as well.


A Protest Against Fur Coats Sweeps Broadway


It's Over, So Long, Farewell
It wasn't supposed to end this way for Syracuse -- a meaningless game in a near-empty stadium -- but that's what happens when a team begins the season sixth in the country and finishes fifth in the Big East.
There was no anticipation of a bowl game after today's fitful 31-18 victory over depleted Rutgers at Giants Stadium, only relief that a winning season (6-4-1) was salvaged and hope that, in retrospect, past successes will overcome the present disappointment.


Battle Is Fierce on the Phone Front
A.T.&amp; T. wants Ed Sassi back.
Ever since the 57-year-old aerospace engineer in Sunnyvale, Calif., switched his long-distance telephone calls to MCI three years ago, A.T.&amp; T. has besieged him with entreaties to return, even offering a $75 bonus to switch back.
Mr.
Sassi hasn't recanted, and A.T.&amp; T. representatives haven't stopped calling, on one night recently as late as 10 o'clock.
"It bothered me a little that they called so late," he said.
"But I just figure that's aggressive marketing."


This Much Is Certain: Nebraska Will Play for Title
If you go only by winning and losing, Nebraska finished its regular season today with an 11-0 record and a sound claim as the nation's No. 1 college football team.
If you consider artistic impression, the way they do in figure skating, the Cornhuskers played a dull, largely inefficient game, and their 21-7 victory over Oklahoma was made possible by the Sooners' generosity, especially in the fourth quarter.
For three quarters, Oklahoma kept the game close, maintaining a tie at 7-7.
Then, early in the fourth quarter, Nebraska scored two touchdowns nine seconds apart.
After that, it pinned Oklahoma deep in its territory until the final minute.


RABIN SAYS ISRAEL MAY NOT MEET DATE TO BEGIN PULLOUT
With little more than two weeks to go and tensions running high, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin is warning that Israel may be unable to meet a deadline of Dec. 13 for the start of its troop withdrawal and the assumption of Palestinian authority in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho.
"The date is not sacred because it was set as a target," Mr.
Rabin told reporters on Thursday night.
He said that "it would be better to allow more time" to make sure that there were no misunderstandings.


Business Digest
The Economy
Shoppers turned out in large numbers for the opening day of the Christmas retail season.
But in Atlanta, at least, the big draw wasn't the merchandise so much as the prospect of discounts and early-bird specials.
Some showed hesitancy to buy until they were satisfied with a gift's price and utility, and many came with coupons and plans to shop for the best prices.  [ Page 35. ]


A Bill Promises Aid for New York City's Mentally Ill
Saintclaire Whigham used to be one of the thousands of homeless mentally ill people in New York City who quieted his pain with the medicines of the street -- L.S.D., marijuana, cocaine.
"I didn't want to live that life anymore," he said recently.
"There's always hope. It's just that you have to find it."
Mr.
Whigham, who is schizophrenic, found hope, as well as a place to live and a way to stay off drugs, through Fountain House, a nonprofit social club and social service agency for the mentally ill.
It is one of only four such programs serving a total of 1,100 people in a city that is home to 95,000 seriously mentally ill people, 8,500 of them homeless, according to state estimates.


Not Again? Yes, Again. Nets Blow Late Lead
After losing three of their last four games in the final minutes of play, the Nets weren't exactly sure what to expect against the Utah Jazz tonight.
Would they play like the talented, if uneven, young group that at several times this season has shown real promise?
Or would they resemble the bunch that time and again has lost its poise in the waning moments of close games?


Schroeder Returns
The backup quarterback JAY SCHROEDER has rejoined the Cincinnati Bengals after learning that his 6-year-old son's brain tumor was benign.
Schroeder received the team's permission to miss last Sunday's game against the Jets so he could be with his son, CHRIS , who underwent surgery yesterday.
"Everything is going well, and he's on the road to recovery," Schroeder said. (AP)


2 More Cubans Defect
In the middle of the week, CONRADO CABRERA and NOEL DE LA CRUZ were the pride of Cuba.
Yesterday, they became the latest Cubans to seek political asylum during the Central American and Caribbean Games in San Juan, P.R.
Two days after collecting the gold and silver medals in the 4,000-meter bicycling race at the regional championships, Cabrera and de la Cruz were helped to defect by the former Cuban cycling coach JOSE MENENDEZ .


Kansas Is Too Big and Too Strong for UMass
Kansas, executing its patented, methodical offense and playing aggressive defense, held off pesky Massachusetts, 86-75, last night in the championship game of the Preseason National Invitation Tournament at Madison Square Garden.
Richard Scott scored 16 points and center Greg Ostertag scored 13 points and grabbed 12 rebounds for Kansas, which won the tournament for the second time.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.13
3.03
3.13
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.09
3.10
3.23
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.23
3.25
3.45
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.29
5.34
6.57
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.24
6.30
7.59
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.28
7.36
8.60
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.65
5.66
6.40
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
Scouting the Top Teams  Here are the scouting reports for today's high school playoff games involving teams in the Public Schools Athletic League, and Westchester and Rockland Counties.
P.S.A.L.
Adams (8-3) at Lincoln (9-0), A Semifinals, 12 P.M.
Key Players: The Adams defenders, led by linebackers Jerry Corollo and Frank LoMonaco, will have to play the game of their lives if they hope to stop the city's best runner, Frankie Sinclair (133 carries for 1,361 yards and 23 touchdowns), and one of the metropolitan area's top quarterbacks, Corey Valentine (32 of 70 for 887 yards, 14 touchdowns).
The Railsplitters' defense, paced by linebackers Jeff Miller (58 tackles, 2 sacks) and Mark Navarette (58 tackles), is not too shabby, either, having shut out its opponents six times this season.
The defensive unit goes by the nickname G-Men, after the defensive coordinator, Ed Grezinski.
The Adams wing-T offense is led by fullback Michael Richardson.
Comment: "It's a very difficult task to stop all their weapons," said Adams Coach Angelo Palumbo.
"We just hope that they don't embarrass us." Lehman (8-1) at Canarsie (9-0), A Semifinals, 12 P.M.
Key Players: Although Robert Talley (142 carries for 1,142) is one of the best backs in the city, Lehman can't expect him to run successfully against a Canarsie defense that has allowed only 27 points.
Quarterback Willie Nelson (40 of 80 for 375 yards, 2 touchdowns) is going to have to throw the ball downfield to Larry Belton and Kevin Reavis if Lehman expects to score on a defense that has registered five shutouts.
Sam Shehadeh (more than 100 tackles, and 7 sacks), Ernest Coakley (12 sacks), Cory Patterson (5 interceptions) and Lance Schulters (4 interceptions, including 2 for touchdowns) are the Chiefs' mainstays on defense.
Offensively, Canarsie plays a ball-control offense with Schulters (104 carries for 868 yards, 14 touchdowns) and Eric Smith (130 carries for 1,134 yards, 11 touchdowns), usually wearing the opponents down.
Comment: Lehman and Canarsie have met in the semifinals for the last two years, with Lehman winning both games: 24-6 last year and 18-12 in 1991.
Fort Hamilton (9-0) vs.
Flushing (9-1), B final at Midwood Field, 12 P.M.
Key Players: Fort Hamilton Coach Vincent Laino said that the biggest question in this matchup is whether his team can cope with Ashley Thomas's speed.
"He's just a sensational runner," said Laino of the back, who has rushed for 1,100 yards and 19 touchdowns this season.
"We're not all that quick defensively. We're more of an attack defense." Fort Hamilton's defensive unit is led by linebacker Jimmy Koutroumanos (100 tackles) and tackle Joe Barbieri, who averages 7 tackles a game.
On offense, the Tigers rely on running back Angelo LiCausi.
Flushing's defense, which features linebacker Bienbenudo Hernandez (90 tackles), has not allowed a point in 14 quarters.
The Red Devils' quarterback, Frank Joaquin, who is a native of the Dominican Republic, speaks little English.
"It's really amazing," said his coach, Mike Sarachek.
"We send the play in and somehow he manages to call it right every time." Comment: Fort Hamilton, the P.S.A.L.
B defending champion, played its first varsity football game against Flushing in 1991 and defeated the Red Devils, 22-8.
Westchester and Rockland North Rockland (11-0) vs.
Jamestown (10-2), Class A State Final, 8 P.M., at the Carrier Dome, Syracuse University.
Key Players: North Rockland quarterback Jeff Becker has thrown 4 of his 9 scoring strikes to Chris Jackson.
The Raiders' rushing attack is sparked by Marcus Larkins (822 yards and 11 touchdowns) and Rasson Wiley, who has rushed for more than 200 yards in each of his last four games.
Jamestown, which is located south of Buffalo, has nine players on defense who weigh no more than 170 pounds.
Anthony Cusimano, a 5-foot-5-inch, 140-pound defensive end, leads Jamestown's defensive unit, along with tackles Aaron Barnett (6-1, 167) and Jamie Bloomquist, who this past year wrestled at 119 pounds.
Bloomquist has since bulked up to 167 pounds.
"They're like a bunch of rats running to a piece of cheese," said Jamestown Coach Wally Huckno of his undersize defense.
Jamestown's offensive stars are quarterback Jim Barlow, who has passed for more than 700 yards, and tailback Jamie Nelson, who has rushed for 1,050 yards.
Comment: The North Rockland-Jamestown game is the final game today at the Carrier Dome in the state's first playoff championship.
The Class B final pits Chittenango (11-0) vs.
Yorktown (10-1), at 5 P.M.; the Class C matches Rye (9-1) vs.
Caledonia-Mumford (10-1), at 2 P.M., and the Class D features Tuckahoe (10-0) vs.
Clyde-Savannah (11-1), at 11 A.M.
All Eyes on Ornstein  Gus Ornstein of Fieldston has set up two official college visits -- to Miami on Dec. 19 and to Syracuse in early January.
Other schools interested in the 6-foot-5-inch, 205-pound quarterback are Brigham Young, Boston College, Notre Dame, Michigan and all of the Ivy League schools.
Ornstein, a switch-hitting first baseman in baseball, has also been scouted by the Mets, the Chicago Cubs and the Colorado Rockies.


Curtain to Fall On TKTS Site In Brooklyn
The TKTS booth at Cadman Plaza in downtown Brooklyn will slam its shutters for the last time this afternoon, ending an eight-year run of offering discount theater tickets at the site, and loyal theatergoers were fuming yesterday.
"But not enough of them" to keep the venture afloat, said Nanette Rainone, president of the Fund for the Borough of Brooklyn, the nonprofit organization that provided the service.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ARTISOFT INC., Tucson, Ariz., a software concern, sold an 8.48 percent stake in the company, worth about $14 million, to a group of investors, not identified, who now hold 1.189 million Artisoft shares.
PHAETON INTERNATIONAL N.V., based in the Netherlands, is heading a group of investors that have taken a 7.2 percent stake, worth about $6 million in Megafoods Stores Inc., Mesa, Ariz., a discount supermarket operator.


Battle Is Fierce on the Phone Front
A.T.&amp; T. wants Ed Sassi back.
Ever since the 57-year-old aerospace engineer in Sunnyvale, Calif., switched his long-distance telephone calls to MCI three years ago, A.T.&amp; T. has besieged him with entreaties to return, even offering a $75 bonus to switch back.
Mr.
Sassi hasn't recanted, and A.T.&amp; T. representatives haven't stopped calling, on one night recently as late as 10 o'clock.
"It bothered me a little that they called so late," he said.
"But I just figure that's aggressive marketing."


2 Years After His Bruising Hearing, Justice Thomas Can Rarely Be Heard
It was an unexpectedly awkward moment at an otherwise cheerful Washington gathering, a recent celebration honoring Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg.
As one guest told the story, someone remarked genially that the reporters who often frequent such Court gatherings were absent.
Suddenly, Justice Clarence Thomas stopped laughing.
Good, he said angrily, adding, "They exist only to torment people."


Come Monday, Hunters Add to Black Bears' Woes
When hunting season opens on Nov. 29 for the Florida black bear -- "the biggest, meanest animal on the face of the earth," says the state's top game commissioner -- hunters will be pursuing an animal that has been listed as threatened in most of the state since 1974.
Although hunters say the woods here in the heart of bear country on the Florida Panhandle have never been so flush with prey, that is not the case everywhere, biologists note; statewide, the bear population is endangered.


CHRONICLE
What do the following have in common: Lou Gehrig, Danny Kaye, Tommy Dorsey, Herbert H. Lehman, Florenz Ziegfeld, Billie Burke, Henri Bendel, Paddy Chayefsky, Ayn Rand, Sergei Rachmaninoff. (Hint: They're not going to show up at a party together.) They're all taking what Raymond Chandler referred to as the Big Sleep.
Their final resting place?
Kensico Cemetery in Valhalla, N.Y., a residential village in Westchester County.
While not nearly as splashy as Forest Lawn, the Kensico Cemetery, which was established in 1889, nonetheless has a good many celebrity skeletons that are now out of the closet, so to speak.


TV Channel Plans Conservative Talk, All Day, All Night
Its creators call it "C-Span with attitude." Its detractors call it the political equivalent of televangelism.
On Dec. 6, the Free Congress Foundation, a conservative group, is set to begin what seems to be the nation's first public-affairs channel with a declared ideological spin.
The channel, National Empowerment Television, or NET, will offer weekly programs like "The Progress Report," with Representative Newt Gingrich as host; "War Games," a look at military strategy, and "Youngbloods," a call-in show for young people that has as its stated aim "challenging the cynicism" of MTV. 'Grievance With Washington'
The channel, it seems, is supposed to do for conservative political views what Court TV has done for the legal system: make them a fixture of popular culture.


Observer; Keeping Up With
It is astonishing how much there is to keep up with, and how little time there is to do it.
A few people -- President Clinton comes to mind -- seem able to keep up with everything, but everybody else has to say, "Sorry, dear Loni, but life is too short."
I pick Loni at random as a human metaphor for all those things I am unable to keep up with because of the time shortage.
I might just as well have picked Michael Jackson or the Uruguay round of GATT negotiations.


METRO DIGEST
TRYING TO GET THE TRACKS BACK
Many policy planners say the area's highways have become so congested with trucks that the revival of railroad freight tracks may well be vital to further economic growth.
The first halting steps in that direction are already under way.
The Long Island Rail Road expects to move 17 percent more freight this year than in 1991.
Another company that hopes to profit through the increase in rail freight is the New York Cross Harbor Terminal Corporation, which operates barges that carry freight trains from Jersey City to Brooklyn.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  MIDTOWN COURT, SEVEN WEEKS LATER
In its seventh week of business, the Midtown Community Court is gamely struggling with how to mete out punishment, community payback and social services under one roof.
Earnestness and optimism still abound, but reality keeps butting in: since the court opened its doors, many defendants have shown up two or three times, already rearrested for the same crime.
Page 1.


Substance or Shadow? Marshall's Rich Question
Perhaps it is all political spin, a way for the Jets to publicly balance an equation.
After all, there are too many digits after the dollar sign on Leonard Marshall's 1993 contract for the defensive lineman to have produced 2 sacks in 10 games.
And so there has been a lot of talk around the Jets lately regarding Marshall's other contributions, his play against the run, his having "made the adjustment." The campaign is full of football jargon about line schemes, about Marshall becoming a "two-technique" lineman, about primary responsibility and secondary help.


Armed for Shopping, But Often Just Looking
Merchants had no trouble whipping shoppers into a frenzy today, luring some from hours away to be first in line when stores opened.
By 9:20 A.M., four cars outside the Lenox Square Shopping Center here had a nearly calamitous convergence where just one was pulling out.
But here, as in much of the United States, the big draw on the traditional opening day of the Christmas shopping season wasn't the merchandise so much as the prospect of big discounts and early-bird specials.


Best's Homecoming Spoiled by Michigan
Michigan 80, Georgia Tech 70
Coming home on Thanksgiving weekend can be rough for a college kid.
So many people to visit, so little time.
For Travis Best on this visit home, there also was a game against Michigan and its Fab Four in the 15th annual Tipoff Classic at the Springfield Civic Center, in his backyard.


Another Bar Patron Accuses Suns' Barkley
The police in Scottsdale, Ariz., are investigating an allegation that CHARLES BARKLEY punched a man at the same pool hall-nightclub where a different man accused the Phoenix Suns forward of hitting him eight days earlier.
The second man, KEITH STIMSON, told the police he knew about the first incident, at Stixx in Scottsdale, which was later ruled by the police to be unfounded, Lieut.
MIKE KEELEY said.


Oil Stocks Dealt Blow By OPEC
A drop in oil prices to their lowest levels in five years rippled through the stock market yesterday, dragging down shares in big oil producers while buoying those of transportation companies.
Most stocks inched forward in a subdued session that ended early because of the holiday weekend, but the Dow Jones industrial average fell 3.63, to 3,683.95.
The index was depressed by Chevron, down 4 1/4, to 85 1/2; Texaco, down 1 5/8, to 63 7/8, and Exxon, down 1 1/2, to 61 3/4.
For the week, the Dow dropped 10.06 points.


Stick-Swingers Fined
Center DENIS SAVARD of the Tampa Bay Lightning and defenseman STEVE SMITH of the Chicago Blackhawks were each suspended for four games without pay and fined $500 by the National Hockey League yesterday for a stick-swinging incident in a game Nov. 20 at Tampa Bay.
Savard and Smith were assessed major penalties for slashing and game-misconduct penalties at the end of the game, won by Tampa Bay, 4-3.


Contributing to Charities Anonymously May Help Avoid Nuisances
A woman who is a regular contributor to the Sierra Club recently called the environmental conservation group's national headquarters in San Francisco to complain that she had received two solicitations within hours.
One was for a credit card that would match a portion of her charges as a club donation, and the other for a cash contribution.
Furious, she threatened to withdraw her support.
As charities and other nonprofit groups aggressively court potential donors, such sentiment is spreading.
"People are being deluged," said Bill Meadows, a senior development officer for the Sierra Club, "and they're starting to resist."


Investigators Start Inquiry At Tunnel
Like explorers on a fantastic journey into the center of the earth, a team of investigators descended into an enormously deep steel-and-concrete shaft at a construction site in Queens yesterday to examine tangled wreckage and the winch that fell in at midweek, killing one worker and injuring seven others.
The investigators reported no progress in the search for the cause of the accident, which happened Wednesday at Grand Avenue and Page Place in Maspeth, at a site for the construction of New York City's Third Water Tunnel, a vast project that someday will bring fresh water to town from upstate reservoirs.


Bowing to U.N., Iraq Will Permit Arms Monitors
Bowing to the pressure of shortages, hunger and inflation arising from a three-year trade embargo, Iraq said today that it had finally agreed to let the United Nations start monitoring its industries on a long-term basis to insure it does not seek again to produce weapons of mass destruction.
The agreement, described by United Nations officials as a triumph for the Security Council in its long test of strength with President Saddam Hussein, would bring Iraq into compliance with one of the few remaining major cease-fire conditions set by the victorious Persian Gulf war allies after driving Iraqi forces from Kuwait in 1991.
Iraq Wants Ban Lifted
Baghdad also called today for the immediate lifting of a ban on Iraqi oil sales that has deprived it of crucial revenue.
But the Security Council has said it will not agree to this until it is satisfied that President Hussein has given a full accounting of his nuclear, chemical, biological and missile weapon programs and shows that he is cooperating with the industrial monitoring.


Trade Debate Brought Out Best in the House
To the Editor:
In an otherwise reasoned and substantive debate over the North American Free Trade Agreement, there were only a few discordant voices.
One of the most disappointing was "Running Scared From Nafta" (editorial, Nov. 16).
While the House of Representatives was making an extraordinarily difficult choice about the country's economic future, weighing the agreement's impact and listening to constituencies, you reduced the debate to a simple matter of whether or not members had received contributions from labor union political action committees.


Taking Steps to Revive Region's Rail Freight
The train clanked forward at a top speed of 10 miles an hour, but even so it rocked on the antique, uneven tracks like a ship at sea.
The grass and weeds sprouting between the ties might captivate a botanist, but John Cossman, the engineer, complained that when they get high enough, they make the wheels on his twin 130-ton engines spin as if they were rolling "through soup."
This 10-mile section of the Long Island Rail Road's freight line, from Fresh Pond, Queens, to Bushwick, Brooklyn, is a piece of the aging freight tracks that still thread through large sections of New York City and Long Island, mostly forgotten but hardly unimportant.


Critics See False Promises and Higher Taxes in Nassau Budget
Less than a month after Nassau County Executive Thomas S. Gulotta, newly re-elected, said he was proposing a "tax freeze" budget that would eliminate a deficit of at least $39 million, opponents say the plan is full of false promises and raises taxes.
Democratic critics of Mr.
Gulotta, a Republican, said today that he had broken a campaign pledge "to hold the line on taxes." They noted that his budget proposal increases tax rates by as much as 16 percent for condominium, commercial and utility properties and for a number of sewage districts, which county officials confirmed.


Films About the African Diaspora
Work by film makers from Cuba, Brazil, Britain, Curacao, Portugal, France and the United States (among other places) is featured in the first Festival of Contemporary Films of the African Diaspora, which began yesterday and will run through Thursday at Cinema Village, 22 East 12th Street.


How They Do It; Moving Up and Out of a Home Office
For 10 years, Douglas Baldwin gave guitar lessons at his home.
The business suplemented his income from guitar repair and professional club dates.
Having moved three times in the last five years, he found that address changes disrupted his teaching business.
Furthermore, students were coming to his home at all hours, and parking was becoming a problem.


Jacqueline Shearer, Documentary Maker, 46
Jacqueline Shearer, a producer and director of documentary films about black Americans, died yesterday at her home in Cambridge, Mass.
She was 46.
The cause was colon cancer, said her brother Clement.


No Replacement Is Found For a Replacement Referee
Day 12 of the National Hockey League officials' strike included a game without a referee for one period, more criticism of the replacement officials and a hint that the league might consider allowing a Federal mediator to enter the negotiations.
The missing official, Chuck Harrison, arrived after the first period in Anaheim, Calif., yesterday afternoon for the game between the Mighty Ducks and San Jose.
He was late because of air travel problems in Dallas.
The two substitute linesmen handled his chores, as well as their own, until he arrived.
Complaints Increase
The start of the game was delayed for five minutes, until it was determined that Harrison couldn't arrive in time.
The second period was delayed for another five minutes until he was ready to skate.
The linesmen, Dan Moffatt and Stephen Metcalf, called only one minor penalty in the first period, which proceeded without incident.
The Sharks won, 4-3.


Beliefs
"Finally," President Clinton said at a convention of black ministers two weeks ago, "we may be ready to do something about it."
Mr.
Clinton was speaking from the pulpit in Memphis where the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. delivered his last sermon.
The "it" that the President hoped the nation might finally confront was the blight of crime, drugs, joblessness and family disintegration that has cast such a shadow on Dr.
King's dream.
A political column in The Washington Post by E. J. Dionne termed President Clinton's speech "the most important of his 10-month-old Presidency."


Seoul Gets the Shakes
President Clinton cannot allow a last-minute anxiety attack in South Korea to deflect his deft diplomatic efforts to denuclearize North Korea.
South Korea's President, Kim Young Sam, balked this week at a package of inducements aimed at getting North Korea out of the bomb-making business and opening the way to contact and commerce.
The package would include the suspension of Team Spirit -- the annual military exercise that the U.S. conducts with South Korea.
It could also offer North Korea light-water reactors, which Pyongyang needs to generate nuclear power; and diplomatic recognition, which would facilitate aid and trade.
Finally, Mr.
Clinton could pledge not to threaten the North with nuclear weapons.


Children Rescued From Fire; Mother Is Held
A woman was arrested yesterday after a fire broke out in her apartment in the Bronx, where her three children had been left unattended, the police said.
The woman, Andrea Negroni, 26, was found outside the building at 2009 Gleason Avenue in Parkchester after the fire began, the police said.
A police spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnis, said she was charged with abandonment and endangering the welfare of her children.


For Outdoor Tennis Enthusiasts, It Is the Final Set


CHRONICLE
"An astonishing weekend in my life," THOMAS STODDARD said yesterday, looking ahead to next Friday and Saturday.
On Friday evening, Mr.
Stoddard, 45, the lawyer and gay-rights advocate, is to receive the Tom Paine Award from the National Emergency Civil Liberties Committee, a group founded in 1951 to defend the right of dissent.
Also receiving the award at the group's annual Bill of Rights Dinner is Representative MAXINE WATERS, Democrat of California.
They were chosen, said EDITH TIGER, the director of the organization, for their roles "in the struggle to achieve dignity, equality and freedom for all Americans, including gays, lesbians and individuals who have AIDS."


Aide Denies Vote Payouts For Whitman
Frequently testy, at other times agitated, Webster B. Todd Jr., the brother of Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman, completed his sworn testimony before lawyers for the Democratic Party today, offering nothing to advance their investigation into allegations that Republicans paid to suppress the urban black vote in the election for Governor.
In testimony sprinkled with the response "I don't know," Mr.
Todd acknowledged that his sister's campaign strategy included keeping the Democratic vote light, but steadfastly denied allegations of paid voter suppression.


Stocks Plunge in Tokyo on Worries About Japan's Banks
Share prices hit another air pocket today, as the struggling stock market collided with a patch of bad news about the banking system and investors sold everything from mining to communications company shares.
The closely watched Nikkei index of 225 issues tumbled 496.55 points, or 2.9 percent, to 16,726.37, a 10-month low.
Trading volume was a fairly brisk 340 million shares, up from 315 million shares on Thursday.
For the week, the Nikkei lost 1,214.82 points, a decline of 6.77 percent.


Russia Court Calls 'Protocols' Anti-Semitic Forgery
A Russian court ruled today that the "Protocols of the Elders of Zion," a document commonly used as a pretext in this century for anti-Semitic attacks, is a forgery and that to publish it is an anti-Semitic act.
The ruling is thought to be the first by a Russian court on the document, which was fabricated in Russia by the czarist secret police and first published in 1903.


Battle Is Fierce on the Phone Front
A.T.&amp; T. wants Ed Sassi back.
Ever since the 57-year-old aerospace engineer in Sunnyvale, Calif., switched his long-distance telephone calls to MCI three years ago, A.T.&amp; T. has besieged him with entreaties to return, even offering a $75 bonus to switch back.
Mr.
Sassi hasn't recanted, and A.T.&amp; T. representatives haven't stopped calling, on one night recently as late as 10 o'clock.
"It bothered me a little that they called so late," he said.
"But I just figure that's aggressive marketing."


The Barn Door Is Closing for This Season's Biggest Stars
New York will shout its last hurrah of the year to quality racing today when four graded stakes worth $850,000 in purses will be clustered at Aqueduct with a cast led by Strategic Maneuver, Turnback the Alarm and Missionary Ridge.
Racing will continue all winter at Aqueduct, but not with so many recognizable names, especially since most of the star horses and jockeys in town are already pulling up stakes for the annual migration to Florida.


The Barn Door Is Closing for This Season's Biggest Stars
New York will shout its last hurrah of the year to quality racing today when four graded stakes worth $850,000 in purses will be clustered at Aqueduct with a cast led by Strategic Maneuver, Turnback the Alarm and Missionary Ridge.
Racing will continue all winter at Aqueduct, but not with so many recognizable names, especially since most of the star horses and jockeys in town are already pulling up stakes for the annual migration to Florida.


George Baker, Publicist, 65
George W. Baker, a retired international public relations executive, died on Wednesday en route to his home in Weston, Conn.
He was 65.
The cause of death was a heart attack, said Thomas Baker, his son.


To Smell Good And Feel Righteous
Agraria potpourri usually comes in a cardboard box, but this season it is also offered in a package that is not only esthetically pleasing but also a political statement.
For $30, you get 1.5 liters of potpourri in a woven box made of Indonesia palm leaves, whose cultivation, Agraria's makers say, helps to reclaim the rain forest.


Angel of the Airwaves
IT IS around 2:30 A.M., and yet another livery-cab driver is calling WNYE-FM.
"This is B-24 from Black Pearl," he says, giving his car number and the name of one of Bedford-Stuyvesant's biggest car services.
Sirens, coughing exhausts, a dog's barking and other sounds of the night thump and bang in the background.
"Are you watching your back?" asks Al Angeloro.


Young Boxers Find a Woman in Their Corner
Inside a one-story, red-brick recreation hall on East 112th Street in East Harlem, tough-looking young men grunt as they do push-ups, pudgy youths battle a punching bag, a professional boxer takes on a string of opponents in the ring, and a promoter in a three-piece suit watches from the side.
The room is crowded with white, black, Hispanic and Asian boxers.
And at the side of the ring, a lone woman with long braided hair shouts orders and encouragement.
She is Rafaela Rosario, who coaches the Gladiators Boxing Club with her husband, Mike.
The two -- he is a hospital worker, she has a part-time job in the Parks Department -- have been training boxers for about 20 years, pulling hundreds of young men off the streets and training them to take out their aggressions in the ring.


Mr. Clinton on Crime
Spotting a White House political offensive is a lot like spotting a tidal wave.
All you have to do is look offshore and watch for a big bump.
By that standard, it takes no special genius to see that President Clinton and his staff have fastened on crime.
It is an impulse to be saluted, especially since Mr.
Clinton does not seem drawn to the simplistic -- and sometimes demagogic -- approach embodied in Nixon-Reagan-Bush rhetoric.
Their main theme was that the nation could stamp out crime by chasing and punishing criminals more relentlessly.
But several decades of experience have proved beyond reasonable doubt that a purely punitive approach can, at best, hold the line.
To decrease crime requires a mixture of law enforcement, social and economic remedies.


Giuliani Meets With Bratton on Police Post
The Police Commissioner of Boston, William J. Bratton, said yesterday that he had met with Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani and his aides in New York City on Friday to discuss the possibility of serving as the city's Police Commissioner.
The interview, which lasted about two hours, underscored Mr.
Bratton's emergence as a leading contender to head the Police Department, only two weeks after he said he was not interested in the job.


Ann M. Smith, Thad R. Denehy
Dr.
Ann M. Smith, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Leon G. Smith of Essex Fells, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Thad R. Denehy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Denehy of Middletown, N.J.
The Rev.
Michael Drury performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Joseph in Mendham, N.J.
The bride, 28, is a resident in radiology at Yale-New Haven Hospital.
She graduated magna cum laude from Duke University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a medical degree from Yale University.
Her father, the chief of medicine at St.
Michael's Medical Center and a professor of medicine at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, both in Newark, is the vice president of the National Foundation for Infectious Diseases in Bethesda, Md.


The Last Details
Garden chores are winding down now, but grab any remaining nice days to finish cleaning up vegetable and flower beds.
Dig in compost and manure and add lime, if needed, to the vegetable patch and you'll be all but ready to plant peas in the spring.
Top-dress raspberry, blackberry and other small fruit beds with plenty of compost and aged manure and mulch with clean straw or salt hay.
Trim any extra-long canes of climbing roses so that they won't whip around and break in the wind, or tie them to their trellises.
Protect tender broadleaf evergreens with structures made of stakes and burlap.
Wrap the fig tree with old-fashioned roofing paper but leave an air vent at the top.
On cold days, keep the hole covered with an old buckle; on sunny days, take it off to allow heat to escape.


Not Just for Bureaucrats
SOMETIMES the best source of books about the city is the city itself.
The City Publishing Center has a bookstore, Citybooks, and though it carries many serious tomes, like the Charter of the City of New York and the Electrical Code of New York City, it also sells guidebooks, history books and tales of do-gooders, all of them from New York City, of course.
For a complete catalogue, visit the store at 61 Chambers Street.
QUEENS CULTURAL GUIDE ($5.00)
A boroughwide guide to cultural, community, educational and service institutions and organizations from the Queens Council on the Arts.
Grouped by topic.
BUILDING A BOROUGH: ARCHITECTURE AND PLANNING IN THE BRONX 1890-1940.  ($19.95)
This book tells the transformation of the Bronx from a suburb with 90,000 residents to a borough with 1,400,000.
Includes original drawings and architectural plans and pictures of things like the original zoo and art deco apartment buildings.
OLD NEW YORK IN EARLY PHOTOGRAPHs by Mary Black ($12.95)
A pictorial album of life in the city from 1853 to 1901, with black and white prints from the days of gas lamps and horse-drawn trolleys.
THE NEW YORK WORLD'S FAIR 1939-1940 ($9.95)
A collection of more than 150 photos from the fair in Flushing Meadows.
The book provides a glimpse of pre-war New York and the pageantry.
THE LATE, GREAT PENNSYLVANIA STATION by Lorraine B. Diehl ($12.95)
The story of the famous railroad station and the generations of people who have walked through it on their way to somewhere else.
Contains vintage photographs and drawings of its formal dining room, vaulted ceilings and fancy concourse.
THE BEAUTIFUL BRONX 1920-1950 by Lloyd Ultan ($25.00)
Mr.
Ultan is a man who knows from the Bronx, and he shares some of his knowledge in this narrative of developments, events and everyday life during the era of Governor Al Smith, President Franklin D. Roosevelt and RKO movie houses.
GREENING THE CITY STREETS: THE STORY OF COMMUNITY GARDENSby Barbara A. Huff ($10.00)
A true tale of how children and adults transform garbage-filled lots into thriving gardens.
With photos.
WOMEN'S ORGANIZATIONS: A NEW YORK CITY DIRECTORY ($6.95)
Put together by the New York City Commission on the Status of Women, this is a comprehensive listing of 455 organizations that focus on women's concerns, giving their purpose, programs and addresses.
CENTRAL PARK, PROSPECT PARK: A NEW PERSPECTIVE by M.M. Graff ($12.50)
The story of how these tracts of land, abandoned by developers and politicians, became the parks in which so many frolic today.
Included are vintage illustrations from private and public collections and full-view, fold-out maps of each.


Of Shutter Speeds And F/Stops
LAST week's column explained how shutter speeds and aperture settings (also known as f/stops) control the amount of light that reaches the film in a camera.
When the shutter speed, measured in fractions of a second, is changed from, say, 1/30 to the next faster speed, 1/60 , the amount of light that reaches the film is cut in half.
You can compensate by opening the lens to the next larger aperture, which, confusingly, is designated by a smaller f/stop number -- going, say, from f/8 to f/5.6.
But why do you need two different systems to control the amount of light hitting the film?
Why not just have shutter speeds?


Sheik Rejects 2d Lawyer
Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the Muslim cleric accused in a conspiracy to commit terrorist bombings, has refused to accept a second court-appointed lawyer, an associate of Mr.
Abdel Rahman said last night.
The associate, Ahmed Sattar, said that Mr.
Abdel Rahman still wants the return of his original defense team, William M. Kunstler and Ronald L. Kuby, disqualified from the case by a judge who cited a potential conflict of interest because they represent other clients in the case.
In their absence, Mr.
Sattar said, Mr.
Abdel Rahman will defend himself in a trial in Federal court next year.
Mr.
Sattar said that Mr.
Abdel Rahman refused last Tuesday to see Emanuel Moore, a lawyer from Queens who was named last week after the first court-appointed lawyer withdrew from the case.


Get a Grip on It
Across America the same desperate scene is repeated thousands of times each night and day.
The hopeful consumer returns home with a compact disk, or a cassette, or a bottle of painkiller or contact-lens cleaner, or a box of cereal, or a pair of headphones, or a pack of potato chips.
The struggle begins.
Fingernails scrabble vainly for an edge.
Hands try to rip the unrippable.
Bottles are put to the teeth.
Scissors, tree pruners, plumbers' wrenches and pipe cutters are brought into play.
Sometimes the consumer wins.
Sometimes the packaging wins.
But the problem remains.
You can't get anything open.
Why?
It was after the Tylenol poisonings that impenetrable wraps (as distinguished from impenetrable raps) were developed, the idea being that a consumer who could not open a bottle of medicine could never be poisoned by it.
But nobody poisons C.D.'s.
There is another danger manufacturers fear: moisture.


Leaping From E Street to 'Late Night'
WHEN MAX WEINBERG was a teen-ager, he had a drum teacher named Gene Thaler who would tell him stories about his friend Ed Shaughnessy, the drummer in the "Tonight Show" band.
"He always used to say what a great gig that is," Mr.
Weinberg recalled.
"You get lots of money and then you go home, and you don't have to go on the road. I didn't even know what going on the road meant, but I could understand you get a lot of money to play for an hour on TV. At one point I thought that would be the ultimate gig."
Not too long after that, Mr.
Weinberg found out what going on the road meant, and whatever dreams he may have had of a career in television were shelved for 15 years while he enjoyed a different kind of "ultimate gig": playing the drums in Bruce Springsteen's E Street Band.
Now it turns out that those dreams had merely been deferred.


Waldheim and Wiesenthal
To the Editor:
In his review of "Betrayal: The Untold Story of the Kurt Waldheim Investigation and Cover-Up," by Eli M. Rosen baum with William Hoffer (Oct. 10), Jacob Heilbrunn leaves readers with the impression that Mr.
Rosenbaum is not to be trusted because he would have us believe that Mr.
Waldheim and Simon Wiesenthal are Nazis of some sort.
Actually, I believe Mr.
Rosenbaum is saying something very different: he claims that Mr.
Wiesenthal is fallible, after all, despite the veneration often expressed for him.
He erred 15 years ago in "clearing" Mr.
Waldheim because he didn't know about the damaging pictures and documents that the World Jewish Congress would later unearth.
Because he erred, he vouchsafed Mr.
Waldheim's reputation and, in so doing, conveniently hurt an old enemy, Bruno Kreisky.
He persisted, Mr.
Rosenbaum says, to save his own reputation and place in history long after he should have climbed down from the Waldheim defense bandwagon.
But this is surely not "Nazi" activity, and Mr.
Rosenbaum never implies that.
MARK BERNHEIM  Oxford, Ohio


Stop Planes From Buzzing Our National Parks
To the Editor:
"Parks Are for People, Not Planes" (editorial, Nov. 17), recognizes that noise from sightseeing aircraft at Grand Canyon deprives visitors on the ground of the opportunity to experience the park's profound natural quiet and solitude.
National Park Service studies demonstrate that nearly all visitors to the Canyon report that the opportunity to enjoy natural quiet and the sounds of nature is either a very important reason or an extremely important reason for their visit.
A majority of visitors also believe that they should have the opportunity to experience the park on the ground without hearing aircraft.


Umbrage, of Sorts, On Street Trees
To the Editor:
I found Anne Raver's article "Why Street Trees Live or Die" (Nov. 14) valid regarding the perils that street trees must endure.
However, her reference to street trees as "stunted, sad little things that speak poorly of New York City" and to "a city of dying trees" is incorrect: there are beautiful, healthy and large trees (some 80 years old and older) in Manhattan and the other boroughs.


Art to Snuggle Under
THE AMERICAN QUILT A History of Cloth and Comfort 1750-1950.
By Roderick Kiracofe  with Mary Elizabeth Johnson.
Illustrated. 290 pp.
New York: Clarkson Potter Publishers. $60.


COLLEGES REVERSE DIVESTMENT PLANS
For many college students of the 1980's, boycotting corporations like Coca-Cola, I.B.M., Ford and others with subsidiary interests in South Africa was taking a stand against apartheid, and the groundswell led many colleges and universities to divest themselves of stock in companies with ties to South Africa.
Since the late 1970's, 155 colleges have sold $5 billion in such stocks, out of portfolios totaling $300 billion, according to the Africa Fund, a nonprofit, anti-apartheid group based in New York.


From Little Packages Come Big Sounds
WHEN "CROSSROADS," A FOURCD boxed set chronicling the career of Eric Clapton, went gold shortly after it was released in 1988, the recording industry took notice.
Record companies, eager to tap the vast catalogues they had amassed, saw an opportunity to sell old wine in new bottles.
"Crossroads" has gone on to sell more than two million copies in this country alone, and the boom that it sparked has, if anything, accelerated.
Boxed sets, once the fare of late-night television commercials, have become big business, a particular favorite for holiday gifts.
Here are 15 choices that Times critics found worthy of note.
Prices are suggested retail.
Django Reinhardt: 'Djangology'  Blue Note 80659; 10 CD's ($118)


Number Makes Up for Height As Trees Glow in Holiday Festival
Thirty holiday trees were lighted in unison last week in downtown Brooklyn in the borough's spirited answer to Manhattan's towering tree with its shimmering lights at Rockefeller Center.
"Personally, I don't like the tree at Rockefeller Center because it's just lights," said Merrna Pouncy, a Flatbush resident who was downtown running errands on Tuesday when her 3-year-old grandson spotted the trees and dragged her to look at each one.
"I like ornaments, and these trees certainly don't have a lack of those."


Today In The City
TO MARKETS!
TO MARKETS!
Five ethnic microcosms for the in-the-know diner or shopper.
Page 1.
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT  Will the trolley return to 42d Street?
How do Brooklyn's Christmas trees compare to Rockefeller Center's?
Pages 6 and 10.
SOAPBOX  "Them" and "us": sharing the street with prostitutes.
Also, back and forth on buses.
Page 25.
The City, section 13 (distributed in most of New York City).


Before the Bar
To the Editor:
I wish to thank Patricia O'Connell for the kind words in her review of my book "Blood Will Tell: A True Story of Deadly Obsession" (In Short: Crime/Mystery, Oct. 17).
However, there are certain parties who believe that perhaps I did my job too well.


If You're Thinking of Living in/Pelham; Planned, Small and Close to the Big City
IN the late 80's, the Town of Pelham, in Westchester County, developed a reputation as a smart suburb for young professionals from Manhattan who were looking for a little more elbow room.
National magazines began mentioning it, and an article in Esquire described it as ideal for "fleeing Manhattanites who want to stay near the center of the universe but don't want to fall off the face of the earth."
Nicholas Lemann, a national correspondent for Atlantic Monthly, who moved with his wife, Dominique, to Pelham from Manhattan seven years ago, fit that profile perfectly.


Find a Listing Of Buyer Brokers
Q.
How can I locate a listing of buyer-brokers who represent the buyer rather than the seller in a real estate transaction?
I am specifically interested in those located in New Jersey and Massachusetts. . . .
John Del Baglivo, Secaucus, N.J.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SHORT FICTION LEARNING TO LOVE IT  Seven Stories &amp; a Novella.
By Thomas Farber.
Capra Press, paper, $10.95.


West of the Hudson
Clustered in the canyons of super-sophisticated Manhattan, the nation's top designers and manufacturers envision women dressing one way.
Yet, fashion-conscious customers across the country often think along quite different lines.
This fall, New York has been espousing stark, almost monastic shapes, playing down evening silhouettes, and nothing but black.
But west of the Hudson, women still crave color and snappy styles, and their evening gowns cannot be gala enough.
Designers of luxe wear like Bill Blass, left, regularly visit stores coast to coast.
Linda Allard, above right, the designer for Ellen Tracy, understands the desire for a shot of color and a jacket with good shoulder pads.
It's no surprise that both designers seem to be comfortably successful.


Artists at Work
A film screening at the National Arts Club, Gramercy Park, Manhattan, Nov. 19.


In America; Tobacco Dollars
A few years ago I interviewed a rugged-looking, jut-jawed fellow named David Goerlitz, a former model who was once known as the Winston Man because he had appeared in Winston cigarette ads for the R.J.
Reynolds Tobacco Company.
Mr.
Goerlitz described an outdoor photo session in which several cartons of Winstons were scattered around.
A number of Reynolds executives were at the session and Mr.
Goerlitz asked if it would be all right if he took a few cartons for himself.


Microbes in the News
Scientists have discovered that:
Louisiana hot sauce seems to kill Vibrio vulnificus, a nasty bacterium that can kill you if it's in the oyster you eat.


BEST SELLERS: November 28, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
4
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
2
2
68
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
3
3
7
NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.) Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.
4
5
14
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
5
4
9
LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) A sequel to "The Witching Hour."
6
8
3
MR.
MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $23.95.) A writer's happy family life is threatened by a madman.
7
9
6
A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A young student's mysterious drowning has repercussions in Victorian England's high society.
8
7
5
DECIDER, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $22.95.) An architect-engineer gets caught between the warring factions of a clan that owns an English racecourse.
9
6
5
THE FIRES OF HEAVEN, by Robert Jordan. (Tor/Doherty, $24.95.) The fifth volume of a fantasy saga.
10
11
33
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
11
10
9
SACRED CLOWNS, by Tony Hillerman. (HarperCollins, $23.) Two Navajo tribal policemen undertake to unravel a web of politics and murder.
12
12
12
THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) A sequel to "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
13
13
37
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
14
1
DARK MIRROR, by Diane Duane. (Pocket, $22.) A "Star Trek" story about an evil universe that tries to replace one of the Federation's starships with its own.
15
44
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through illustrated cards and letters.
16*
1
THE ROBBER BRIDE, by Margaret Atwood. (Talese/Doubleday, $23.50.) A woman who long manipulated three friends suddenly reappears in their lives.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
2
SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.
2
2
6
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
3
4
14
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
4
3
12
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
5
5
29
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
6
6
8
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
7
7
3
THE DOWNING STREET YEARS, by Margaret Thatcher. (HarperCollins, $30.) The former British Prime Minister recalls her 11 1/2 years in power.
8
10
8
A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ...
OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Reflections on 43 years of marriage.
9
8
6
STAR TREK MEMORIES, by William Shatner with Chris Kreski. (HarperCollins, $22.) Reminiscences from the man who played Capt.
James Tiberius Kirk.
10
9
8
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem, relationships and spiritual growth.
11
12
20
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A psychiatrist discusses mood-changing medications and their effects on a person's self.
12*
11
68
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
13
5
MORE MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Putnam, $21.95.) Stories about country music stars from the host of the "Nashville Now" television show.
14
14
25
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
15
13
2
RARE AIR, by Michael Jordan. (Collins, $50.) Photographs of and observations by the retired basketball superstar.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
7
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological health and fitness.
2
2
28
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.
3
3
2
AND IF YOU PLAY GOLF, YOU'RE MY FRIEND, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) More tips and anecdotes from the golf instructor.
4
4
18
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Nov. 13, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
AND BEAR IN MIND THE BOOK OF NIGHTS, by Sylvie Germain. (Verba Mundi/Godine, $22.95.) In this work of magic realism by a French philosopher living in Prague, the protean world of the Brothers Grimm meets Nazi Germany.
THE DUKE ELLINGTON READER, edited by Mark Tucker. (Oxford University, $30.) A fascinating anthology of 70 years' worth of writing about (and occasionally by) Ellington, who clearly inspired powerful emotions in even the most sober minds.
EXIT INTO HISTORY: A Journey Through the New Eastern Europe, by Eva Hoffman. (Viking, $23.) Seeking out the ordinary, a Polish-born writer with a touch of American objectivity makes a tour of Mitteleuropa, returning with subtle insights about a world in transition.
EXTRA INNINGS: A Memoir, by Doris Grumbach. (Norton, $22.) Well into her 70's, Ms.
Grumbach says she is trying to "learn to sit still" and mining what she calls her "mental compost heap." GENET: A Biography, by Edmund White. (Knopf, $35.) A monumental biography, meticulously researched, that places Genet's literary vision squarely in his homosexuality and confronts the mystery of how a man who left school at 12 became a great master of the French language.
A HISTORY OF WARFARE, by John Keegan. (Knopf, $27.50.) Mr.
Keegan, the most readable and original of military historians, argues that war is an omnipresent cultural ritual of mankind, from which the ruthless modern notion of disciplined total war was an aberration.
HONEY: Stories, by Elizabeth Tallent. (Knopf, $22.) In her third fine collection, set mainly in New Mexico, Ms.
Tallent's characters are tempered in the crucible of marriage while their creator revels in comely language and summons accurately the sensations of daily life.
JAZZ: The American Theme Song, by James Lincoln Collier. (Oxford University, $25.) Starting with the provocative idea that there is no satisfactory history of jazz, Mr.
Collier pleads for musical literacy, rails against fan mentality and smashes some popular notions.
NEVER STOP RUNNING: Allard Lowenstein and the Struggle to Save American Liberalism, by William H. Chafe. (Basic Books, $28.) A historian captures the rootlessness and personal insecurity of an aggressive reform politician from New York who could accomplish almost anything except getting himself elected.
THAT'S THE WAY I SEE IT, by David Hockney.
Edited by Nikos Stangos. (Chronicle Books, $35.) The second volume of the artist's reminiscences, taken from the tape recorder of Mr.
Stangos, is a long, perky monologue -- autobiography alternating with ruminations on vision and the reproduction of images.
WHAT IS FOUND THERE: Notebooks on Poetry and Politics, by Adrienne Rich. (Norton, $20.) A distinguished poet's reflections on the work of poetry, its social and cultural authority, its power to help us "invent what we desire."


Clinton Won't Take Credit For These Jobs
LARRY OSWALT doesn't like "Bubba." He has even less use for Hillary Rodham Clinton.
And Socks the Cat?
Me-ouch!
Yet, as far as he is concerned, Bill Clinton hasn't received nearly enough credit for some of the less-than-shining moments of his Presidency.
The Memphis resident, after all, made a tidy sum when the President reneged on his middle-class tax cut and another when he retreated over homosexuals in the military.
"Nannygate" was a shot in the arm, and the Haircut was a real boon.
Mr.
Oswalt sells Bill Clinton doormats -- "wipe feet liberally." He is one of a growing legion of rankled right-wingers producing products that poke fun at the President.
Of course, items lampooning Presidents are nothing new, but lately it seems that conservative magazines like the National Review are positively swollen with ads for anti-Clinton paraphernalia -- a confirmation, perhaps, that for those who believe the business of America is business, making a profit is the best revenge.


Susan Layton and William Palmer
TWO years ago, Susan Layton decided to take "the blitz approach" to her love life.
A divorced caterer, then 49, she was living with her daughters, Becky and Elizabeth, on a quiet country road in Fairfield, Conn.
The only men who stopped by were high school or college students, arriving to visit her daughters.
So she began a serious search for suitors of her own.
She asked everyone -- co-workers, old friends from Cornell University's class of '64 -- to introduce her to their single male friends.
She called professional matchmakers, one of whom worked out of a hotel on the Upper East Side and wanted to charge her $12,500 for 24 introductions.
Ms.
Layton declined.


Playing It As Written
To the Editor:
New York musicians have been providing Baroque orchestras around the country with their best players for more than a decade, so it is absurd to read about how much worse they are than their colleagues elsewhere.


Frequent Fliers of the Plant World
HAVE you ever come in from a long walk through fields and woods with the dog and found both trousers and fur matted with burs, twigs and seeds?
Most of these nuisances cling tightly and it is difficult, to say the least, to get them all off.
As bothersome as these experiences are, they are simple examples of nature's seed-dispersal mechanisms.
It is one easy way for plants to get around.
The noted naturalist-author Gerald Durrell puts it this way, "Trying to de-seed yourself is one of the most frustrating tasks of a naturalist's life, but it certainly is an excellent way to collect such seeds."


Festival Recipe: Recitals, Gifts, Food
THE Hoff-Barthelson Music School in Scarsdale will offer eight recitals, an international buffet and an elaborate collection of gift items for sale at the school's 18th yearly Holiday Music Festival next Friday and Saturday.
Hourly recitals begin Friday evening at 7:30, starting with the Wind Ensemble, Jazz Group and Festival Chorus.
Singers from the New York City Opera will give a special production for children on Saturday morning at 11:15, and programs by the Flute Club, the Symphonette, the Suzuki Strings and other ensembles will follow until about 4 P.M.
Admission is free, but funds raised from the sale of gift items and food will go toward faculty expansion and student scholarships.
For more details, the number to call is 723-1169.


DAVID GERGEN, MASTER OF THE GAME
As far as I can tell, your article about David Gergen was mostly a barely warmed-over series of half-truths by a new generation of Nixon haters.
That is, the piece was in some measure just another attempt to portray R.N. as a master manipulator of press and public, some sinister new breed of Goebbels-like wizard of progaganda.
This is obvious nonsense.
Has Michael Kelly forgotten that the Nixon hands were so maladroit at press relations that they allowed the news media to hound R.N. from office over what is really a trifle compared with other Presidential miscues?
Surely the great wizards of the Nixon White House should have been able to simply roll over such a minor irritant.


Sports of The Times; Finding the Answer To Coach Question
WHEN the Giants were about to open training camp last July, someone mentioned to Dan Reeves how David Meggett had been "misused" during Ray Handley's two-year term.
"Misused? Did Ray give you that quote?" the new Giant coach asked with his slow smile.
"Let's hope that when we're sitting here next year you don't think he's misused."


Seattle Chefs Showcase Northwest's Riches
PUGET SOUND and its environs are an amazingly fertile food laboratory, producing superlative seafood, lush fruits and vegetables, abundant game and outstanding wines.
Local chefs have such an enviable head start that one would think they couldn't miss.
Well, some do, mostly by gilding the lilies with incongruous sauces and other embellishments.
But when a chef hits the mark here, the results can be sublime.
Below is a roundup of some Seattle area restaurants well worth visiting.
All exude passionate dedication to regional ingredients like salmon, ling cod, Dungeness crab, spot prawns, Olympia oysters, venison and local mushrooms.
Oriental influences are increasingly common, and rarely does one encounter cream-and-butter sauces in this health-conscious corner of the nation.
Dahlia Lounge
On fog-dampened week nights in autumn, downtown Seattle is not exactly a Mardi gras, yet the scene is always spirited at this stylish four-year-old establishment that serves bold (and occasionally bizarre) new American cuisine.
The setting is provocative: soaring ceilings, vermilion walls, vintage neon, illuminated papier-mache fish and flower-patterned banquettes.
For all the action in the dining room, it never gets distractingly loud.
Dahlia Lounge is a husband-wife effort, with Tom Douglas running the kitchen and Jackie Cross tending to the guests.
Mr.
Douglas seems to be an inveterate experimenter.
And just as many of Thomas Edison's early light bulbs probably shattered in his face, so do some of the chef's concoctions.
Why, for example, would anyone take a classic pasta puttanesca, with garlic, olives and tomatoes, and lay over it big slices of rare-seared tuna?
It's like adding wings to a Mercedes.
A supposedly crisp-skinned garlic duck was not crispy, but rather covered with acrid burned garlic.
Green bean risotto seemed like a fine idea, but it wasn't when the beans were served untrimmed and raw.
Those exceptions aside, one can have a perfectly satisfying evening at Dahlia Lounge by cruising in the middle of the road with dishes like butternut squash soup; sauteed Alaskan spot prawns with Provencal herbs; grilled Alaska king salmon with ginger-sake butter, and grilled rosemary lamb chops with smoked-tomato ratatouille.
Kaspar's
In Seattle, the options for waterfront dining are diverse.
One of the more imaginative spots is Kaspar's, a semicasual restaurant atop an office building overlooking the shipyards of Elliott Bay.
Kaspar Donier, the chef-owner, is Swiss-born, but he wears his zeal for Northwest products on his sleeve.
Nancy Donier, his wife, is a welcoming and earnest hostess.
Mr.
Donier offers two menus: one featuring his signature dishes, another with nightly specials.
On a recent evening one special was exceptionally light ravioli filled with sweet rock prawns and spinach, all in a refreshingly light lemon sauce.
His shellfish and wild rice chowder, from the regular menu, was creamy and delightfully briny, overflowing with mussels, scallops and clams.
Firm, fresh gnocchi was the richest appetizer, as the dumplings were paired with artichoke hearts and napped in a rich, tasty Gruyere-flavored sauce.
Only the Dungeness crab hash went unfinished for lack of seasoning.
Three signature main courses are good bets: rare-cooked king salmon under a latticework of crunchy fried potatoes, braised lamb shank with garlic and rosemary sauce, and bouillabaisse built on a sturdy fish stock with the addition of lentils.
Kaspar's has a good selection of Northwest wines at average prices.
As for desserts, let the chef put together an assortment -- plum tart with cardamom-and-rum ice cream; pecan-and-sweet-potato pie with Grand Marnier cream, and ripe-fruit sorbets are among the choices.
Wild Ginger
If you want to know what East-meets-West cooking is all about, Wild Ginger is the place to find out.
The creation of the young, soft-spoken owner, Rick Yoder, who spent several years in Southeast Asia filling his cognitive shopping cart with ideas, this is perhaps the most provocative, and fun, restaurant in Seattle.
The big open dining room with cream-tinted walls, dramatic lighting and high-backed wooden booths is both casual and formal.
A mahogany satay bar is a wonderful spot for a quick snack or multicourse tasting.
All three satays sampled were arresting: pork basted with coconut milk and served with a complex hot sauce; large prawns in an Indonesian-style marinade of garlic, galangal (a type of ginger), chili and coconut, and a simple but delicious plate of grilled, garlic-infused Chinese eggplant.
Choosing wines to match these exotic flavors is a challenge.
High acid sauvignon blancs and chenin blancs work well, as do some beers.
Main courses to try include sweet-hot black-pepper scallops with a soy and rice-wine dipping sauce; roasted duck seasoned with cinnamon and star anise and served with steamed buns that are used to make little sandwiches, and any of the noodle dishes.
The steamed Chilean sea bass with shallot sauce, recommended by the waiter, lacked pizazz compared with the other dishes.
Wild Ginger offers impressive daily vegetarian specials, something that is much in demand in this part of the country.
Szmania's
This smart-looking, friendly spot in the residential village of Magnolia, about 15 minutes from downtown Seattle, typifies the trend for top chefs to move from the city to outlying areas.
The dining room is cheerful and bright, with lots of blond wood, colorful local art and a horseshoe-shaped dining bar.
The strapping German-born chef and owner, Ludger Szmania (SMAHN-yah), was previously chef at the highly regarded Four Seasons Olympic Hotel.
His menu defies description -- a little Pacific Northwest, a little Oriental, some German and Mexican thrown in for good measure.
Yet his mastery of blending flavors is immediately evident.
At lunch you can start with nicely browned Dungeness crab cakes with a roasted-pepper aioli, grilled Oriental chicken salad with a sprightly ginger-sesame dressing or a tortilla salad with spicy seafood and roasted peppers.
Main courses include tasty smoked mozzarella ravioli in a simple but pleasing fresh tomato sauce or perfectly roasted monkfish under a lid of homemade potato chips with a light chanterelle cream sauce.
The signature dessert is Magnolia dream cake, a stratified indulgence of peanut butter cream, chocolate cake and chocolate mousse.
The Herbfarm
What began as a backyard herb garden selling at a roadside stand in this gloriously rustic area about 30 minutes east of Seattle has evolved into a leafy wonderland and one of the best restaurants in the Pacific Northwest.
It is also highly sought after, with an extremely restrictive reservations policy (see listing on page 6).
The Herbfarm is open Friday, Saturday and Sunday only.
A visit to The Herbfarm can be much more than an extraordinary meal.
It also includes a tour of the magnificent, meticulously cultivated theme gardens -- 17 in all, covering 6 acres -- and kitchen garden.
In addition, guests are given talks on the food's provenance and preparation by the owners and the chef during the nine-course tasting meal (there is only one menu, which changes weekly), and samplings of greenery that you never suspected were suitable for two-legged species.
A recent dinner in the enchanting cottage that houses the restaurant, which seats only 32, started with a glass of dry 1988 Argyle Oregon Brut topped with sprigs of lemon verbena.
"You will notice that the herb gives the sparkling wine a wonderful aroma, but it does not affect the flavor at all," explained Ron Zimmerman, who owns the restaurant along with his wife, Carrie Van Dyck.
The table was set with name cards atop mini-pumpkins, elegant silver and stemware and an arrangement of wildflowers and herbs.
Each course is prepared in an open kitchen by the chef, Jerry Traunfeld, with detailed explanations of each ingredient.
"During the evening you will be served many strange and different flowers," he said.
"And all are edible unless we say otherwise."
The first course was an aromatic tart of wild boletus mushrooms from southern Alaska, onions and marjoram, along with nasturtiums stuffed with nasturtium capers, and tiny Olympia oysters.
From there it got exotic: a briny combination of Dungeness crab-and-fennel dumplings, Whidbey Island mussels, Pacific spot prawns and wild cauliflower mushrooms; little pumpkins containing pumpkin gnocchi with chanterelles and sage under shavings of a local sheep's-milk cheese, and herb-smoked wild king salmon ("Line caught," Mr. Traunfeld assured us) with beet and arugula sauces.
The show went on at a blissfully slow pace -- more than three hours -- as we reveled in herb-encrusted local lamb with a ginger and coriander sauce, a magnificent salad of wild greens and flowers, a splendid apple souffle and apple-caramel ice cream.Five Pacific Northwest wines accompanied the meal, which concluded with a vibrant 1927 Madeira.
All of this luxury comes at a price: dinner came to $115 a person with wine; the six-course lunch is $50. page 6, sub head only  SAMPLING A SPIRITED DINING SCENE
Prices given below, with the exception of The Herbfarm, include a glass of house wine.
Dahlia Lounge, 1904 Fourth Avenue, Seattle, (206) 682-4142.
Dinner is $30 a person.
Lunch is served Monday to Friday; dinner, Monday to Sunday.
Kaspar's, 2701 First Avenue, Seattle, (206) 441-4805.
Dinner, at $30 to $35 a person, is served Monday to Saturday.
Wild Ginger, 1400 Western Avenue, Seattle, (206) 623-4450.
Dinner, at $25 to $35 a person, is served daily; lunch, Monday to Saturday.
Szmania's, 3321 West McGraw, Magnolia Village, Seattle, (206) 284-7305.
Dinner comes to $30 to $35 a person.
Lunch is served Tuesday to Saturday; dinner, Tuesday to Sunday.
The Herbfarm, 32804 Issaquah-Fall City Road, Fall City, Wash., (206) 784-2222.
Prix fixe dinner is $115 to $120 a person with five wines; lunch is $50, without wine.
The restaurant, which closes in March, is open three days a week, usually serving lunch one weekend, dinner the next (the kitchen serves only one meal a day).
Lunch is served Friday, Saturday, Sunday; dinner, Friday and Saturday.
Reservations can be made only on one of two call-in days a year -- this year April 6 and a Wednesday in August, as yet undetermined; any remaining seats may be reserved Fridays at 1 P.M. for the following weekend.
A 50 percent deposit -- or your credit card number -- is required.


With No. 1 Door Ajar, Kentucky Puts a Foot In
Kentucky 78, Louisville 70
Tony Delk scored 19 points and Andre Riddick added 15 as No. 2 Kentucky staked its claim to No. 1 with a 78-70 season-opening victory over No. 7 Louisville yesterday in Lexington, Ky.


Selina Peyser And David Lamb
Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick M. Peyser Jr. of Vero Beach, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter Selina Wilma Peyser to David Coleman Lamb, a son of Sheila Keating Lamb of Stonington, Conn., and Jerry C. Lamb of Groton, Conn.
A January wedding is planned.
Miss Peyser, 30, graduated from Williams College.
She is the president of Calypso Cowboy, a sportswear and home furnishings retail company, and the general manager of Island Wash, a design and fabric-finishing consulting company, both in Darien, Conn.
Her father, now retired, was the managing partner of Hallgarten &amp; Company, an investment banking firm in New York now known as Moseley, Hallgarten, Estabrook &amp; Weeden.


Patricia Burns, Frederick Evans
Patricia Ellen Burns, the owner of Pepper's Pantry, a home catering service in Princeton, N.J., was married on Friday to Dr.
Frederick John Evans, a psychologist.
The nondenominational ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Dr.
Thomas Baker, a Presbyterian minister, at the Princeton Theological Seminary.
Ms.
Burns, 36, is keeping her name.
She is also a freelance researcher.
She is a daughter of Mary Burns Corcoran of Lawrenceville, N.J., and the late Daniel F. Burns.


THE NATION: The American Strike; An Airline Union Wins One
FOR all the talk of the shriveling muscle of labor unions, the strike by flight attendants at American Airlines underscored one enduring reality of business: it is difficult to operate without workers.
If only half of the 21,000 flight attendants had walked the picket line, as the company initially anticipated, American might well have weathered the strike.
But the actual number was far higher -- the union claims it exceeded 90 percent.


SURFACING
TELEVISION  Jon Stewart: With his month-old talk show on MTV becoming one of the network's hottest programs, this antic comedian may displace Conan O'Brien as television's coolest young host.
Mr.
Stewart, in his version of a Calvin Klein advertisement, above.
MARKETING  A poison pen: There's plenty of potent imagery in the world of hip-hop; still, a promotion for "Lethal Injection," Ice Cube's new album, was riveting: a pen in the shape of a hypodermic syringe.
FASHION  "Closed circuit" couture: Taking a cue from professional boxing, a number of Paris haute couture shows in January will be broadcast into several American sites, including the Metropolitan Museum of Art but not any Irish pubs.
Admission: $500 a day.


A Very British Thing
To the Editor:
In reference to Rick Marin's article on the "The Remains of the Day" complex, it should be noted that Stevens, the character Anthony Hopkins portrays, is an English butler of Victorian values whose father was a butler.


At Work; Accounting for the Uncountable
ECONOMIC indicators may help investors gauge the health of the economy but the typical indicator doesn't have a lot of soul.
It doesn't tell us, for example, why, if layoffs line the road to recovery, the recovery still looks like Oz off in the distance.
Or why George Bush got skewered on the economy thing last election, when the economy thing was in an upturn.
Or why, if unemployment has fallen, 1.9 million jobs have been created in the last two-and-a-half years and the economy is starting to look like a rosy-fingered dawn, consumer confidence is hunkered down lower than an economist's navel.
The fault, according to Greg Tarpinian, is not in our moods but our numbers.
Or in at least one number, unemployment, the principal measure of the state of the labor market.
Mr.
Tarpinian, executive director of the Labor Research Association in New York, contends that the unemployment figures released monthly by the Government don't tell the full story of the current wistful relationship between Americans and employment.
So he invented a new indicator, the Job Opportunity Barometer, or -- just to cue your memory -- the JOB.


A Prince Is a Prince Is . . .
WHEN the national rock press openly questioned Prince's sanity this year, his fans in Minneapolis offered a more benign diagnosis of their hometown hero.
Prince wasn't truly mad, many opined; he'd probably just gone "shack wacky."
The malady, brought on by prolonged indoor exposure during the region's cruel five-month winter, is traditionally diagnosed when Minnesotans do peculiar things after the snow finally starts to melt.
What but an attack of shack wackiness, locals figured, could possibly explain Prince's decision late last winter to break up his band, retire from studio recording and change his name to an unpronounceable pictograph that resembles intertwined male and female symbols?


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
P.S.A.L.
FORT HAMILTON CLAIMS BACK-TO-BACK TITLES: Usually, a coach's first championship holds a special place in his heart.
But to Fort Hamilton Coach Vincent Laino, who guided his Tigers to their second consecutive Public Schools Athletic League B title yesterday when they defeated Flushing, 40-14, at Midwood field, the second one was more thrilling and rewarding than the first.
"This time it was a little sweeter because it was a lot harder to accomplish," Laino said of his 10-0 team.
"Every week we had to battle teams that gave us their best game."


Artful


Jill D. Breslow, George A. Wells
Jill Dana Breslow, the daughter of Alvin and Lila Breslow of Fresh Meadows, Queens, was married there last evening to George Alvin Wells, a son of Robert and Evelyn Wells of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Jerome Berkowitz performed the ceremony at the Fresh Meadows Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Wells, a cum laude graduate of Brandeis University, is an account representative at Jessica McClintock Inc., a dress manufacturer in New York.
Her father, now retired, was the vice president and national sales manager for Metaco Ltd. in New York, a manufacturer of men's outerwear.
Her mother is a teacher's assistant at Public School 209 in Whitestone, Queens.


Let's Give Kennedy Credit for Peace Corps
To the Editor:
"From Man to Myth to Martyr" (The Week in Review, Nov. 21) by Tom Wicker, about the image of John F. Kennedy, might well have included some reference to the Peace Corps.
Most Americans who make any specific response when asked what they regard as the positive contributions of the Kennedy Administration will mention the Peace Corps.


Sweet Bay Scallops For Holiday Soirees
BAY scallops from Peconic Bay on Long Island and Nantucket Bay in Massachusetts are in fairly good supply this year.
They are rather expensive and therefore more suitable for special holiday occasions.
Their slightly briny sweetness and manageable size make them excellent to use in a variety of dishes.
These are not tiny scallops.
They are usually around an inch in diameter, so they retain a certain appealing succulence when cooked.
If they are not available, it is better to substitute sea scallops, quartered, than to use the smaller calico scallops.


Furor Over Rollins Revives Images of Acumen and Loose Lip
Edward J. Rollins's reputation as a canny political manager may have been restored in Christine Todd Whitman's upset victory in the race for Governor of New Jersey.
But so was his reputation as a political workhorse who regularly says things that injure and infuriate his employers, often to the public indignation and private delight of their Democratic opponents.
Political consultants who have worked with and against Mr.
Rollins say that the election of Mrs.
Whitman and the weeks of controversy that followed his statement about payments to black ministers show the 51-year-old Republican has a golden touch at politics but a tin ear for the effect of what he sometimes says.


Harassment Ruling Leaves a Puzzle for Bosses; Short Is Beautiful
To the Editor:
In "Fast-Food Justice" (Op-Ed, Nov. 16), Jeffrey Rosen displays a misunderstanding of the Supreme Court's history, its role in our legal system and the basics of good legal writing.
"Short, polemical and hastily written" he calls the Court's Nov. 9 sexual harassment decision, adding: "it reads like the worst sort of opinion journalism." This is nonsense.
In the sexual harassment decision, the Justices narrowly decided the case before them on its facts.
They did not attempt to announce a lengthy legal code that would cover all forms of sexual harassment.
Such an approach would have been unfair to victims of harassment and to employers in future cases.


High Court Set to Hear Airline Appeal of Fee Case
In a case closely watched by both the airline industry and the nation's cities, the Supreme Court is scheduled to hear arguments on Monday about how much an airport can charge planes for landing.
Seven airlines sued the Kent County International Airport, outside Grand Rapids, Mich., which raised its landing fees by 50 percent in January 1992.
The airport, which has about 150 commercial takeoffs and landings a day by airliners as big as a Boeing 747, charges the airlines $1.15 for each 1,000 pounds of gross landing weight.
The landing fee for a Boeing 747 carrying an average load is about $600.


Gauging Weatherstripping's Economy and Durability
SHOPPING for weatherstripping can be confusing.
First, it is important to realize that the presence or absence of weatherstripping will probably not greatly affect energy bills unless one lives in a small house having many large windows and doors.
But weatherstripping does stop drafts.
A homeowner may be able to lower the thermostat, and windows may develop less inside fog or frost.
Also, because weatherstripping is subject to wear and tear, most types eventually deteriorate.


Laura Feigin And Barry Levine
Laura Beth Feigin and Barry William Levine were married last Sunday in Washington, where she is an associate and he is a partner in the law firm of Dickstein, Shapiro &amp; Morin.
Rabbi Jeffrey A. Wohlberg officiated at the Hay-Adams Hotel.
The bride is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Simeon L. Feigin of White Plains.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brown University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a master's degree in English literature from Columbia University and a law degree from Stanford University.


Music, Words, Drugs And Truth
NAMES: Michael Franti (photo, right) and Hal Willner (left).
IDENTITIES: Mr.
Franti, 26, is the lead singer of the hip-hop duo the Disposable Heroes of Hiphoprisy.
Mr.
Willner, 37, is a music producer who did the music for Robert Altman's newest film, "Short Cuts."


Ms. Stewart, Mr. Lawrence
Andrea Marie Stewart, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joe J. Stewart of Akron, Ohio, and Gerald Lawrence Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Lawrence of Garden City, L.I., are planning a January wedding.
Ms.
Stewart, 28, graduated from the University of Virginia, and she and her fiance received law degrees from Villanova University.
She is a lawyer for the mid-Atlantic regional counsel of the Internal Revenue Service in Philadelphia.
Her father is the president and chief operating officer of the Babcock &amp; Wilcox Company, a manufacturer of power-generating equipment in Barberton, Ohio.


HARD SELL
Diane Keaton lays it on pretty thick: "The humiliating aspect of seducing people, rich and poor, into buying something they don't want and more than likely don't need. . . ." Well, welcome to Advertising 101.


F.Y.I.
The Summoner's Tale
Q.
For years I have received jury duty notices from Norman Goodman, County Clerk.
Is there really such a person?
How is one chosen for this job?


Let 'Er Rip
There's a lot of money in the health care system," President Clinton said in criticism of the insurance industry, "that doesn't have a rip to do with health care."
What's a rip?


The Class Discrepancy In New York Services
To the Editor:
Reading Jane Fritsch's essay, "My Day in Taxi Court," Oct. 31, I was reminded of my similar success with the Taxi and Limousine Commission.
Like her, I was afforded prompt, courteous service.
But let's face it, taxi court is for the privileged.
The poor can't afford righteous indignation over a taxi infraction.
The class discrepancy in city services was made clear to me recently when I posted bail for a friend at Riker's Island.


Ward Keeps Seminoles' Dream Alive
They had pleaded for this chance ever since that long afternoon at Notre Dame Stadium two weeks ago, when Florida State's season was transformed from a coronation to a complex and bitter electoral process.
All the Florida State Seminoles had to do was wade through the Swamp, where Steve Spurrier's Florida Gators had never lost in his 23 games as their coach, to earn a second chance at the national championship.
Florida State was accomplishing all of that, limiting the Gators beyond its expectations, until Spurrier's Swamp suddenly became dangerous.


Jeffrey Schaffer, Laura Zeligman
Laura Ann Zeligman, the daughter of Linda and Jerry Zeligman of East Rockaway, L.I., was married last evening to Jeffrey Andrew Schaffer, a son of Ann and Mel Schaffer of South Orange, N.J.
Rabbi Jehiel Orenstein officiated at Temple Emanuel in Kings Point, L.I.
Mrs.
Schaffer, 25, is an associate at the New York law firm of Dewey Ballantine.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from New York University.


Ms. Lewis, Mr. Abbatemarco
Gillian Io Lewis, the daughter of Dr.
Melvin Lewis and Dr.
Dorothy Lewis of New Haven, was married yesterday evening to Luciano Abbatemarco, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donato Abbatemarco of West Hartford, Conn.
Rabbi Roy A. Rosenberg and the Rev.
Louis L. Gioia performed the interdenominational ceremony at the Rainbow Pavilion in New York.
Mrs.
Abbatemarco, 27, and her husband teach emotionally disturbed children at the Newington Children's Hospital School in East Hartford.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.
Her father is a professor of pediatrics and psychiatry at the Yale University Child Study Center in New Haven, where her mother is a clinical professor of psychiatry.
The bride's mother is also a professor of psychiatry at the New York University School of Medicine.


Roxanne Bleemer And Gregg Kam
Roxanne L. Bleemer, a controller at Sulzer USA Inc., a Swiss manufacturer of electrical equipment, was married last evening to Gregg Kam, a senior financial analyst at Unilever U.S.
Inc.
Both are certified public accountants and both work in New York.
The bride, 30, graduated from Franklin and Marshall College.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman S. Bleemer of Upper Saddle River, N.J.


A Place to Lock Up Those Bags
The garbage from the General Grant Houses that has long spilled out of high piles of bags along 125th Street will soon be placed behind locked gates on the grounds of the project.
The Housing Authority plans to fence in two areas for garbage on the 15-acre grounds of the project, which stretches from 123d Street to 125th Street from Broadway to Morningside Avenue, said Tim Sullivan, a Housing Authority spokesman.
After garbage is compacted at each of the complex's nine buildings, it will be bagged and driven to the two enclosures.


Fla. State In Hurry To Stop The Rush
That the University of Florida entered today's game against Florida State as the nation's No. 2 scoring team, averaging 42.3 points a game, didn't faze the Seminoles' defense.
"We go against No. 1 every day and we stop them in one minute," said Seminole linebacker Ken Alexander of Florida State's 44.1-points-a-game offense, which he faces in practice.
"So it shouldn't be a problem stopping No. 2, if you can stop No. 1. Right?"


LITTLE BIG PEOPLE
Thank goodness Lucinda Franks concludes her article "Little Big People" (Oct. 10) with a child-rearing anecdote from her own experience, in which she tells her son that he must clean his room simply because she said so.
Children do have rights.
That recognition is a positive change in our society.
Its corollary, that parents have responsibilities, has not changed.
Simply put, as adults we must provide for and protect our young until they are able to tend to themselves -- and, ultimately, to others -- physically, emotionally, socially, ethically and intellectually.


Lori Karcinell and Keith Webster
Lori Karcinell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Karcinell of Highland Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Keith Webster, a son of Evelyn Webster of Jersey City and the late Thomas Webster.
The Rev.
Bruce Larmon performed the Unitarian ceremony at the Coveleigh Club in Rye, N.Y.
Mrs.
Webster, 31, is a senior manager at the New York accounting firm of KPMG Peat Marwick.
She graduated from the University of Massachusetts.


Marcella Rand, John Ricciardi Jr.
Marcella Sullivan Rand, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James H. Rand 4th of Darien, Conn., was married yesterday to John Anthony Ricciardi Jr., a son of Mr.
Ricciardi Sr. of Key Biscayne, Fla., and Ruth A. Shannon of West Yarmouth, Mass.
The ceremony was performed by Bishop Alfred J. Jolson of Reykjavik, Iceland, at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Stamford, Conn.
Mrs.
Ricciardi, 23, is studying for a master's degree in social work at Columbia University.
She is a graduate of Pine Manor College.
Her father is the founder and chief executive of Kredietbank Global Management, an investment management firm in Stamford.
Her great-grandfather the late James H. Rand Jr. was the founder of the Remington Rand Corporation.


In Detroit's Despair, Mayor Sees Hope
Dennis Wayne Archer glanced out the window of his 40th-floor law office and suggested that conventional thinking about one of America's most troubled cities was wrong.
"Detroit is going to be a world-class city," he declared.
But he then acknowledged that reaching that goal, after he becomes Detroit's Mayor, would not be easy.


Frequent Fliers of the Plant World
HAVE you ever come in from a long walk through fields and woods with the dog and found both trousers and fur matted with burs, twigs and seeds?
Most of these nuisances cling tightly and it is difficult, to say the least, to get them all off.
As bothersome as these experiences are, they are simple examples of nature's seed-dispersal mechanisms.
It is one easy way for plants to get around.
The noted naturalist-author Gerald Durrell puts it this way, "Trying to de-seed yourself is one of the most frustrating tasks of a naturalist's life, but it certainly is an excellent way to collect such seeds."


CRIME
Editing a weekly newspaper in rural Maine should be a breeze.
You put in a few days covering the big news events -- layoffs at the lumber mill, pileups on the highway, opening of ice-fishing season, hockey game at the high school -- then you knock off and go skiing.
Right?
Not the way Gerry Boyle tells it in DEADLINE (North Country Press, $17.95), a bone-cracking first novel set in a gritty mill town where the snow starts falling around Labor Day and the hearts of the citizenry stay frozen all year round.
That's how it seems to Jack McMorrow, a jaded newsman who has fled New York City to edit The Androscoggin Review.
McMorrow runs into granite indifference from the town cops when his staff photographer is found floating in an icy canal, but he attracts plenty of rough attention when he does a little muckraking on the local paper mill.


Conversations/Christopher D. Rollins; A Recruiting Sergeant's Message: Peace or Not, the Army Wants You
IN the entryway of the armed forces recruiting office in this Northern Virginia suburb, a huge green banner with white lettering cries out for attention: "U.S. Army, We're Still Hiring."
At a time when the Pentagon is actually paying people to quit the armed services, the military is struggling to sign up new recruits largely because of an overwhelming public perception that new people are no longer needed or wanted.


Photographers Cast a Wary Eye on the Cult of Wilderness
HERE, in the three exhibitions on view at the Hudson River Museum, there lurks, if not a lifetime supply of nature, certainly more than can be comfortably ingested in a single visit.
Acting as a warning shot across the bow, so to speak, is the one encountered first, "The Visitor in the Landscape," an in-house production of 19th-century paintings and 20th-century photographs accompanied by overly Socratic legends like "Why Depict Nature?" and "Where Is the Landscape?"


Seton Hall Shoots For Higher Goals
THINK of Seton Hall University and most people think of five students dribbling a basketball down a hardwood floor.
But after a 10-year effort to upgrade the university's buildings and athletic teams, Seton Hall officials say they are ready to go head-to-head with their competition on a more cerebral level.


Clare M. Rooney, David M. Butler
Mr. and Mrs.
Francis C. Rooney Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Clare Margaret Rooney, to David Michael Butler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Glen W. Butler of Columbus, Ohio.
A January wedding is planned.
Ms.
Rooney, 28, graduated from Boston College.
She is a decorating editor at Colonial Homes, an interior-design magazine published six times a year by the Hearst Corporation, in New York.
The future bride's father is the chairman emeritus of the Melville Corporation, a retailing concern with interests in shoes, apparel and health and beauty products, in Harrison, N.Y., and the chairman and chief executive of the H. H. Brown Shoe Company, a manufacturer in Greenwich.


When Everything Is Falling Apart
To the Sports Editor:
I am writing in response to Ira Berkow's column on happenings at today's sports events ("The Sad Saga of the Paraglider," The Times, Nov. 9).
It's getting out of hand, but is anyone really surprised?
First streakers, then pitchers getting harassed and now a drop-in skydiver.
Sports, like any other cultural phenomenon, is a microcosm of the world and now is accruing the ills of its role model.


Enrique Ball and Jennifer Weinstein
Jennifer Jane Weinstein, the daughter of Bonnie and Bob Weinstein of Brooklyn, was married last evening to Enrique Ball, a son of Elba Levesque of Newton, Mass., and Carlos Ball of Boca Raton, Fla.
Rabbi Charles Lippman performed the ceremony at the Palace Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Ball, 26, is an assistant manager of advertising and promotion for Continental Cablevision in Boston.
She and her husband graduated from Clark University.
Her father is an author and journalist.
Her mother owns Bonnie &amp; Toni Jewelry, a retail store in New York.


Sign of Nostalgia At De Niro Center
Robert De Niro's TriBeCa Film Center has asked the Landmarks Preservation Commission for permission to restore a painted advertisement on the north side of its 1905 building at 375 Greenwich Street, at Franklin Street.
The center wants to repaint the large, faded, flaking Martinson's Coffee sign, apparently just for nostalgia's sake.
The application, filed in September by Peter Rosenthal, the film center's chief financial officer, says the billboard dates from the 1930's or 40's.
But a 1946 photograph of the wall shows a sign for Astor Coffee, a brand marketed by the Fischer Company, which built the building and occupied it through the 1940's.


High-Level Games
Next year passengers on Singapore Airlines' 747's will be able to watch movies, play video games and shop without leaving their seats.
The airline is installing interactive video systems in those planes starting in the third quarter of 1994.
Each seat will also have a telephone.


Bonnie McLeod, Forbes Tuttle
Bonnie Anne McLeod, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan W. McLeod of Mount Kisco, N.Y., and David Forbes Tuttle, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Forbes S. Tuttle of Syracuse, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Richard B. Martin performed the ceremony at the Larchmont (N.Y.) Avenue Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Tuttle, 31, was until recently a vice president in institutional equity sales at the Mabon Securities Corporation, a New York investment company.
She graduated cum laude from Amherst College.
Her father is a psychoanalyst in Manhattan.


Seeing a World That Darwin Saw
YESTERDAY I was an urban cog in the machine of civilization and today I am sitting on a volcano in a prehistoric land that erupted from the sea four million years ago.
I watch my 9-year-old son race dozens of brilliant Sally Lightfoot crabs over the black braided ropes of lava.
I see him pirouette with baby sea lions, I watch him inspire the trust of the curious Galapagos mockingbird until it rests its trembling body next to his trembling hand.
Last June Josh and I boarded a 60-foot motor sailer, Beagle III, and ventured into the unknown in more ways than we had imagined.
We booked onto a seven-day "family" cruise around the islands that was made up of nine strangers (four families of various parent-child combinations) who were thrown together in a living space that even honeymooners might find too intimate.
The double bunk rooms were burnished with pine trim but endowed with just enough floor space for one person to get dressed.
In the two miniature bathrooms, you could sit on the head and take a shower at the same time.
But what the handsome old yacht lacked in comfort, it made up for in funky charm.
Miraculously, the passengers, who included three boys aged 15 (a potentially disastrous situation for my much littler one) were all good-humored, adventurous folk who made Josh feel right at home.


Belinda Heckler, John Mulliken 3d
Belinda West Heckler, a daughter of John M. Heckler of Middleburg, Va., and Margaret M. O'Shaughnessy Heckler of Wellesley, Mass., was married yesterday to John Hallett Mulliken 3d, the son of Barbara H. Mulliken of Washington, and John H. Mulliken Jr., of Jupiter Island, Fla.
The Rev.
Joseph T. Lacey performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Holy Trinity Church in Washington.
Mrs.
Mulliken, 36, graduated from Dartmouth College, as did the bridegroom.
She is an actress.
The bride's mother, a lawyer and health policy consultant, represented the 10th Congressional District in Massachusetts from 1967 to 1983, was the Secretary of Health and Human Services from 1983 to 1986, and was Ambassador to Ireland from 1986 to 1989.


From Sibling Rivalry to Civil War
FREDERIC V. SALERNO, vice chairman of the Nynex Corporation, has spent the last 18 months gearing up for the fight of his career.
Shuttling between his office in White Plains and his investment bankers at Morgan Stanley, he has been poring over maps, studying demographics and using computer models to size up the competition in Nynex's New York and New England markets.
His conclusions have been sobering.


A Close Look at Welfare Recipients
IN a program aimed at saving Westchester taxpayers more than $12.5 million next year, the County Department of Social Services has begun investigating all applications for public assistance to needy single people and childless couples.
The results of the department's pilot four-month study in its White Plains district office showed that 33 percent of applications for home relief -- the county's name for aid to singles and childless couples -- were not valid, according to criteria set by the county.


NOV. 21-27: Atlanta Election; A Mayor-Elect Takes Aim at Crime
After he won election in a landslide last week, Bill Campbell, who will take over as Mayor of Atlanta in January, had a theme in his public statements: His first priority will be to make Atlanta a safer place.
This was not unrelated to why he won.
Early polls told his campaign how important the issue of crime was -- even more important than elsewhere, perhaps, because this city of 400,000 is preparing to host the 1996 Summer Olympics while pondering 1992 F.B.I.  statistics placing it in the lead in violent crimes among cities of its size.
Although the bureau found an overall 8.4 percent decrease in the city's crime rate in 1992, the number of homicides, rapes, robberies and assaults put it ahead of Miami, Newark, Tampa and St.
Louis.


The Red Ribbon Of AIDS Awareness
THE United States Postal Service is issuing an AIDS awareness stamp on Wednesday, which the American Association for World Health has designated World AIDS Day.
The 29-cent stamp, in a vertical format, shows the loop of red ribbon that has become a symbol of AIDS awareness.
And to encourage research about the disease and better care for its sufferers, the Postal Service will let nonprofit groups use the stamp design for promotional purposes, on things like printed material, T-shirts and mugs, without paying any licensing fees.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
PACINO'S DOUBLE PLAY
Al Pacino has settled in at the Rich Forum in Stamford, starring in two plays produced jointly by the Stamford Center for the Arts and Long Wharf Theater in New Haven.
He will portray Herod in Oscar Wilde's "Salome," and Harry Levine, a struggling New York novelist, in Ira Lewis's "Chinese Coffee." Subscribers to both plays will receive tickets to special screenings of a documentary made during the 1979 Broadway production of Shakespeare's "Richard III," in which Mr.
Pacino had the title role.


Grumpy in Nebraska
To the Editor:
Perhaps it is because of my extreme dislike of stereotypes or merely that I am grumpy from sitting around talking about corn and taxes, but I am compelled to respond to William Hauptman's assertions about Nebraskans in his review of "Strange Angels," by Jonis Agee (Oct. 17).
Please inform Mr.
Hauptman and your readers that conversations in Nebraska consist of a variety of subjects (including personal ones) and that the "people on the Great Plains" are as diverse as people anywhere else.
Some of us even subscribe to (and discuss!) The New York Times.
Imagine that.
J.
A.
VERNON  Elkhorn, Neb.


Violently Obsessed With Art
GHOSTS By John Banville. 245 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $21.


Seeking After Truth In Times of Scarcity
WITH the anointing last week of Harold E. Varmus as director of the National Institutes of Health, the organization that is the breath and blood of biomedical research in America, many scientists dared to fantasize that a sunnier and more abundant era might finally be upon them.
Yet some researchers say that even with his radiant scientific credentials, his Nobel prize and his forceful and persistent personality, Dr.
Varmus has scant hope of reviving the grand old days of government largess and unbounded freedom that made him and his peers in the upper scientific strata what they are today.


Having to Say Your Sorry
The apology game is a crap shoot.
The United States Government apologized, eventually, to Japanese Americans for locking them up in internment camps, but not to American Indians for killing most of them.
The United States apologized to some Navajo uranium miners (mining uranium is not such a good job to have), and to victims of atomic-bomb tests, but not, certainly not, to the victims of the wartime atomic-bomb explosions.
You see, Japan won't apologize for Pearl Harbor, either.
Most recently the House and Senate approved a formal apology to native Hawaiians.
Hard as it may be to believe, the United States engineered the overthrow of the monarchy of Queen Liliuokalani 100 years ago.


Burmese Ease Red Tape To Lure Travelers
AFTER years of self-imposed isolation, the Government of Myanmar is inviting foreign travelers -- and their hard currency -- to return to a nation blessed with some of the most wondrous sights in Southeast Asia.
Myanmar, better known to the outside world by its colonial name, Burma, has dramatically eased visa restrictions that once frustrated all but the most determined and adventurous travelers.


The Executive Life; Cultivating the Spirit Of a Rational Manager
ON a Sunday morning not long ago, a meeting room at the Sunnyvale Presbyterian Church in Northern California was filled with 50 businesspeople drawn by a discussion prepared just for them: "The Fear of Failure."
The texts were from Galatians and I John, but the leader, the Rev.
Roy O'Shaunessey, the church's assistant pastor, knew that the real story was Silicon Valley itself.
"What I felt from that room," he said, "was this feeling that, 'Hey, is all of this worth it?' They were searching for a balance."


You Don't Miss Bridgeport Until the Well Runs Dry
The rich are different from you and me: they have no water.
At least that's true in Greenwich, Conn.
Fortunately, nearby water-rich Bridgeport has a severe money shortage.
And yet, despite the perfect coalescence of supply and demand, no deal has yet been struck.


A Rough Day for All Manner of Birds


China Frees 2 Elderly Bishops
As President Jiang Zemin traveled to Seattle this month to meet with President Clinton for a tough discussion on human rights, the conventional wisdom was that China would not release any of its political prisoners as a concessionary move.
But now, Western officials and human rights activists say they have confirmed that two elderly Roman Catholic bishops, one of them paralyzed and severely ailing, were released on Nov. 19 after three years in prison-like conditions.
They have returned to their homes in Xushui County in Hebei Province, church officials in Hong Kong said.


Choral Performances Herald Holiday Season
THE holiday season is fast approaching and so are the choral programs that normally dot the concert landscape in December.
Handel's "Messiah" leads the way, of course, and on Saturday evening at 8 audiences can choose among performances by the New Haven Chorale and Orchestra New England at Battell Chapel (call 934-8863 for reservations), the Hartford Chorale and Symphony at the Bushnell (246-6807) or the Waterbury Chorale in the Church of St.
John's on the Green (754-3116).
For ambitious folk who would prefer to sing the oratorio (Dec. 22 at St. Peter's Church), the group's music director, James Humphreville, has opened the Danbury Concert Chorus to anyone willing to attend all four Tuesday night rehearsals, beginning at 7:30 the day after tomorrow at the Danbury Music Center.
Singers are asked to bring their own music, if they have it, or they may call 748-1716 for copies of any extra scores.


Bringing Out the Works of So-Called 'Outsiders'
SINCE a halfway adequate review of "Dream Singers, Storytellers: An African-American Presence" would be as long as the show's 238-page catalogue, this can be no more than a notification.
To begin with the nuts and bolts: the spectacle celebrating the "sister-state" agreement between New Jersey and the Fukui prefecture in Japan is now on view here, at the State Museum, where it was organized by the assistant curator, Alison Weld.
Its debut, however, took place last year in Japan -- hence the bilingual catalogue.
As explained in the foreward, the project seeks to reconcile differences between the two countries, on the assumption that art is a universal language.
Be that as it may, viewers in a homogeneous culture like Japan's may have had trouble grasping the nuances of an African tradition modified by three centuries of subjugation and one of relative freedom.


Pious Need Not Apply
There were surprisingly few demurrers last Sunday when a leading historian of American religion accused major universities of discriminating against scholarship that reflects religious perspectives, especially traditional Christian ones.
Addressing the American Academy of Religion in Washington, George M. Marsden said he had seen applications for jobs or for graduate admission "dismissed out of hand because applicants revealed a Christian motivation for their work."


One Way to Be Remembered
Fred Merkle, a Giants first baseman, fails just once to run to a base in 1908 and is remembered forever as Bonehead Merkle.
Roy Riegels, a California center, picks up one Georgia Tech fumble and runs 69 yards toward his own goal in the 1929 Rose Bowl and goes to his death as Wrong-way Riegels.
Question: How many lunkhead plays does Leon Lett have to pull before he gets a nickname worthy of his lapses?


Leaping Rabbits, Dancing Cranes And Lithe Irises
ONE OF THE MORE ROMANTIC legends of Japanese folklore tells of Tanabata, a young princess, known since ancient times as the weaver of the skies and the patron deity of the craft.
According to the tale, one day Tanabata's father grew angry with her and her husband, Kengyu, and separated them by sending him across the Milky Way.
When the birds of the air realized how forlorn the loving couple were, they took pity on them and created a bridge with their wings to reunite them for one day each year.
The story, celebrated in Japan annually on the seventh day of the seventh month by a festival of feasting and fireworks, lies at the heart of an exhibition at the Textile Museum, "Beyond the Tanabata Bridge: A Textile Journey in Japan." The show makes clear that women weavers were an integral part of Japan's past and its folklore.
It will be at the museum, which is near Embassy Row, through Feb. 27.


Cuban Defectors Reach 32
The number of Cubans defecting during regional athletic championships here increased to 32 tonight, Cuban delegation members said.
The athletes were among the 931-member Cuban delegation participating in the Central American and Caribbean Games, which end Tuesday.
Lino Elias Ocana and Emilio Lara Rodriguez, both gold-medal winning weight lifters, were among at least nine athletes and officials who escaped Cuban security to defect today, according to a small Cuban exile group helping house the defectors.
Lara Rodriguez is the brother of Pablo Lara, who broke the world record Thursday in the 167-pound division by lifting 451 pounds.
Pablo Lara flew home today.


Elizabeth Worrell, David J. Carroll
Elizabeth DeWitt Worrell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard D. Worrell of Providence, R.I., was married there yesterday to David Joseph Carroll, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter H. Carroll of Hanover, Mass.
The Rev.
J.
Daniel Burke performed the ceremony at St.
Martin's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Carroll, 25, is a teacher at Bright Horizons Day Care Center in Boston.
She graduated from Skidmore College.


Mutual Funds; 'Rights Offerings' at Wrong Time?
THE rage among closed-end funds to raise capital has intensified.
Using "rights offerings," in which investors are invited to buy additional shares at discounted prices, 31 funds have raised money through mid-November this year and three more are in the process.
That will be more than twice the 16 offerings that came to market last year and more than eight times as many as in 1991.


Whatever Happened to AIDS?
I have come to the realization that I will almost certainly die of AIDS.
I have wavered on that point.
When the disease was first diagnosed in early 1991, I was sure I would die - and soon.
I was facing brain surgery; the surgeons discovered an infection often fates in four months.
I would shortly develop pheumonia, than blood clots.
I was hospitalized four times over five months.
But by the end of that year, I thought differently.
My health rebounded, almost certainly because of AZT.
I was doing so well; I really might beat it.
Now, it is clear I will not.
You can beat the statistics only so long.
Mt T-cell count, which was only 2 when I got my diagnosis, has never gone above 30 - a dangerously low level.
I have lived longer than the median survival time by 10 months.
The treatments simply are not there.
They are not even in the pipeline.
A miracle is possible, of course.
And for a long time, I though one would happen.
But let's face it, a miracle isn't going to happen.
One day soon I will simply become one of the 90 people in America to die that day of AIDS.
It's like knowing I will be killed by a speeding car, but not knowing when or where.
I used to be an exception in my H.I.V. support group, the only one of its eight members who was not merely infected with the virus but who had advanced to full-blown AIDS.
Now, just a year and a half later, the exception in my group is the one person who does not have AIDS.
All the rest of us have deteriorated with the hallmarks of the disease -- a seizure, Kaposi's sarcoma, pneumonia.
Our weekly meetings simmer with desperation: We are getting sicker.
I am getting sicker.
Time is running out.
Once AIDS was a hot topic in America -- promising treatments on the horizon, intense media interest, a political battlefield.
Now, 12 years after it was first recognized as a new disease, AIDS has become normalized, part of the landscape.
It is at once everywhere and nowhere, the leading cause of death among young men nationwide, but little threat to the core of American political power, the white heterosexual suburbanite.
No cure or vaccine is in sight.
And what small treatment advances had been won are now crumbling.
The world is moving on, uncaring, frustrated and bored, leaving by the roadside those of us who are infected and who can't help but wonder: Whatever happened to AIDS?
As a journalist who has written about this disease for five years, and as a patient who has had it for nearly as long, I went out looking for answers.
THE DISEASE AND THE DOCTORS DR.
ANTHONY S. FAUCI SPEAKS WITH A HINT of a Brooklyn accent, which is out of sync with the elegance of his appearance -- well tailored, tidy, trim.
At 52, he is scientist-cum-celebrity, ridiculed by Larry Kramer in the play "The Destiny of Me," lionized by George Bush in the 1988 Presidential debate as a hero.
Being the Government's point man on AIDS has made Tony Fauci (rhymes with OUCH-ee) famous.
He professes to be solely the scientist.
But in fact, he is very much the star and the politician, one year defending modest Reagan-Bush AIDS budget proposals as adequate, the next defending generous Clinton proposals as necessary.
He is the activist's enemy -- "Murderer!" Kramer once called him in an essay published in The Village Voice.
He is the activist's friend, a comrade in arms, showing up last October at the opening of the Kramer play wearing a red AIDS ribbon.
Fauci's starring AIDS role comes from the many hats he wears -- among them director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and director of the National Institutes of Health's Office of AIDS Research.
"Fauci deserves a lot of the blame for where we are on AIDS," said Peter Staley of TAG, the activist Treatment Action Group.
But others say that is not fair.
"You can't blame any one person," said Gregg Gonsalves, who wrote TAG's report on the status of AIDS research.
"We've gotten to the edge of a scientific cliff."
Whatever Fauci's faults, I have never doubted his commitment.
Still, he is the face of the AIDS scientific community, and 12 years into the disease there are only temporary treatments that work for a few years at most.
AIDS remains a fatal illness.
Approximately a million Americans are believed to be infected with the human immunodeficiency virus, the key component of AIDS, and virtually all of them are expected to develop the disease eventually.
Close to half a million Americans are expected to have full-blown AIDS by the end of next year; more than 200,000 have already died.
Roughly 350,000 will have died by the end of 1994.
The World Health Organization puts the number infected worldwide at more than 13 million adults and an additional 1 million or more children.
So far, the only treatments are nucleoside analogues, drugs like AZT, DDC and DDI.
A fourth nucleoside analogue, D4T, is expected to be approved by the spring.
Fauci has focused national research efforts on these analogues, which slow the virus by fooling it with a decoy of genetic material it needs to reproduce.
But the analogues have problems.
They are highly toxic, and the virus, which mutates rapidly, eventually catches on to the deception.
Everyone knew going into the international AIDS conference in Berlin in June that the nucleoside analogues were of limited use, but the horrible surprise was just how limited.
A report issued just before the meeting -- the Concorde Study, conducted in England, France and Ireland -- found that, contrary to the recommendations of the United States Government, use of AZT before the onset of AIDS symptoms did not necessarily prolong life. (In an extraordinary action, a United States Government panel has since pulled back the earlier recommendation. AZT is still recommended for those with full-blown AIDS. But the panel left it for patients and their doctors to decide on earlier use.)
A subsequent Australian study, published in July, found that AZT, used early, did prolong life.
I have always felt that it has prolonged mine.
Still, what makes the fuss over AZT so stunning is not just that the drug has shortcomings -- almost everyone knew that from the start.
It is that AZT, flawed as it was, had become the Gold Standard of treatment, against which other therapies were being measured.
The chilling message of the AZT dispute is this: Things are not just failing to get better; they are getting worse.
We are losing ground.
"The fallout from Berlin has been devastating," said Martin Delaney, founding director of Project Inform, an AIDS treatment information and lobbying group.
"There were no surprises. But the risk now is that AIDS gets put up on the shelf along with a lot of other long-term unresolved problems. We lose the urgency for money and the scientific momentum." The bad news has left drug companies scrambling.
Last spring things were so desperate that a group of 15 announced they would pool research data.
Many scientists -- and activists -- are fed up with the drug companies, which seem hellbent on pursuing more nucleoside analogues when the real future of AIDS treatment probably lies with gene therapy.
The idea is to alter the genetic structure of cells to make them inhospitable to H.I.V.
But the problem is, no one knows how to translate the occasional test-tube success into a workable treatment.
In addition, most of the gene therapies are being developed by small biotechnology companies that will take years to get into full production.
So, was all the time and money spent on the nucleoside analogues wasted?
Fauci, who obviously has an investment in the answer, was emphatic that it wasn't.
"People say the Berlin meeting was so depressing, nothing's happening," Fauci said in his office overlooking the N.I.H. campus in Bethesda, Md.
"I say that's not the way science works. There are little steps, building blocks. What's important is whether you're going in the right direction, and I am convinced that we are.
"Was it grossly inappropriate to do the extensive studies of AZT and DDI?" he continued.
"No. Should we have done more with other drugs? If we had them, one could say, yes.
"Let's say a year and a half from now, nevirapine isn't working," Fauci said of an experimental drug undergoing trials in combination with the nucleoside analogues.
"Somebody's going to say, 'Why did you waste all that time with it?' But you don't know it doesn't work until you test it."
If Fauci is defensive, it may be because he is still smarting from a political bruising.
His Office of AIDS Research has been reorganized by the Clinton Administration and he has been, in effect, ousted -- done in by the AIDS activists through their Democratic friends in Congress.
And while some of his time is being diverted to playing politics, in his own laboratory research he has now returned to basics -- Square 1 -- where many AIDS researchers are working.
Fauci is studying the pathogenesis of the disease, its route through the body.
I asked him the obvious: 12 years into the disease -- shouldn't we know that already?
"More effort looking at pathogenesis might have been appropriate in retrospect," Fauci responded.
"But we were constantly being diverted -- by the activists, by Congress. It was: 'What can you give me right now? Get those drugs out there as quickly as you can.' "
Not so long ago we believed that if we just could find enough money, we could make the disease manageable, like diabetes.
But in a further sign of how little hope exists these days in the scientific community, money isn't seen as the main issue anymore.
"Certainly, there are more scientific opportunities than there are resources to fulfill them," Fauci said, echoing the views of other scientists.
"But should we dump billions into AIDS research now? I think we'd reach a point of diminishing returns."
Fauci presents a front of optimism, at least for me.
After all, there is no cure for any virus, only vaccines to prevent them -- measles is an example.
By the year 2000, he predicted, "We'll be into vaccine trials that show a vaccine is much more feasible than we thought, though we may not have the best vaccine by then."
Other scientists are unconvinced.
They point out that the rapid mutation of the AIDS virus and its many strains make development of a vaccine difficult.
"The public is frustrated; it says, 'You've been working on this for 10 years,' " said Dr.
Irvin S. Y. Chen, director of the AIDS Institute at the University of California at Los Angeles.
Chen bemoaned the lack of money for biomedical research in general, which he said was discouraging the best and the brightest from entering the field.
"We're in that in-between stage," said Dr.
Merle A. Sande, an AIDS expert at the University of California at San Francisco; he was head of the Government panel on AZT use.
"We know a lot about the virus, but we just don't seem able to translate that knowledge into significant treatment advances. It's incredibly frustrating."
Still, the frustration of the public and the scientists is nothing compared with the frustration of those of us living with AIDS or H.I.V.
Will people still be dying of AIDS in the year 2000?
Fauci didn't hesitate for a second before replying, "I don't think there's any question that will be the case." THE ACTIVISTS AND THE GOVERNMENT TIM BAILEY WAS ONE OF THE MARYS, AND THAT'S AS close to Act Up royalty as anybody can get.
The Marys are a subgroup of Act Up, the group involved in the more radical demonstrations, like disrupting services at St.
Patrick's Cathedral.
When Bailey died in June at 35, stipulating that he wanted a political funeral in Washington, Act Up was obliged to comply.
So on a drizzly Thursday at 7 A.M., two buses filled with Act Up members set out from New York.
They were to rendezvous with the body in Washington, then carry the open coffin through the streets from the Capitol to the White House.
They would show Bill Clinton the urgency of AIDS.
They would bring one of its carcasses to his doorstep.
But it was not to be.
The police would not let them march, and the day turned into a sodden fiasco, as the police and activists quarreled over the body, shoving the coffin in and out of a van parked in front of the Capitol.
The rage was there, but the organization was not.
And when the police said no, where did Act Up members run for help but the White House, the very target of their protest, getting Bob Hattoy, a White House staff member with AIDS, to intervene.
In the end, Act Up members gave up and went home, taking the body with them.
It was a perfect metaphor for the state of AIDS activism -- raging in desperate but unfocused anger, one foot on the inside, one on the outside.
The AIDS movement was built on grass-roots efforts.
Now those efforts are in disarray.
Many Act Up leaders have died.
The group's very existence was based on the belief that AIDS could be cured quickly if only enough money and effort were thrown at it -- something that now seems increasingly in doubt.
Besides, it is hard to maintain attacks against a Government that is seeking big increases in AIDS spending.
Much of the cream of Act Up has fled, forming groups like TAG and joining mainstream AIDS organizations like the Gay Men's Health Crisis and the American Foundation for AIDS Research.
Those left behind are Act Up's hard core.
Act Up was always part theater, part group therapy.
Now, sadly, Act Up is increasingly reduced to burying its dead.
To say all that is not to belittle the accomplishments of the group.
One reason for Act Up's decline is that it has got so much of what it wanted.
Act Up forced AIDS into the Presidential race, dogging candidates.
Because of Act Up the price of AZT is lower.
Drugs are approved more quickly.
Today it is a given that the communities affected by a disease have a voice, and must be consulted.
To a great extent, Act Up deserves much of the credit for the increasing political power of the entire gay rights movement.
But now even the gay movement has pushed AIDS to the sidelines.
Anyone questioning how AIDS ranks as an issue among gay groups need only look to the march on Washington on April 25.
Six years earlier, in 1987, a similar gay march had one overriding theme: AIDS.
If there was a dominant theme last April, it was homosexuals in the military.
To be sure, AIDS was an element of the march, but just an element.
Speaker after speaker ignored it.
"It's like they are waiting for us to die so they can get on with their agenda," said Dr.
Nicholas A. Rango, the director of New York State's AIDS Institute, a gay man who himself has AIDS and watched the march on C-Span from his Manhattan hospital bed.  [ He died on Nov. 10. ]
Torie Osborn, formerly executive director of the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force, argued that the shift was inevitable with the election of a Democratic President, renewed attacks from the right wing and just plain burnout.
Increasingly, many homosexuals, especially those who test negative for H.I.V., do not want a disease to be what defines their community.
"There is a deep yearning to broaden the agenda beyond AIDS," she said.
"There's a natural need for human beings who are in deep grieving to reach for a future beyond their grieving.
"It's one thing to be fighting for treatment, believing you're going to get a cure that will have everyone survive," continued Osborn, who recently buried three friends who had died of AIDS.
"But it's an incredibly depressing truth that AIDS has become part of the backdrop of gay life."
What is to some a broadening of the gay agenda, however, is to others desertion.
"It's one thing for the politicians to abandon AIDS," Kevin Frost, a TAG member, said.
"But for our own community to abandon the issue.  . . . Who brought this issue of gays in the military out in the open? A couple of flashy queers with checkbooks. Well, what about AIDS?"
What about AIDS?
Perhaps the greatest development affecting Act Up, the activist community and the entire AIDS care world is the changing face of the disease.
Homosexual sex still accounts for the majority of cases, 57 percent.
But that number is dropping, down from 61 percent in 1989.
Meanwhile, the percentage of cases tied to intravenous drug use is beginning to climb.
It is now at 23 percent, up from 21 percent in 1989.
Black and Hispanic groups are clamoring for a greater role in running AIDS care organizations.
Their intentions seem genuine -- what do gay groups know of inner-city drug use? -- but also seem driven in part by a desire for money and power.
In an age of Government cutbacks, AIDS is where the money is -- "today's equivalent of the Great Society programs of the 60's," as Rango put it.
In Washington and Houston, gay groups and black and Hispanic groups are bickering over who should control the money and the programs.
In New York, the largest AIDS care organization, the Gay Men's Health Crisis, is trying valiantly to be all things to all constituencies -- it contributed $25,000 to the lobbying effort to allow homosexuals in the military even as it was helping to expand legal services in Harlem.
Inevitably, focus is lost.
G.M.H.C. has recently changed executive directors, as have many of the more than 3,500 AIDS organizations in the United States.
The average executive director of an AIDS service group lasts less than two years, burned out by depression and exhausted by the bickering among AIDS constituencies.
"We should be fighting the virus, not each other," said Dan Bross, the executive director of the AIDS Action Council.
"We're eating our young."
MARY FISHER, WHO ADDRESSED THE REPUBLICAN National Convention in Houston as a woman infected with H.I.V., whom I interviewed at the time and who has since become a friend, also believes the AIDS movement is adrift.
She was sitting at lunch in Manhattan with Larry Kramer, both of them bemoaning the state of AIDS activism.
"We need to agree on the goals," Fisher said.
"That's just rhetoric," Kramer shot back. "The goal is to find a cure."
Fisher sees AIDS entering a dangerous never-never land, with the day fast approaching when no one will be carrying the AIDS banner.
"The gay community is going to stop screaming," she said. "It is already stopping."
"I'm very despondent," Kramer said.
"You don't know where to yell or who to yell at. Clinton says all the right things, then doesn't do anything."
Indeed, the Clinton Administration does say all the right things, at times coming close to being patronizing about it.
"I have a real understanding that the people who feel the strongest about this, they don't have time," Carol H. Rasco, the President's top domestic policy adviser, said in defense of the zealotry of Act Up.
"When a bomb is ticking inside you, you have to keep pushing."
Where once Washington doors were closed to AIDS activists, they are now open.
Indeed, perhaps the single biggest AIDS change in Washington under the Clinton Administration has been one of tone.
AIDS sufferers are no longer treated as immoral lepers.
David Barr, director of treatment education and advocacy for the Gay Men's Health Crisis, recalled a May meeting with Donna E. Shalala, the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
"She agreed to everything we wanted," Barr said.
"I was amazed. We're so used to doing battle. But is it a ploy?"
Certainly Bill Clinton is a vast improvement over George Bush.
The President proposed a major increase in spending on AIDS research, about 20 percent, coming up with an additional $227 million.
That would raise the total N.I.H. spending on AIDS research to $1.3 billion.
In aid for outpatient care, the White House proposed a giant increase in what is known as Ryan White money, named for the Midwestern teen-ager who died of AIDS in April 1990.
The current appropriation is $348 million, which the Administration proposed to nearly double by adding $310 million.
The House didn't add the entire amount, just a $200 million increase, but it still brought the total to $548 million.
The Senate was slightly more generous, and the final appropriation was $579 million.
But is more money enough?
AIDS activists say they want leadership, but they are not sure anymore what that means.
"It was much easier," said Torie Osborn, "when we could hate George Bush and Ronald Reagan, when we thought we had evil genocidal Republican Presidents who weren't doing what needed to be done to get a cure."
Still, as is so often the case with Bill Clinton, he is a victim of his own lofty campaign rhetoric.
He spoke eloquently about AIDS in his pitches for the gay vote.
He insisted that people infected with the AIDS virus, Bob Hattoy and Elizabeth Glaser, speak at the Democratic National Convention.
On Election Night, he mentioned AIDS high in his victory speech.
It all seemed so promising.
David B. Mixner, a Clinton friend who helped rally the gay vote, exclaimed in the flush of a Clinton victory, "I believe thousands of my friends who wouldn't make it, who would die of AIDS, might make it now because Bill Clinton is President."
There it is: the man from Arkansas was to be not just President but savior.
He's not.
Bogged down early on in a battle over homosexuals in the military, Clinton has grown wary of anything that the public might perceive as a gay issue.
He delayed fulfilling his campaign pledge to name an AIDS czar, finally naming her five months into his term -- and only when the National Commission on AIDS was about to attack him for not providing leadership on the epidemic.
More than anything else, what the AIDS community wants from Bill Clinton is a sense of urgency.
Carol Rasco maintains that Clinton is committed.
"Health-care reform and AIDS are the only things I've worked on every day since I got here," said the domestic policy adviser.
But others, even in the Administration, think Clinton is doing little to help.
"Other than myself, who lives with AIDS every day, there's no one at the White House for whom this is their first-tier issue," said Bob Hattoy, who, after serving six months as a White House aide often critical of the Administration's AIDS policies, was shifted to the Interior Department.
He praised the President and Mrs.
Clinton for having "a profoundly sensitive awareness about AIDS," but at the staff level, he said, "AIDS is not on the radar screens at the White House every day." And the political advisers?
Hattoy scoffed.
"I don't think they'll address AIDS until the Perot voters start getting it." THE CZAR AND THE PRESS THERE WAS A TIME when it was thought that the solution to the AIDS crisis could be found in two words: AIDS czar.
One omnipotent public figure with the power to marshal funds, direct research, cut through the bureaucracy -- in short, to lead a Manhattan Project-size effort to force a cure for AIDS.
Kristine M. Gebbie doesn't look like a czar, and she doesn't think of herself as one, either.
At 50, she has the air of the head nurse.
There is something at once no-nonsense and fussy about her -- her erect posture, her precise and proper answers, her tendency to correct an interviewer's questions.
She is what she is -- a nurse who worked her way up through the public-health bureaucracy, a divorced mother of three children, who has willed herself to a better lot in life.
In 1978 she became the chief health officer of Oregon and then, 11 years later, the chief health officer of Washington State.
Her experience with AIDS is primarily as a bureaucrat, as chairman of the Centers for Disease Control's advisory panel on H.I.V. prevention and as a member of the National Commission on AIDS.
Now, she is the AIDS czar -- a far cry from the stellar names that AIDS activists had fantasized about: H. Norman Schwarzkopf, Jimmy Carter, C. Everett Koop.
"We wanted 'Jurassic Park,' and we got 'Snow White,' " Larry Kramer likes to say.
"The activists wanted a war on AIDS," Gebbie said, shaking her head.
"I am not one of the big names. I am someone who has struggled with systems around this epidemic since the beginning. I think I have a feel for what it takes to bring people together."
Indeed, asked to give her job description, she responded, "consensus builder."
Gebbie, whose official title is national AIDS policy coordinator, sees her job as exactly that -- coordinating the various Federal agencies like Defense and Housing and Education in terms of prevention, care and research.
Her goal is to have the agencies themselves take over the assault on AIDS, so she sees hers as a short-term job -- 3 or 5 years, "10 years tops." She expects to take no role in research other than, again, as a coordinator, but not one who independently sets priorities.
And what happened to the eagerly awaited Manhattan Project?
"Manhattan Project?" Gebbie said.
Gebbie advocates distributing condoms to sexually active teen-agers, though not necessarily in the schools.
She supports supplying clean needles to drug addicts.
She backs "in extreme cases and only as a very last resort" the isolation of people infected with H.I.V. who continue to be sexually irresponsible.
"It might be in a hospital or a group home," she said.
And she advocates, in theory, and with full civil rights protection, the reporting of names of those with H.I.V. as a public-health technique for making sure connections are made to their partners for counseling and possible treatment.
Kristine Gebbie was not at the top of the Administration's list of candidates for AIDS czar.
Most of the medical and private-sector leaders who were approached said they had withdrawn their names for personal reasons.
Yet it was clear that they did not regard the post as the all-powerful one it might have been.
"There's this contradiction," said Dr.
Mark D. Smith, a San Francisco AIDS expert who discussed the job with the Administration but eventually withdrew, "between the public perception of great responsibility and the reality of no real organizational authority."
Most of those considered said, however, that they might have taken the job as AIDS adviser to the President if Clinton himself had called to convince them.
But he didn't.
The $112,000-a-year position, which does not require Senate confirmation, was offered to Gebbie in a phone call from Rasco.
Gebbie never met the President until the morning of the June 25 news conference to announce her appointment.
To be fair, on that sunny Friday in the Rose Garden when he announced the appointment of Gebbie, the President sounded like the old Bill Clinton, the one in the campaign.
He finally did what the activists wanted -- he spoke out on AIDS as President.
He labeled the virus "one of the most dreaded and mysterious diseases humanity has ever known" and "an epidemic that has already claimed too many of our brothers and sisters, our parents and children, our friends and colleagues."
But the trouble was, no one was listening.
Newspapers and the networks reported the naming of Gebbie.
But few carried the President's comments on AIDS.
Newsweek magazine, in a week-in-the-life-of-the-President piece, didn't even mention the Gebbie announcement.
At the news conference, there was only one question on AIDS, and that was directed to Gebbie about her qualifications.
Reporters were eager to move on to the real news, like the budget and homosexuals in the military.
AIDS, it seems, had become old news.
"In the early days of AIDS, when knowledge was expanding, there were lots of very compelling things to write about," said Marlene Cimons, who covers AIDS and Federal health policy out of the Washington bureau of The Los Angeles Times.
"We were in the infant stages of making policy decisions about AIDS that had unique social and political ramifications. Now it's become harder to find angles. We've written to death most aspects of the disease: AIDS in the classroom. AIDS in the workplace. Testing. They filled the front pages. Now there's a vacuum."
Stuart Shear, a reporter for "The MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour" who covers AIDS, said the conflicts that had made for good stories -- the fights between Republican Administrations and AIDS advocates -- were gone.
"It's become a pure science story," he said.
"When it gets down to the clinical nitty-gritty, that's not what we look at. It's hard to get people to come on and complain about an Administration that's increasing funding."
For her part, Gebbie, who has a budget of just under $3 million and a staff "of four or five" -- with 15 to 20 others, she said, in another office -- seems to prefer being in the shadows.
Her office will not be in the White House but in a building across the street that houses a McDonald's.
"My guess," she said, "is that the choice of me makes clear that this isn't intended to be somebody who spends all their time outside rousing people up, but somebody who is prepared to spend a lot of time inside making it work.
"It's very clear how many people really did expect miracles," Gebbie said.
"When I give what I know are appropriate answers, I know I sound like a bureaucratic stick-in-the-mud: 'This lady is not worth two bits to us; she talks about coordination and cooperation. Blah!'
"But part of my mission," Gebbie said matter-of-factly, "is to help people keep their expectations within reality."
Gebbie needn't worry.
Expectations could hardly be lower.
"People are weary and hopeless and sad -- the researchers, the activists, the care-givers," John H. Templeton, director of AIDS educational services at Grady Memorial Hospital in Atlanta, told me.
"There is this sense that no matter what you do, it's all going to turn out the same in the end." THE PATIENT AND JOURNALIST  IN MY INTERVIEWS FOR this article and others, I always ask people with AIDS if they expect to die of the disease.
One reason for that is a genuine reporter's curiosity; the answer is part of the profile of who they are.
But I am also searching for hope for myself.
Increasingly, the answers come back the same, even from the most optimistic of Act Up zealots: Yes, we will die of AIDS.
I thought about that the other day in the emergency room at Lenox Hill Hospital.
I had taken my boyfriend there for a blood transfusion to offset the anemia caused by the chemotherapy for his Kaposi's sarcoma.
I realized on that Sunday morning in the emergency room that the moment of crisis wasn't coming tomorrow or the next day for my boyfriend.
It was here today.
And it will soon be here today for me, too.
Does that make me angry?
Yes.
I had such hope when I interviewed Bill Clinton about AIDS and gay issues for this magazine in August 1992.
He spoke so eloquently on AIDS.
I really did see him as a white knight who might save me.
How naive I was to think that one man could make that big a difference.
At its core, the problem isn't a government; it's a virus.
Still, in interviews with researchers and Administration officials, it was clear that we are talking from different planets.
I need help now, not five years from now.
Yet the urgency just wasn't there.
Compassion and concern, yes; even sympathy.
But urgency, no.
I felt alone, abandoned, cheated.
I asked Gebbie what she says to someone with AIDS -- in other words, what she says to me.
And for one brief moment, there was a glimmer of realization that delay means death.
"I say, 'I hear you and I appreciate the frustration and the sorrow and the loneliness,' " she said.
"That can sound trite, but it is genuine. It's inappropriate for me to hold out a false promise to you. It would be easy to say: 'There, there. It will be better soon.' That's a disservice, so I have to be honest with you. We don't have quick answers. I can't tell you when we're going to have a cure."
I am on the cutting edge of drug testing, in a trial at New York Hospital for a new combination therapy: AZT, DDI and nevirapine.
That is the combination that drew so much publicity last February when researchers in Boston declared that they had found the combination was effective in inhibiting the virus.
But at the Berlin conference, the formulator of the concept, Yung-Kang Chow, a Harvard medical student, reported a flaw in part of the original study.
Other researchers challenged the findings after they were unable to confirm the results.
I was surprised at how jealous many of my fellow members of the support group were when I got into the trial -- 1 of only 25 people accepted out of more than 400 applicants.
The group members felt that I had used influence.
I had not.
Yet admission to these trials is not purely luck, either -- a point driven home when a number of leading researchers called, offering to get me into one of the nevirapine trials.
I did not take them up on it.
If my doctors used influence to get me in, it was not with my knowledge.
But I am grateful if they did.
The ship is beginning to sink; the water is lapping onto the deck.
I am eager for any lifeboat, however leaky.
The letters pour in from readers who know I have AIDS, which I wrote about in this newspaper last December.
A Florida woman wrote detailing her son's agonizing death from AIDS.
Halfway through the letter, she caught herself, suddenly blurting out, "I don't know why I am writing this to you." Like so many of the letters, it was really not so much for me as for the writer, an excuse to open up her heart and let out the pain.
She ended with a line I think of often, a line as much for her dead son, also named Jeffrey, as for me.
"I intend this letter," she wrote, "as a mother's hug."
Hardly a day goes by without my getting a letter or call from someone who has the cure for AIDS.
Many are crackpots.
But others, I'm not so sure.
Perhaps I will soon be desperate enough to pursue them.
More and more of the letters are nasty, even cruel.
They are still the minority, but they make clear how deep the resentment runs against the attention given AIDS.
Am I bitter?
Increasingly, yes.
At the Act Up funeral for Bailey in Washington, I thought of how much the anger of the activists mirrored my own.
I, too, wanted to shout -- at no one really, just to vent the rage.
I am dying.
Why doesn't someone help us?
I didn't shout.
I couldn't.
All I could think about on that rainy Thursday afternoon was that a political funeral is not for me.
It is at once very noble and very tacky.
What, then, is for me?
I usually say that my epitaph is not a phrase but the body of my work.
I am writing it with each article, including this one.
But actually, there is a phrase that I want shouted at my funeral and written on the memorial cards, a phrase that captures the mix of cynicism and despair that I feel right now and that I will almost certainly take to my grave: Whatever happened to AIDS?


Abstinence Bill Passes First Key Test
Proposed legislation that would mandate that New Jersey schools teach that sexual abstinence is the best way to prevent AIDS has cleared its first legislative hurdle.
The bill, sponsored by Senator Gerald Cardinale of Demarest, passed the Senate Education Committee last week and now faces a test with an Assembly committee before it reaches the Legislature for a vote.


A Line for Stamps (and One for Cocktails)
Brooklyn Academy of Music holds a dinner at the main post office in Manhattan, Nov. 20.


A SENSE OF PLACE
IN one of my earliest memories I'm standing with my mother at the window of an apartment in Hoboken looking west and up the palisades at Union City.
My mother points toward the crest of the steep rise and says that soon we will be moving from our Hoboken apartment to a house of our own on the hill.
"Why?" I ask.


NOV. 21-27: Sending a Message; Clinton Tells Iran He Cares About Rushdie
The United States and Iran, lacking formal diplomatic relations, communicate instead through a variety of public and private channels.
One such message was sent last week when President Clinton met at the White House with Salman Rushdie, the author whose novel "The Satanic Verses" earned him a death sentence in 1989 from Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.


ROMANIA IS LINKED TO TAINTED BLOOD
Romanian blood products have been found to be one source of blood contaminated with H.I.V. that was distributed by a German company, World Health Organization officials say.
Romania's health minister has acknowledged the sale of the Romanian blood, which was bought from impoverished people in the capital.
But the officials, who gave the company special permission to sell the blood, have only said that it was contaminated with hepatitis, not with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.


Crowded School Plans to Grow, Vertically
Trinity School, a private day school on West 92d Street, is suffering a problem common in the city's public schools: overcrowding.
But because the school occupies the bottom three floors of a 29-story apartment building, it is trying an unusual solution that has stirred protests: expanding into the tenants' community room and fourth-floor recreation area.
"We are busting at the seams," said Blaine Fogg, president of the school's board of trustees.
"We have 930 kids this year in a building designed for 600. Our building is old, and we use every nook and cranny of it."


For the Meek, Earth, Maybe, but Not Victory
THERE are players whose only ambition, when faced with a higher ranked opponent, is to hang on for a draw.
Dreams of a glorious upset never enter their heads.
They are not necessarily pushovers, yet their excessive caution often prevents them from getting the counterplay that might stop the knowing opponent from taking liberties with them.
A confrontation that showed the failure of that approach was the pairing of the international master Werner Hug against the grandmaster Joel Benjamin of New York in the Switzerland-United States match in the World Team Championship in Lucerne Oct. 23-Nov. 2.
Benjamin's patient triumph went toward his achieving the four victories and two draws that gave him the highest score on the champion American team.


Effort to Control Rabies Shifts The Focus to Cats
CATS have generally enjoyed a good image.
They are clean and not much trouble to have around.
They keep the mice population down.
They can even be affectionate, if the spirit moves them.
But they are also roaming animals that can get rabies from infected raccoons they come into contact with in fields or woods, or even backyards.
When that happens, they become very dangerous animals and the picture of the neighborhood tabby is bound to acquire something of a tarnish when the state General Assembly goes into session early next year.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Palmer Loses a Skin Arnold Palmer did everything but win a skin while Fred Couples sank a 5-footer worth $90,000 yesterday in the first half of golf's Skins Game at Palm Desert, Calif.
Couples's ninth-hole birdie provided the bulk of the $150,000 he won over the front side at the Bighorn Golf Club.
But the main drama in the four-man, two-day event over 18 holes occurred one green earlier.
And it was an exercise in frustration for the 64-year-old Palmer and his legion of fans.
He misread an 8-foot putt for a birdie that would have been worth $60,000.
He did some muttering after the putt broke out of the hole, dropped his putter and then stalked after the ball, his face filled with anger.
"I won't have many chances like that. I should have made it," said Palmer, a replacement for the suspended John Daly.
Payne Stewart, who has won the last two Skins Games, gained three skins worth $60,000 while Paul Azinger came up empty. (AP)


Upheaval in the U.S. Military
The story of the Dragon Battalion offers a window into the military's world of upheaval amid troop cuts.
Soldiers and families voice concern for their careers, cherished institutions and camaraderie.
Page 24.


Business Diary: November 21-26
COMPANIES Hear That Gobbling?
It's the Nation's Paycheck Being Devoured  It all comes down to jobs.
To those without them, nothing on this page is worth a used turkey.
But let's take it a step further: What kind of jobs?
The corporate behemoths keep making mind-numbing cutbacks -- last week Warner-Lambert, Philip Morris and NCR took their turns in draining away thousands of jobs.
And the trends behind their moves couldn't be clearer: Warner-Lambert, cutting 2,800 jobs, faces narrower drug profits in the great health care shakeout; Philip Morris, cutting 14,000, is facing up to a less-smoky society, and NCR, cutting 7,500, is adjusting to a shifting computer world.
But all the while, the Government says payrolls are rising.
Where?
Some good jobs, to be sure, are emerging at small, entrepreneurial companies, but many new jobs are at the bottom of the heap.
It was hard to give thanks on Thursday if you made the minimum wage on Wednesday.


Harassment Ruling Leaves a Puzzle for Bosses; Refreshing Concurrence
To the Editor:
Jeffrey Rosen's "Fast-Food Justice" (Op-Ed, Nov. 16) illustrates that a flawed premise will inevitably lead to a faulty conclusion.
Mr.
Rosen cites the Supreme Court's decision in the Harris sexual harassment case as an illustration of a "distressing trend," that is, cases that are "short," "terse" and "hardly bother to argue at all."


ABORTION BATTLE MOVES NEXT DOOR
In a new twist to the battle over abortion, abortion opponents here have bought houses next to the area's two clinics and established pregnancy counseling centers in them.
"Rather than just hoping women find it in the Yellow Pages, we have an actual on-site presence," said the Rev.
Michael C. Cloer, who heads a 102-member Pastors for Life organization, which owns one house.
"When they come to the abortion clinic, there is another option."


Frequent Fliers of the Plant World
HAVE you ever come in from a long walk through fields and woods with the dog and found both trousers and fur matted with burs, twigs and seeds?
Most of these nuisances cling tightly and it is difficult, to say the least, to get them all off.
As bothersome as these experiences are, they are simple examples of nature's seed-dispersal mechanisms.
It is one easy way for plants to get around.
The noted naturalist-author Gerald Durrell puts it this way, "Trying to de-seed yourself is one of the most frustrating tasks of a naturalist's life, but it certainly is an excellent way to collect such seeds."


Anne K. Gorman, David Randell Jr.
Anne Kiley Gorman, a daughter of Mrs.
William B. Gorman Jr. of White Plains and the late Mr.
Gorman, was married yesterday to David MacDougall Randell Jr., the son of Toinette Tucker of New York and Mr.
Randell of Portsmouth, N.H.
The Rev.
Michael O'Conner, a Roman Catholic priest, and the Rev.
Luther Tucker, an Episcopal priest and the great-uncle of the bridegroom, officiated at the Church of the Resurrection in Rye, N.Y.
Mrs.
Randell, 25, is a senior account executive at Marilyn Evins Ltd., a public relations company in New York.
She and her husband graduated from St.
Lawrence University, she cum laude.
Her mother, Elizabeth M. Gorman, is a receptionist at the Brunswick School in Greenwich, Conn.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.Gun Control: Vote on passage of a bill that would impose a five-day waiting period on the purchase of handguns with the condition that the waiting period would be in force for four years, unless the Attorney General decided a fifth year was necessary.
Approved 63 to 36, Nov. 20.
2.Nafta: Vote on legislation to put the North American Free Trade Agreement into effect starting Jan. 1, 1994, and to abolish gradually nearly all trade barriers between the United States, Mexico and Canada.
Approved 61 to 38, Nov. 20.
Connecticut  Dodd (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y  Lieberman (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y  New Jersey  Bradley (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y  Lautenberg (D) . . .
Y . . .
N  New York  D'Amato (R) . . .
N . . .
N  Moynihan (D) . . .
Y . . .
N  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.
House
1.
Statehood: Vote on passage of a bill to allow statehood for the District of Columbia.
Rejected 277 to 153, Nov. 21.
2.
Campaign Finance: Vote on passage of a campaign finance reform bill that includes voluntary spending limits on campaign spending and the first public financing of Congressional campaigns.
Approved 255 to 175, Nov. 22.
3.
Budget: Vote on a bipartisan effort to slash an additional $90 billion from President Clinton's five-year budget package.
Rejected 219 to 213, Nov. 22.
4.
Gun Control: Vote on passage of a House-Senate compromise version of a bill providing a five-day waiting period for the purchase of handguns.
Approved 238 to 187, Nov. 22. (The Senate approved the compromise by voice vote on Nov. 24.) Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . . Y . . . Y . . . N . . . Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . . Y . . . Y . . . N . . . Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . . Y . . . Y . . . N . . . Y
4. Shays (R) . . . N . . . Y . . . Y . . . Y
5. Franks (R) . . . N . . . N . . . Y . . . N
6. Johnson (R) . . . N . . . N . . . Y . . . Y New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . . Y . . . Y . . . Y . . . Y
2. Hughes (D) . . . N . . . Y . . . N . . . Y
3. Saxton (R) . . . N . . . N . . . Y . . . Y
4. Smith (R) . . . N . . . Y . . . Y . . . Y
5. Roukema (R) . . . N . . . N . . . Y . . . Y
6. Pallone (D) . . . Y . . . Y . . . N . . . Y
7. Franks (R) . . . N . . . N . . . Y . . . Y
8. Klein (D) . . . Y . . . Y . . . N . . . Y
9.
Torricelli (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y  10.
Payne (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y  11.
Gallo (R) . . .
N . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
Y  12.
Zimmer (R) . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y  13.
Menendez (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . . N . . . Y . . . N . . . Y
2. Lazio (R) . . . N . . . N . . . N . . . Y
3. King (R) . . . N . . . N . . . N . . . N
4. Levy (R) . . . N . . . N . . . N . . . N
5. Ackerman (D) . . . N . . . Y . . . N . . . Y
6. Flake (D) . . . Y . . . Y . . . N . . . Y
7. Manton (D) . . . Y . . . Y . . . N . . . Y
8. Nadler (D) . . . Y . . . Y . . . N . . . Y
9.
Schumer (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y  10.
Towns (D) . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
N . . .
Y  11.
Owens (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y  12.
Velazquez (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y  13.
Molinari (R) . . .
N . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
Y  14.
Maloney (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y  15.
Rangel (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y  16.
Serrano (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y  17.
Engel (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y  18.
Lowey (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y  19.
Fish (R) . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y  20.
Gilman (R) . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y  21.
McNulty (D) . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y  22.
Solomon (R) . . .
N . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N  23.
Boehlert (R) . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y  24.
McHugh (R) . . .
N . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N  25.
Walsh (R) . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y  26.
Hinchey (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y  27.
Paxon (R) . . .
N . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N  28.
Slaughter (D) . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y  29.
LaFalce (D) . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y  30.
Quinn (R) . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
Y . . .
Y  31.
Houghton (R) . . .
N . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


When Culinary Dichotomy Is an Asset
LA PRIMAVERA is like a sleek, light, new- model automobile ready to move confidently through the 90's.
A year ago, new owners began a gradual revitalization of the 12-year-old East Hills veteran.
Old friends will notice the more contemporary decor.
Gone is the heavy, pervasive red hue, replaced by pale wood paneling, beige draperies and a bracelet of mirrors encircling the beige walls.
A few of the drawings of Italian scenes, which dot the attractive bar, would brighten the somewhat stark monochromatic dining room.


HARD SELL
Diane Keaton sounds like an old reactionary -- angry, full of half-baked thoughts backed up by simple images ("Hard Sell," Nov. 7).
Her main image, the centralized white male sales force peddling undifferentiated products to a witless market, is truly irrelevant today.
We now know that what's good for General Motors isn't necessarily good for the rest of us.
Where has Keaton been for the last 40 years?
Oh, that's right . . . in Hollywood.
I think everybody finds these images amusing, but that's about as far as it goes.
MARK DUFFY Newton, Mass.


From Andean Peaks to City Canyons
OLLANTAYTAMBO is a village in the Sacred Valley of the Incas, near Machu Picchu in the Peruvian Andes.
The villagers are called Ollantay, and that is the name chosen for an entertainment on Saturday to celebrate the village as part of the United Nations Year of the Indigenous Peoples.
Luis Delgado, a Peruvian photographer, is to present a slide show about the village, and Sur Mantu, a band whose name means southern earth, is to play.
Formed in New York four years ago, the band includes musicians from Peru, Chile and Ecuador.
Mr.
Delgado, in addition to his photography, guides trips to the Andes and teaches Quechua, the language of the region.


Vols' Point Machine Thumps Vanderbilt
Tennessee 62, Vanderbilt 14
Tennessee scored on three consecutive offensive plays in the second quarter and became the school's highest-scoring team with a 62-14 rout of Vanderbilt yesterday in Knoxville, Tenn.


Allison Singer, Jonathan Epstein
Gerald E. Singer of Plantation, Fla., and Sally E. Feingold of Boca Raton, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Allison Joy Singer, to Jonathan Harris Epstein, a son of Dr.
Gerald S. Epstein of Framingham, Mass., and Ellen D. Rose of Roseland, N.J.
A February wedding is planned.
Miss Singer, 23, graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology.
She is an account executive at Action Sports Retailer, a trade magazine for the sporting goods industry, in New York.


Exploited


Sound Bytes; What's Ahead for Software? Simpler Stuff, Easily Used
Mike Maples is executive vice president for the Microsoft Corporation of Redmond, Wash., responsible for all product development and marketing at the world's largest personal computer software company.
Before joining Microsoft in 1988, Mr.
Maples was director of software strategy for the International Business Machines Corporation.
We caught up with him at the Comdex/Fall trade show earlier this month in Las Vegas, just before he left on a deer-hunting trip.
Question: What kind of software will we be using five years from now?


Dumas Family History Is Marked by Drama
To the Editor:
"The Name Is Dumas" (Topics of The Times, Nov. 14) calls Alexandre Dumas pere "the natural son of a Napoleonic general and Marie Cessette Dumas, a black woman from Santo Domingo." Not quite.
Thomas-Alexandre Dumas was a Napoleonic general, but Marie Cessette Dumas was the novelist's grandmother, dead 30 years before his birth.


Sweet Bay Scallops For Holiday Soirees
BAY scallops from Peconic Bay on Long Island and Nantucket Bay in Massachusetts are in fairly good supply this year.
They are rather expensive and therefore more suitable for special holiday occasions.
Their slightly briny sweetness and manageable size make them excellent to use in a variety of dishes.
These are not tiny scallops.
They are usually around an inch in diameter, so they retain a certain appealing succulence when cooked.
If they are not available, it is better to substitute sea scallops, quartered, than to use the smaller calico scallops.


Homeland, Apartheid's Child, Is Defying Change
South Africa has turned millions of blacks into outcasts and outlaws, exiles and aliens.
It also turned Lucas Mangope into a potentate, with his own little country, his own showcase capital rising at the edge of the Kalahari desert, and his own army, which paraded before him today in gold ascots and green berets.


Cavaliers Deal Sonics First Loss Of Season
Cavaliers 101, SuperSonics 90
The Cleveland Cavaliers handed the visiting Seattle SuperSonics their first loss of the season, 101-90, last night as John Battle scored 26 points and Mark Price took control down the stretch.


Seminoles: Orange; W. Va.: Sour Grapes
He operates in different political worlds.
In the springtime, Charlie Ward's basketball season at Florida State ends with the clearly defined order of the national collegiate tournament.
In the late fall, the definition of Ward's final college football season will be settled at the ballot box.
"I can't sit up here and say we're better than West Virginia," Ward said after Florida State's 33-21 victory over Florida.
"Because we didn't play them."
Barring a shocking reversal of recent poll results, Florida State will meet Nebraska in the Orange Bowl on New Year's Night with a chance to win its first national championship.
Nebraska, which defeated Oklahoma on Friday, should hold its first-place position in the point total of the two sources used by the coalition of bowl games -- the Associated Press media poll and the CNN/USA Today poll of coaches.


Caroline Chua And James Rocco
Caroline Siok-Yau Chua, a daughter of Jessie and Hua-Thye Chua of Los Altos Hills, Calif., was married there yesterday to Dr.
James William Rocco, a son of Michelle Rocco Hendrix of Winston-Salem, N.C., and the late William S. Rocco.
The Roman Catholic ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Gary Thomas at the Los Altos Country Club.
The bride is an associate at Fish &amp; Neave, a law firm in New York.
A graduate of the University of California at Berkeley, she received a master's degree in East Asian studies from Columbia University and a law degree from Fordham University.
Her father is a founder and the vice president of technology and development of Quick Logic, a maker of semiconductors in Santa Clara, Calif.


The Dalai Lama
The last place one expects to find His Holiness Tenzin Gyatso, the 14th Dalai Lama of Tibet, the exiled secular and religious leader of the Tibetan people, the winner of the 1989 Nobel Peace Prize, the world's leading exponent of nonviolent political change, is at a glitzy Tucson, Ariz., golfing resort called the Sheraton El Conquistador.
Yet there he was on a recent autumn morning, dressed in his traditional maroon robes, surrounded by Buddhist monks and non-Buddhist bodyguards, astonishing tourists as he rushed past the snack bar.
The Dalai Lama had come to this unlikely corner of the world to give a series of interpretive readings from "A Guide to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life" by Shantideva, an eighth-century Buddhist saint.
For five full days, 1,500 attendees risked bad backs and cramped hands to sit for hours taking notes on the nature of patience.
For them, participants in the expanding Buddhist movement in the Western world, this was a rare opportunity to study with the head of the faith -- the equivalent of taking Bible classes from the Pope.
Moreover, many of the aspirants were more secular types, veterans of the 1960's who'd come to regard the Dalai Lama as the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., the Mahatma Gandhi of this political moment.
It is a forum the Dalai Lama clearly enjoys, a needed break from routine as head of the Tibetan government-in-exile in India.
"I am a simple Buddhist monk -- no more, no less," he often says of himself.
At the teachings, he gets to be that.


Dean Edelman and Pamela Lieberman
Pamela Frances Lieberman, the daughter of Milton and Carole Lieberman of New York, was married last evening to Dean Richard Edelman, the son of Frederick and Linda Edelman of Yardley, Pa.
Rabbi Herman Blumberg performed the ceremony at the Rye Town Hilton in Rye Brook, N.Y.
The bride, 26, graduated from Washington University in St.
Louis and is a promotion assistant in the Post Cereal division of Kraft General Foods, in White Plains.
Her father is the senior vice president of marketing for Parade Publications Inc. in New York.
Her mother is the president of the Lieberman Group, an executive search company in New York.


Anyone Else Recall the 70's?
To the Editor:  What's Rick Marin's problem? He doesn't remember.


Marian Logan, 73, A Civil Rights Aide And Cabaret Singer
Marian Bruce Logan, a civil rights advocate, former New York City Commissioner of Human Rights and a cabaret singer in her youth, died on Thursday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Medical Center.
She was 73.
The cause was emphysema, her son, Warren Arthur Logan, said.


Its Audience Is Growing
To the Editor:
I was pleased to see Bernard Holland acknowledge the high level of artistry prevalent in performances of early music these days  [ "A Streak in the Heavens Has Become a Straggler," Oct. 31 ] .
It troubled me, however, that his conclusions discounted these positive factors, stating instead that there is "lessened excitement" and that "the streak seems to have passed on."


Frequent Fliers of the Plant World
HAVE you ever come in from a long walk through fields and woods with the dog and found both trousers and fur matted with burs, twigs and seeds?
Most of these nuisances cling tightly and it is difficult, to say the least, to get them all off.
As bothersome as these experiences are, they are simple examples of nature's seed-dispersal mechanisms.
It is one easy way for plants to get around.
The noted naturalist-author Gerald Durrell puts it this way, "Trying to de-seed yourself is one of the most frustrating tasks of a naturalist's life, but it certainly is an excellent way to collect such seeds."


Toys 'R' Us Creates Burst Of Optimism
Toys 'R' Us last week became the first national retailer to open a store in downtown Brooklyn in 15 years.
The store, in the Gallery mall at MetroTech on Fulton Mall, has been hailed as a major step in the area's revitalization program and is expected to serve as a magnet for other large retail chains.
"This says to me that I can now go after those major retailers who have shied away from us in the past because none of them wanted to be the first to come here," said Robert W. Ohlerking, executive director of the Fulton Mall Improvement Association.
"Now I can say, 'We have Toys 'R' Us.' "


DAVID GERGEN, MASTER OF THE GAME
Michael Kelly's article "David Gergen, Master of the Game" (Oct. 31) was educational and devastating.
So we live in a world of manipulation and we reward manipulators.


A Broader Base for Corporate Hiring
PHILLIPPA MASCARENHAS is smart.
When she was a senior at New Rochelle High School, her 3.4 grade average, combined with leadership ability, earned a recommendation from her guidance counselor to apply to Inroads, a career-training organization, for possible placement in a corporate internship program.
That was four years ago.
Ms.
Mascarenhas, now a senior at New York University in Manhattan, has worked at Kraft General Foods in White Plains for the last four summers and on Fridays during the rest of the year.


Party Time


IN SHORT: FICTION
MAGIC REALISM PIANO STORIES By Felisberto Hernandez. Eridanos/Marsilio, paper, $18.


Easy as Tarte Tatin
Cooking can be guided more by smell and taste and feel than by precise measure.
Cooks with an inherent sense of direction tend to view recipes as a snapshot rather than a road map.
Baking is a different matter.
While cooking, like jazz, is improvisational, baking is all etudes and scales.
Deviating from a pastry recipe is, for all but masters, about as advisable as trying to outriff Thelonius Monk.


Vocabulary Test For Football
To the Sports Editor:
Professional football abounds in misnomers.
The phrases "Jersey Jets" and "Jersey Giants" are euphonious, alliterative and accurately descriptive.
"New York Jets" and "New York Giants" are none of the above.
Another misnomer in which the news media perseverate is "Fighting Irish." Surely that must be a prime example of mumpsimus, the pig-headed persistence in error.
LEON C. CHESLEY  Valley Stream L.I.


Foreign Aid: Better, but Threatened
The long-troubled Agency for International Development, which administers most of America's direct foreign aid, is showing signs of revival under its new administrator, Brian Atwood.
Lax management is being tightened, and this month the agency announced plans to shut down 21 of its 70-odd overseas missions and eliminate some programs that have outlived their usefulness.
Even more important, Mr.
Atwood is changing the way America parcels out foreign aid.
In the past, it was done on a country-by-country basis, as a way to reward friendly governments during the cold war.
Now the emphasis will be less on politics and more on specific areas of need, such as environmental protection, family planning, economic development and humanitarian relief.


From Little Packages Come Big Sounds
WHEN "CROSSROADS," A FOURCD boxed set chronicling the career of Eric Clapton, went gold shortly after it was released in 1988, the recording industry took notice.
Record companies, eager to tap the vast catalogues they had amassed, saw an opportunity to sell old wine in new bottles.
"Crossroads" has gone on to sell more than two million copies in this country alone, and the boom that it sparked has, if anything, accelerated.
Boxed sets, once the fare of late-night television commercials, have become big business, a particular favorite for holiday gifts.
Here are 15 choices that Times critics found worthy of note.
Prices are suggested retail.
The Weavers: 'Wasn't That a Time'  Vanguard VCD4-147/50; four CD's ($59.95)


Jessica Rose Berg, D. Valentine
Jessica Rose Berg, a daughter of Dr.
Solomon and Jean Berg of Brookline, Mass., was married last evening to D. Kemp Valentine, a son of Wanda Henderson of Sun Lakes, Ariz., and a stepson of Jim Henderson of Sun Lakes.
Cantor Elliott Hurwitz officiated at the Coonamessett Inn in Falmouth, Mass.
Ms.
Berg, 26, is keeping her name.
She and her husband graduated from Dartmouth College, and she is studying for a master's degree in management at Northwestern University.
Her father is a urologist at Beth Israel Hospital and with the Harvard Community Health Plan, both in Boston.
Her mother is an administrative assistant at the Winsor School, a private school in Boston.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-21  ANXIETIES FOR RUSSIAN MILITARY  Dismembered and demoralized, the Russian military is the most unwieldy and troublesome legacy of the Soviet empire.  1  Russian troops and their families are disillusioned.  19


Scorned


The Ancient Road to Hypertext
THE ELECTRONIC WORD Democracy, Technology, and the Arts.
By Richard A. Lanham. 285 pp.
Chicago:  The University of Chicago Press. $22.50.


John I. Dugan; Lawyer, 86
John I. Dugan, a Manhattan lawyer for 48 years who practiced admiralty and international law, died on Thursday at his home in New Rochelle.
He was 86.
He died of liver cancer, said his wife, Marie.


'Kafka Was the Rage'
To the Editor:
As an admirer of the work of both Anatole Broyard and Morris Dickstein, the reviewer of Broyard's memoir, "Kafka Was the Rage" (Oct. 31), I feel obliged to take issue with the overall, somewhat patronizing, tone of the review and with a couple of points scored by Mr.
Dickstein.


Commercial Property: Class C Buildings in Manhattan; Marketing Takes Creativity
HE walks to a ramshackle building, way off the beaten track of town.
He goes through the unattended lobby and gets into a slow, rickety elevator that takes him to his small, shabby office.
The day is hot, so he throws the window open for some air.
It takes a while, after all, for the air-conditioning to kick in, and it's never been very good anyway.


Habitats/The Secret Garden; Sanctuary on East 66th
IN a bustling city like New York it is surprising to find a private house -- only a few blocks from Bloomingdale's -- that has for its backyard a large, serene common garden.
The Jones Wood Garden has a mystique about it.
Real estate brokers are asked not to mention it in their advertisements.
No movies can be filmed there.
A garden committee reviews proposed exterior alterations, and is known for its diligence.


Jill Postelnek and Samuel Karliner
Jill Karen Postelnek, a daughter of Stephen and Natalie Postelnek of Roslyn, L.I., and Samuel Jonah Karliner, the son of Dr.
Jerrold Karliner of Atlanta and the late Estelle A. Karliner, were married last evening.
Rabbi Lawrence G. Freedman, the bride's brother-in-law, officiated at the Temple Beth Sholom in Roslyn.
The bride, 26, graduated cum laude from Brandeis University and is a doctoral candidate in clinical psychology at Yeshiva University.
Her father is a senior partner in Wilson, Elser, Moskowitz, Edelman &amp; Dicker, a law firm in New York.
Her mother is the educational director of the Special Kids Intervention Program, a preschool for developmentally delayed children in Howard Beach, Queens.


It's a Mean 5,280 Feet for the Misstepping Nets
Just in case the Nets had forgotten how tiring playing on the road is -- especially when there is a stop in Denver -- the Nuggets reminded them with a sign posted on the Nets' locker room door before tonight's game.
It read, "One Mile Above Sea Level. 5,280 Feet."


From Little Packages Come Big Sounds
WHEN "CROSSROADS," A FOURCD boxed set chronicling the career of Eric Clapton, went gold shortly after it was released in 1988, the recording industry took notice.
Record companies, eager to tap the vast catalogues they had amassed, saw an opportunity to sell old wine in new bottles.
"Crossroads" has gone on to sell more than two million copies in this country alone, and the boom that it sparked has, if anything, accelerated.
Boxed sets, once the fare of late-night television commercials, have become big business, a particular favorite for holiday gifts.
Here are 15 choices that Times critics found worthy of note.
Prices are suggested retail. 'The Police -- Message in a Box: the Complete Recordings'  A&amp;M 314540150; four CD's ($59.95) or cassettes ($39.95)


CLINTON TO WEIGH PAYMENTS TO SPUR HIRING OF THE POOR
As part of its plan to revamp the welfare system, the Clinton Administration is considering giving new Federal subsidies to companies that hire or find jobs for welfare recipients.
One option is to have the Government pay employers directly, subsidizing the wages of welfare recipients.
Another is for the Government to hire placement companies that would receive a fee for each person who obtained a job.


The Archetypal Misfit
To the Editor:
Roberto Gonzalez Echevarria's review of "Before Night Falls" (Oct. 24) was nothing short of astonishing.
That Rei naldo Arenas's life was full of suffering and persecution cannot be disputed, though much of it was exaggerated and of his own making.
Dealing with him always left me with the sense that no matter what happened, he -- the archetypal outsider and misfit -- would always feel betrayed.


Fighting Loss With Work and Art
LIFE IS HARD IN NEW YORK CITY'S nonprofit theater, but for Carole Rothman, the artistic director and co-founder of the prestigious Second Stage, it's even harder.
It's not just that there's more competition than ever for funds, or that her company has outgrown its tiny space (108 seats) and can't break even, or that the actors and directors she wants to work with have all fled to Hollywood so they can eat.
It's that in the last three years, Ms.
Rothman has lost both her professional and personal partners.
Robyn Goodman, Second Stage Theater's co-founder and co-artistic director, left more than a year ago to work in television; and in 1991, Ms.
Rothman's husband, Dr.
Stuart Forster, died suddenly of a heart attack at the age of 44, leaving her with a 7-year-old son and a 2-year-old daughter.


The Supreme Court Massacre
THE PALACE OF JUSTICE A Colombian Tragedy.
By Ana Carrigan.
Illustrated. 303 pp.
New York:  Four Walls Eight Windows. $22.95.


Taking On Big Companies Over Harassment
To the Editor:
I was pleased to read the article by Barbara Presley Noble regarding the recent Supreme Court decision that would make it easier to sue over sexual harassment in the workplace, "Little Discord on Harassment Ruling" (At Work, Nov. 14).
However, I disagree with Burke Stinson of A.T.&amp; T., who says the ruling will not affect companies with antiharassment policies already in place.


Businesses Find New Sources Of Credit
WHEN the Cannondale Corporation was looking for a $30 million line of credit this year to expand its Redding-based bicycle manufacturing business, it didn't go to a bank.
Instead, the company's financial consultant, Michael R. Carter, managing director of Carter &amp; Company in Fairfield, arranged for the loan from Barclay's Business Credit in Glastonbury, a commercial credit arm of the England-based Barclay's Bank.
"Commercial credit companies have been gaining market share here in Connecticut dramatically since 1989," Mr.
Carter said, "when the credit crunch really started."


Competitive Dressing
A funny thing happened in my Jam 'n' Funk class this morning.
I arrived at the Main Street dance studio clad in my usual exercise regalia -- striped boxer shorts, an old T-shirt and the dullest sneakers in the Reebok line -- and saw three women dressed the same way.
For the first time since I started taking dance aerobics 17 years ago, I was actually in fashion.
"The style now is funky, baggy street stuff," said the class clotheshorse, who had hung up her cat suit and was working out in her husband's Calvin Klein briefs.


Aran Islands
To the Editor: Our enjoyment of Douglas Colligan's piece on the perils of sailing to the Aran Islands, "Casting One's Fate to the (High) Winds" (Oct. 17), was heightened by our having made the same journey on Sept. 29.
Lest any readers, alarmed by the perilous nature of this crossing, be deterred from visiting the Aran Islands, we would like to describe the current state of affairs.
A proper ferryboat now carries visitors from Doolin to Innisfree and Inishmaan Island.
However, at low tide the ferry cannot tie up at the stone pier at Doolin, and passengers must clamber into a curragh, the small tar-covered canvas rowboat with an upswept bow described by Mr.
Colligan.


Computer Drive Time
To the Sports Editor:
Your computer ranking of the top 25 teams indicates your need for an up-to-date computer.
Evidently, modern technology has passed you by.
I would recommend that you acquire a hard drive and a much larger memory capacity.
JOHN T. CARLSON  East Islip, L.I.


Hard Times for the Neediest
A 5-year-old child pleads with her father: Please don't come to my birthday party.
I don't want my friends to see you.
Later the father tells the story at the fathers' club he's joined.
Why, the other members ask him, doesn't your kid want you around?
Why is she ashamed of you?
And the usual litany begins: I'm broke.
I don't have a job.
I have a drinking problem.


Co-op Lending Eases
IT is finally getting easier for shareholders in financially troubled New York City co-op buildings to secure share loans -- either to refinance their individual loan or to further a sale.
For several years loans had been extremely difficult to obtain these share loans because the real estate excesses of the 80's had left many co-ops with dozens of unsold units.
Maintenance payments on those units then became an unreliable source of building income.
This scared lenders because it posed a long-term threat to building conditions.


Ms. Scannell, Mr. Giaccone
Christine Marie Scannell, a daughter of Lillian C. Wenborne of Syracuse and the late John W. Scannell, was married yesterday to Donald Scott Giaccone, a son of Leonarda and C. Francis Giaccone of Centereach, L.I.
The Rev.
Joseph Curley performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary in Centereach.
Mrs.
Giaccone, 33, is a senior editor at the Pergamon Press in Tarrytown, N.Y.
She and her husband graduated from Colgate University.


A la Carte; A Sip of Wine, on the House, at Holiday Time
THE year-old Adam's Grill, 388 Willis Avenue, Roslyn Heights (621-3636), has redone its menu to include sandwiches, salads, pastas and other light inexpensive fare at all meals, including dinner.
Additionally, the restaurant now offers two or three complimentary tastings a week to customers who reserve tables for lunch or dinner and belong to the America Club.
Each tasting will feature the specialties of a different state.
Free membership cards, which admit a member and his or her guests to the American-cuisine taste sessions and complimentary cocktail hours, are available at the restaurant.


NOV. 21-27: Spy Agency Speaks; A Warning From Russia Not to Expand NATO
The continuing debate about whether NATO should expand to include the newly non-Communist countries of Eastern Europe produced an unusual intervention last week from Russia's Foreign Intelligence Service, a branch of what used to be the K.G.B.


Los Angeles
No major American city in recent times has suffered quite the body blow to its tourism industry that Los Angeles did after last year's devastating riots.
Those events changed the world perception of Los Angeles from one of a dreamy land of towering palms, movie stars and sunny escape to one of urban apocalypse, with violent street gangs and drive-by shootings.
If both notions were exaggerated, the result was that visitors avoided Southern California, and especially its intimidating core, Los Angeles.
The latest blow was the wildfires, and then mudslides, that afflicted the region in October and November.
Despite the horrific television images, though, few visitors will notice the damage except in parts of Malibu, Laguna Beach and suburbs remote from most tourist attractions.
Indeed, a year and a half after the riots, visitors are returning.
With the peaceful reaction to verdicts in both the retrial of four white police officers who beat a black man and the trial of two young black men accused of brutalizing a white truck driver, Los Angeles has regained a measure of self-confidence.


Hubble Jeopardy
Sun beats through the skylights and mingles with the scent of chlorine, creating a tropical oppression atop the Neutral Buoyancy Simulator, a four-story human aquarium at the Marshall Space Flight Center, in Huntsville, Ala.
Lying at the bottom of the tank like a sunken pirate ship is the cargo bay of a space shuttle, chockablock with high-tech fittings, boxes, handholds, airlock and a 30-foot white robot arm draped with cables.
Nearby, standing upright on the pool bottom, is a sizable section of the Hubble Space Telescope -- not the real one, of course, which has drifted in famous myopia 370 miles above the earth these last three years, but a full-scale model.
Kathy Thornton and Tom Akers, dressed in bulbous spacesuits, float through the landscape like marine Robocops, trailing hoses, bubbles and a bevy of frogman assistants.
Prowling the edge of the pool is 58-year-old Story Musgrave: surgeon, parachutist, gardener, ex-marine, literary critic, holder of six university degrees, father of five children, veteran astronaut and bald as a monk.
On Wednesday, Musgrave will make his fifth trip into space, accompanied by Akers, Thornton and four other astronauts, aboard a space shuttle Endeavour crammed with tools and instruments.
Their mission: repair the orbiting Hubble telescope, which suffers not only blurry vision but also several potentially fatal mechanical ailments.
Practice, Musgrave hopes, will make perfect.
By early October, he and his crew have spent nearly 400 hours in tanks like the one in Huntsville, rehearsing every conceivable excruciating moment of Hubble's rebirth.


A Pre-mortem Among Old Thanes
IT is not surprising that the great works of English literature contain no bridge deals, since they would be almost completely anachronistic.
This void has been skillfully filled by a book by Nick Smith, with a series of highly entertaining parodies.
His "Bridge Literature" features characters from Shakespeare, Marlowe, Milton, Austen, Dickens, Hardy, Carroll and Orwell, and is available for $16.95, which includes postage, from "The Bridge World," 39 West 94th Street, New York 10025.


Streetscapes: The Chemists' Club and the Godmothers League; Two Ways of Dealing With Aging Non-Landmarks
RESPECT for historic architecture is now ingrained in our culture.
Every renovation is called a restoration, every old building has become historic.
The preservation movement has succeeded beyond the expectations, even the hopes, of its original advocates.
But there are still widely varying notions of how to deal with the problems presented by aging buildings, as two recent projects on notable (but not landmarked) buildings clearly show.


Rangers Can't Shake Isles' Home-Ice Jinx
He has been in the other locker room and knows what it feels like.
As an Islander, Glenn Healy used to live for this game.
Rangers-Islanders, at Nassau Coliseum, the Islanders' pride always at stake.
He never understood, then, what it was that made the Rangers seem so flat, so unlike themselves, when they visited Nassau Coliseum.
Today, he wore a blue jersey, dressed in the visitors' locker room, and, after a poor start by Mike Richter, played in the Rangers' goal.
But his new vantage point did not give him any insights into the Rangers' slump in this arena.


Burn, Baby, Burn!
I was 7 when I tried to burn down the forest bordering my suburban neighborhood.
My friends and I had no good excuse with which to placate the army of parents who descended after only a few sticks and shrubs went up in flames.
It never would have occurred to us to say that Howdy Doody, that notorious reprobate among television puppets of the time, made us do it.
Only in retrospect could I argue that we were 60's rebels in embryo, venting antiauthoritarian impulses against that fascist, Smokey the Bear.


Zuzana Valna, Philip Polishook
Zuzana Valna, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Valny of Bratislava, Slovakia, and Philip K. Polishook, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Burton H. Polishook of Greenwich, Conn., were married yesterday at the Town Hall of Old Town Square in Prague, the Czech Republic.
The bride, 24, who graduated from the School of Economics, was until recently an assistant marketing manager at the Prague offices of Procter &amp; Gamble.
The bride's father is a partner in Sintegra Inc., a Bratislava construction firm, and her mother, Silvia Valna, is a sociologist at the Research Institute of Social Development and Labor, a government institute in Bratislava.


China Chooses Not to Prod North Korea
AS brothers in arms, China and North Korea have a long history of standing shoulder to shoulder against Western "hegemony" in Asia.
Perhaps half a million Chinese soldiers died defending the right of Kim Il Sung, North Korea's longtime dictator, to commit one of the century's great military blunders in attacking South Korea on June 25, 1950.
Today, the world is anxiously waiting to see how a much different China, one desperately seeking an era of stability in which to lift its 1.2 billion citizens to prosperity, is going to help North Korea escape its most serious confrontation with the West since Harry Truman was forced to send a general named MacArthur onto the beach at Inchon.


The Going-Out-of-Business Business
THE very act of going out of business, or trying not to, has become big business in New York's rough and tumble economy.
Lawyers, collection agents, auctioneers, liquidators -- they have always flourished here, but for the last three years they have been working overtime.
Consider David J. Doyaga, a bankruptcy lawyer who works at least 10 hours a day, seven days a week.


In School With Their Children, Parents Try Again
As Larry Morris, a 39-year-old security guard and father of six, folded his six-foot frame into a desk made for 14-year-olds, his knees knocked against the desk rim and his back crouched stiffly in his seat next to a girl in a Bugs Bunny T-shirt.
It has been 22 years since he last sat in a classroom and carried a book bag.
He dropped out of high school at 17, when his girlfriend became pregnant and the streets had more pull than geometry.
In those 22 years, he had six sons by two wives, got hustling stints and minimum-wage jobs, and was rejected for better-paying work because he had no diploma.
He also grew up.


Monday Night Fever
THE happy, sappy, gloriously unmenacing, pulsing, pumping, apolitical sound of disco music was resurrected on Monday at an auction and ball for the American Foundation for AIDS Research (Amfar).
But there seemed to be some resistance to the nouvelle nostalgia.
Though the cocktail-hour art auction at the Barneys New York store on Madison Avenue was well subscribed, most of the patrons had largely ignored the instructions to attend in "disco dress."


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen108.90
108.50
124.50
per Dollar
German Mark1.7130
1.7140
1.6005
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar1.3290
1.3268
1.2864
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound1.4775
1.4735
1.5100
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold N.A
$378.00
$334.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Beware the Baker Street Irregulars
To the Editor:
As a member of the Baker Street Irregulars, I must protest, vigorously, the slur upon the name of Sherlock Holmes that appeared in the Book Review on Oct. 17.


Larry Uttal, Executive In Music, Dead at 71
Larry Uttal, a pop music business executive in New York for over 25 years, died on Thursday at his Manhattan apartment.
He was 71.
The cause of death was AIDS, said his daughter, Jody Uttal-Gold.


Group Persists With Plan to House Homeless Mentally Ill
Despite protests from around the neighborhood, a nonprofit group says it plans to build a model residence for homeless mentally ill adults on a vacant lot just east of 10th Avenue on West 46th Street.
The 55-unit residence is part of a citywide demonstration project sponsored by the New York State Office of Mental Health.
Six social service agencies have been selected to help design and build six residences to address the specific needs of the mentally ill.


For Olds, The Import Of Being Different
PONTIAC has been running some strong television commercials in which it compares its top models with the imports.
But it is really Pontiac's sister division, Oldsmobile, that intends to be an out-and-out competitor to the invaders from foreign shores.
Behind the move is John Rock, Oldsmobile's general manager, who claims to feel a lot better about the General Motors division now than he did a couple of years ago.
At that point, he said, the warehouses were full of his cars and Olds had "a mixed-bag marketing strategy."


Three New Carriers Flying to Florida
Three airlines have joined the crowded flight paths to Florida.
Sun Jet International Airlines, (800) 478-6538, started offering two daily round trips last month from Newark to Fort Lauderdale and St.
Petersburg for $69 each way.
The airline, based in Largo, Fla., operates MD-80 jets.


Minnesota's Frozen Farmland Is Fertile for Deer Hunting
Store-front banners welcome deer hunters to this community of about 3,000 in the remote, flat farm country of northwestern Minnesota.
Waitresses in restaurants wished our party good luck and the weekly newspaper, the Times-Region, devoted most of the lower half of its front page to the hunting skills of 76-year old Violet Sunsten of Roseau, who has brought home venison the past six seasons.
In the story, Vi, as she is known, says that since she bought a Remington .308 semiautomatic rifle, she has not had a blank year.
She and her husband Hjalmer, 83, hunt from their deer camp cabin that has neither running water nor electricity.
It does have a battery-operated television, however, Vi being a passionate sports fan.
Vi, one learns, chooses to post herself in her 10-foot-high tree stand, while Hjalmer pokes around, not remaining motionless for long.
"I get cold," he says.


The Taj by Moonlight, Again
For the first time in a decade, the tomb Shah Jahan built for his favorite wife, Mumtaz Mahal, in the mid-17th century, the pristine pale-white marble mausoleum better known as the Taj Mahal, has been opened for early evening viewing.
Visitors can now pay $3.25 -- more than 50 times the usual entrance fee of 2 rupees, or about 6 cents -- to remain in the sprawling grounds of the Taj Mahal until 7:30 P.M.


From Little Packages Come Big Sounds
WHEN "CROSSROADS," A FOURCD boxed set chronicling the career of Eric Clapton, went gold shortly after it was released in 1988, the recording industry took notice.
Record companies, eager to tap the vast catalogues they had amassed, saw an opportunity to sell old wine in new bottles.
"Crossroads" has gone on to sell more than two million copies in this country alone, and the boom that it sparked has, if anything, accelerated.
Boxed sets, once the fare of late-night television commercials, have become big business, a particular favorite for holiday gifts.
Here are 15 choices that Times critics found worthy of note.
Prices are suggested retail.
When "Crossroads," a four-CD boxed set chronicling the career of Eric Clapton, went gold shortly after it was released in 1988, the recording industry took notice.
Here are some choices from Times critics for holiday gift giving.
Prices are suggested retail. 'The Brill Building Sound: Singers and Songwriters Who Rocked the 60's'  Era/K-Tel International; four CD's or cassettes ($39.99)


Guardians at the Gate Unbowed by Time
DOORMEN don't kiss, and they certainly don't tell on tenants.
That is a principle of the job advocated by some of New York City's most experienced dooormen, who were interviewed at the post during this pre-Christmas season as they took packages, hailed cabs, dispensed information, directed repairmen, questioned deliverymen, remarked on the weather, and held doors.
"I know the habits of all the tenants in the building," said Rudy Martoni, as well he might after 22 years at the entrance to 174 East 74th Street, at Third Avenue.
He would disclose none of them.


'Keely and Du' Offered At the Hartford Stage
KEELY, three months pregnant, is kidnapped by the pastor in charge of a detention center for abortion seekers.
Du, a registered nurse, is assigned to guard her, from incarceration to childbirth.
"Deal with it," the resigned Du commands Keely, who is handcuffed to the bedpost.
In "Keely and Du," the harrowing new play at the Hartford Stage Company, two women, ideologically adverse, make contact.
It is the intention of the mystery playwright, who goes by the name of Jane Martin, to question the forces that sever the bond between two characters with spoiled lives in common.


Rowan Steamrolls Its Way Over Paterson to Semifinals
Steve Anderson, a sophomore running back, scored two touchdowns on runs of 33 and 41 yards as Rowan crushed William Paterson, 37-0, at Wightman Field this afternoon to make it to the N.C.A.A.
Division III Final Four for the second straight year.
The Profs (10-1), currently on a nine-game winning streak, will face Washington and Jefferson in a rematch of last year's semifinal.
The site of the game will be announced Monday.


NOV. 21-27: Bad News for Kohl; A Presidential Candidate Bows Out in Germany
Chancellor Helmut Kohl suffered one of the worst political defeats in his 11 years in office last week when the conservative candidate he had hoped to make the next president of Germany pulled out of the race under fire.
Steffen Heitmann, a 49-year-old lawyer for the Protestant Church in East Germany's Communist days, is the Justice Minister of the new state of Saxony.
Mr.
Kohl, impressed by Mr.
Heitmann's forthrightness, plucked him out of obscurity because he thought the eastern part of the country, wracked by high unemployment and social problems, would appreciate the gesture.


The Eyes Have It, Part II
"The Eyes of Laura Mars," the 1978 film starring Faye Dunaway as a fashion photographer, has inspired one of this season's underground theatrical hits, "E.S.P. (Eyes of a Supermodel Psychic)."
"For a lot of people who are into the club scene right now, 'Eyes of Laura Mars' is one of those cult icon movies," said Douglas Sanders, 29, the author of the play, which has been selling out on Sunday nights at CB's Gallery on the Bowery.


DAVID GERGEN, MASTER OF THE GAME
Having served with David Gergen on the board of the International Media Fund, I'm sure he did not need nor want to give up a comfortable private life to return to public service.
He responded to Bill Clinton's request for help because of his old-fashioned belief that a citizen should say yes when a President asks for help.
After the Administration's rocky start, Gergen's perspective and experience have helped the White House staff to distinguish between the urgent and the important.
NEWTON N. MINOW Chicago


The Possessive Is Nine-Tenths Of the Title
THESE DAYS, WITH EVERY Scorsese, Coppola and De Palma getting his name above the movie title, the sign that one has truly arrived is to have one's name part of the title.
Consider "Tim Burton's The Nightmare Before Christmas" and an independent movie that is being advertised as "Abel Ferrara's 'Dangerous Game.' " Opening last week was "George Balanchine's The Nutcracker," though in this case the bow goes to the late artistic director of the New York City Ballet, not to the movie's director, Emile Ardolino.
According to a representative from the Walt Disney Studios, Mr.
Burton's name became part of "The Nightmare Before Christmas" because he created the characters and the studio wanted to give him credit for that.
His name, needless to say, was also a selling point for young audiences who appreciated his macabre sense of humor in movies he directed like "Edward Scissorhands," the "Batman" films and "Beetlejuice."


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Monday
Housing resales, Oct., millions, ann. rate
3.91
3.87
Wednesday
Construction spending, Oct., pct. change
0.8
1.0
Provisional G.D.P. growth, 3d qtr., ann. rate
2.8
2.8
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
339
335
Personal income, Oct., percent change
0.2
0.6
New-home sales, Oct., thousands, ann. rate
762
740
Friday
Nonfarm payroll, Nov., change, thousands
177
175
Unemployment rate, November, percent
6.8
6.8
Leading indicators, Oct., percent change
0.5
0.6
This Week's Developments
Tuesday
British budget released
Thursday
Bundesbank Council meeting


Kathleen Holland, Andrew R. Bacon
Kathleen Marie Holland, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel J. Holland of Hingham, Mass., was married there yesterday to Andrew Roy Bacon, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roy Bacon of St.
Albans, Hertfordshire, England.
Deacon Edward Doyle officiated at St.
Paul's Parish Roman Catholic Church.


Off a Historic Road, Decorators Show Off Historic Houses
UNTil 1958, Shelter Rock Road was a two-lane roadway in North Hills that provided access to some of the most prestigious "Gold Coast" addresses.
The road was home to William Singer of the Singer Sewing Machine Company; Walter Marshall, the president of Western Union; Irene and Vernon Castle, the dance couple of the 1920's who brought the tango and Castle Walk to America, and to the publisher Ralph Pulitzer.


His Life Reformed, Queens Man Is Slain on Street for a Coat
He had turned his life around.
From a troubled dropout on drugs and in jail, he had become a young man of promise with a diploma, a job, a place in college, and the young woman who had given him courage was soon to give birth to their child.
They knew it was a girl and had already picked a name, Bianca Alexis.
Alexander Ortiz would have been 22 years old yesterday, but on Friday night, as he walked home from a movie with his arm around Arlyn Gonzalez, who is 23 and seven months pregnant, two men approached them at Rockaway Boulevard and 86th Street in Woodhaven, Queens.
One drew a gun.
They demanded her shearling coat and his leather jacket.


Helping to Give Thanks
Making meals for people with AIDS, Nov. 25.


One Among Few: Captain Chan
Of the some 30,000 officers of the New York City Police Department, only 244 are Asians, according to the Jade Society, the fraternal organization of Asian officers.
And since the summer, one has been in a class by himself.


Long Island Q&amp;A: Scott Rudolph; Trying to Meet Americans' Demand for Vitamin Supplements
AS studies link vitamins to preventing problems like heart disease, cancer and birth defects, manufacturers are watching revenues soar.
Americans spent $3.5 billion last year on vitamin supplements, a 26 percent increase over 1991, according to the National Council for Responsible Nutrition,
For Nature's Bounty in Bohemia, the nation's largest manufacturer of natural vitamin supplements, sales rose $27.3 million last year over 1991, to $100.9 million.
Revenues have doubled since 1988.
The president and chief executive, Scott Rudolph, said publicity about disease prevention had helped revenues surge.


Shopping at Amtrak In Northeast Corridor
Passengers riding the train along Amtrak's Northeast corridor can shop for everything from televisions to clothing during their trip, as part of a trial service that started last month and will be offered until Jan. 31.
After browsing through a 118-page catalogue in the magazine pocket of their seats, passengers can use an on-board telephone to place toll-free orders with Skymall, a company that has been selling merchandise in catalogues on airliners since 1990.
The mail-order service is offered on Amtrak's Metroliner Service, between Washington and New York, and on the New England Express, which runs between New York and Boston.


To Markets! To Markets!
THE number eight signifies fortune in Chinese culture, and it is along Eighth Avenue in Sunset Park, Brooklyn, that thousands of recent Chinese immigrants have settled to improve their lot.
Mostly poor and from southern China, they have created a bustling new commercial zone packed with chaotic dim sum palaces, fish markets selling blank-eyed flounder and knots of tiny purple octopus, and stores filled with everything from soybean drinks to children's clothes printed with slogans in awkward English.
Elderly people gather in the afternoons at the Brooklyn Chinese-American Association hall to play mah-jongg, while their grandchildren become roadworthy at the Hong Kong Driving School with the help of Cantonese-speaking instructors.


The Beautiful Map in His Head
THE MISERABLES By Damien Wilkins. 298 pp. New York:  Harcourt Brace &amp; Company.


Good Seats
To the Editor: I read with interest the Practical Traveler article by Betsy Wade, "Airline Seats: Not Always First Come First Served" (Oct. 24).
I would like to comment that whatever John Kiker, the spokesman for United Airlines says, United does not make available all open seats "to all comers," 72 to 24 hours before flight time.
Four times last summer I was refused a seating assignment at a city ticket counter, and told I must get my seat assignment at the airport instead.
In every case, I began trying to get an assignment during the period mentioned, and every time United only made middle seats available at the airport check-in.


Wadkins to Be Named Captain of U.S. Ryder Cup Team
Lanny Wadkins, one of golf's fiercest competitors, will be named the captain of the 1995 United States Ryder Cup team.
The PGA of America, which selects a new captain for each cup team, will officially announce Wadkins as the captain at a news conference on Wednesday at its headquarters in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla.
Wadkins, 43, was chosen over Tom Kite, Hale Irwin and Larry Nelson.


Back and Forth on Buses; Overcrowding Poses A Threat to Children
To the Editor:
It is one thing when adults are inconvenienced by the bus system.
It is quite a different situation when young children are placed in a somewhat dangerous situation.
A case in point: The M15 between 2:30 and 4 P.M. on First Avenue, where I have waited at 68th Street through as many as three 120 cigarettes, maybe 20 minutes, for an uptown bus.
When it does arrive, it is packed.
There are small children alone, medium-sized children, mothers and nannies with infants and the children they are picking up from school, strollers and the elderly who have chosen to travel in a "nonrush" hour.
Sudden stops mean that people are tossed around, particularly small children standing in the aisle.


Gauging Weatherstripping's Economy and Durability
SHOPPING for weatherstripping can be confusing.
First, it is important to realize that the presence or absence of weatherstripping will probably not greatly affect energy bills unless one lives in a small house having many large windows and doors.
But weatherstripping does stop drafts.
A homeowner may be able to lower the thermostat, and windows may develop less inside fog or frost.
Also, because weatherstripping is subject to wear and tear, most types eventually deteriorate.


THE NURSES OF VIETNAM, STILL WOUNDED
We are nurses who care for H.I.V.-infected patients at Beth Israel Medical Center.
Your article struck a particular chord with us.
War kills the young primarily, and so does AIDS.
We trained to be healers but AIDS doesn't allow us to heal.
We discussed this in our Monday morning support group.
The nurses in Vietnam had no forum in which to share their experiences.
When they tried, they were discouraged and reprimanded.
We can go home at night.
They couldn't.
We would like to express our support for these brave women.
DALE MANDELMAN New York, N.Y.


As Winter Comes, Safari Animals Are Moved Indoors
THE winds that whip across the African plains and send leaves swirling in the Australian section herald the move of some 1,500 wild animals to winter quarters at Great Adventure theme park here.
While the animals of the safari attraction remain on the park's 350-acre wildlife preserve, they move into houses with radiant heat that feels like the summer sun or Quonset huts generously stocked with grain and hay.
The animals seem to adjust well to their new quarters.
But getting them there requires some artful strategy by the park's 15 animal wardens.
The cranes are captured one at a time and taken to a heated bird house.
The gnus, which stay outdoors, have an easier time as they are herded en masse to their winter grazing ground.


From Little Packages Come Big Sounds
WHEN "CROSSROADS," A FOURCD boxed set chronicling the career of Eric Clapton, went gold shortly after it was released in 1988, the recording industry took notice.
Record companies, eager to tap the vast catalogues they had amassed, saw an opportunity to sell old wine in new bottles.
"Crossroads" has gone on to sell more than two million copies in this country alone, and the boom that it sparked has, if anything, accelerated.
Boxed sets, once the fare of late-night television commercials, have become big business, a particular favorite for holiday gifts.
Here are 15 choices that Times critics found worthy of note.
Prices are suggested retail. 'Sounds of the South'  Atlantic 7 82496-2; four CD's ($69.95)


After a Decade of Decline, Homeownership Is Rising
REVERSING a decade-long decline, homeownership rates, a key indicator of the nation's economic health, have been rising modestly over the last year, according to the National Association of Home Builders.
Housing analysts attribute the increase to the decline of mortgage rates, which have fallen to 25-year lows, and to home prices, which are not rising as much as they did in the 80's in most parts of the country.
They note, though, that homeownership rates, especially among people under 35, remain lower than in the early 1980's, evidence of unaffordable prices, stagnating wages, job insecurity and changing demographic trends.


Failure Marks On a Card Report
To the Editor:
In "Making the Grade" (Nov. 14), Eve Kahn completely misses the point of the Environmental Report Card and presents a one-sided, inaccurate account of its development and purpose.


Many Marketers Seem to Be Missing the Point
To the Editor:
Regarding the article "The Famous Brands on Death Row" (Nov. 7), it seems clear that many of today's marketers still don't get it.
Today, brands must be constantly monitored to determine if they are still providing a benefit to consumers and a point-of-difference from competing brands.
Marketers must return to the core brand's equities and reinforce this message in advertising, packaging, promotion and all means of marketing support.


...And the Studios Offer, For Your Consideration...
OSCAR-NOMINATION FEVER is especially virulent in the weeks before a movie opens, when press agents' spirits soar, and many critics have yet to glimpse the finished product.
But which movies finally get nominated for Oscars, and which the studios hope will be nominated are two very different things.
Here are some of the films that the studios (however misguided) have pinned their wishes on, and the likely categories to which they aspire.  -- Linda Lee Friday
"A Dangerous Woman" (Gramercy Pictures).
Best Actress: Debra Winger as a social outcast.
Dec. 8
"Six Degrees of Separation" (MGM).
Best Actress: Stockard Channing, who was nominated for a Tony for the role on Broadway, as the very social Ouisa Kittredge.
Best Director: Fred Schepisi.
Dec. 10
"Geronimo" (Columbia).
Best Actors: Wes Studi as Geronimo, Jason Patrick as U.S.
Cavalry Lieut.
Charles Gatewood.
Best Supporting Actor: Robert Duvall as a frontiersman.
Best Director: Walter Hill.
Dec. 14
"Germinal" (Sony Pictures Classics).
Best Director: Claude Berri, for bringing Emile Zola's novel to the screen, in the most expensive French movie ever made. (Opens for one week in Los Angeles only, in order to qualify.) Dec. 15
"Schindler's List" (Universal).
Best Picture.
Best Actor: Liam Neeson as Oskar Schindler, a German-Catholic who saved Jews from the Holocaust.
Best Supporting Actors: Ben Kingsley as a Jewish accountant, Ralph Fiennes as a Nazi.
Best Director: Steven Spielberg.
Dec. 17
"The Pelican Brief" (Warner Brothers).
Best Picture.
Best Actress: Julia Roberts as a law student in this adaptation of a John Grisham novel.
Best Supporting Actor: Denzel Washington as an investigative reporter.
Best Director: Alan J. Pakula.
"What's Eating Gilbert Grape" (Paramount).
Best Actor: Johnny Depp as a confused teen-ager.
Best Supporting Actress: Darlene Cates as his 600-pound mother.
Best Supporting Actor: Leonardo DiCaprio as his mentally retarded brother.
Best Director: Lasse Halstrom.
"Wrestling Ernest Hemingway" (Warner Brothers).
Best Actors: Robert Duvall and Richard Harris as two retired men who become friends.
Dec. 21
"The Summer House" (Samuel Goldwyn).
Best Supporting Actresses: Joan Plowright as an English mum in the 1950's; Jeanne Moreau as a half-Egyptian, half-French busybody.
Dec. 22
"Philadelphia" (Tri-Star).
Best Picture.
Best Actors: Tom Hanks as a lawyer who is fired because of AIDS and Denzel Washington as the lawyer who takes his case to court.
Best Director: Jonathan Demme.
Dec. 25
"Heaven and Earth" (Warner Brothers).
Best Actress: Hiep Thi Le as a young Vietnamese woman.
Best Supporting Actress: Joan Chen as her mother.
Best Actor: Tommy Lee Jones as an American soldier.
Best Director: Oliver Stone.
"Grumpy Old Men" (Warner Brothers).
Best Actors: Jack Lemmon and Walter Matthau as old friends in Minnesota.
Best Supporting Actress: Ann-Margret as a professor of literature.
"Shadowlands" (Savoy).
Best Picture.
Best Actor: Anthony Hopkins as C. S. Lewis.
Best Actress: Debra Winger as Joy Gresham.
Best Director: Richard Attenborough.
Dec.29
"In the Name of the Father" (Universal).
Best Picture.
Best Actor: Daniel Day-Lewis as a man who is unfairly accused of I.R.A. bombings.
Best Supporting Actor: Pete Postlethwait as his father.
Best Supporting Actress: Emma Thompson as his lawyer.
Best Director: Jim Sheridan.


Kelly Corley, C. C. Wuest
Kelly Maureen Corley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph A. Corley Jr. of Atlantis, Fla., and Christopher Charles Wuest, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph S. Wuest of Douglaston, Queens, were married yesterday in Fair Haven, N.J.
The Rev.
Kenneth Ekdahl performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Nativity.
Mrs.
Corley-Wuest, 33, is a television production manager based in Bayside, Queens.
She graduated from George Washington University.
Her father retired as a representative of manufacturers of railroad equipment.


The Merchant of Tuscany
Why is it American social historians and their novelist counterparts so rarely focus on the Italians?
Granted that observing a cultural milieu through the eyes of one of Edith Wharton's diffident heiresses may not be ideal, but faute de mieux, it's better than nothing.
Yet when it comes to the Italians and the great Florentine families, that's about what we have -- nothing.
And it's not that they aren't noteworthy.
Many of the ancient clans of England and France are but parvenus compared with the Frescobaldis, the Antinoris and the Ricasolis, who hobnobbed with the likes of Dante and the Medicis, and who were there at the birth of the Renaissance.


Hairpin Turns of Peace Lead to Maze Called Jerusalem
ON a slope of the Mount of Olives, with the rest of Jerusalem glistening below, the Beit Orot Yeshiva stands as a symbol of the rights and wrongs of this ever-fragile city.
Naturally, deciding right from wrong depends on one's outlook.
It is a dilemma that goes far to explain why the future of Jerusalem, so tough and emotion-laden an issue that it supposedly was set aside as the final matter to be dealt with in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, is in reality already on the bargaining table.
Beit Orot, founded a few years ago in an old Arab house, is a Jewish toehold in a Palestinian part of town.
In October, on an adjoining lot, the school put up a dozen makeshift booths that seemed at first to be ceremonial huts for the Succoth holiday but turned out to be forerunners of planned houses for students and their families.
The tract of land belongs to Jews, yeshiva officials said, and, besides, Jews have a right to live anywhere in Jerusalem.


Home-Style Appeal in a Victorian Setting
ALEIA'S (the maiden name of the owners' mother), adds new dining luster to Westbrook.
Inside an inviting white frame Victorian house with shutters, a green awning and gas street lights, the large dining room is on the subdued side, with dark green carpeting, dark wood paneling and wainscoting.
White lace curtains at the windows and chipper hand-painted renderings of vegetables on the walls help brighten up the place, but even the ceiling spots and glass-shaded lights hung over many tables do not completely relieve the dim look.
But that should not deter you from a really pleasurable dining experience, enhanced by well-trained and cheerful staff work.
The Italian-accented menu contains many current hot-button items, prepared authoritatively and with home-style appeal.


A Classic Tale


Tanya Lewis and Lenard Garrett
Tanya Cecilia Lewis, the director of equal-employment opportunity compliance for the New York City Transit Authority, was married yesterday to Lenard Garrett, the authority's assistant director for government affairs.
The Rev.
William S. Randolph, a Baptist minister, officiated at Rutledge Chapel at the University of South Carolina in Columbia.
Ms.
Lewis is keeping her name.
She is also an adjunct professor at Cornell University, teaching about employment discrimination and the law.
She graduated from South Carolina, from which she also received a law degree.


The Myth of Free Trade
To the Editor:
In "Drop Textile Tariffs, for GATT's Sake" (Viewpoints, Nov. 7),James Bovard perpetuates the damaging myths that free traders have trumpeted for decades.
None of this rhetoric ever seems to consider the damage that the loss of manufacturing jobs is inflicting on the United States, while it uses gross distortions to support the position that free trade is always right and any hint of protectionism is always wrong.


'Eloise' of the Plaza Leads to 'Junior Kroll' of the Hamptons
ONCE upon a time there lived a famous illustrator named Hilary Knight.
He drew pictures for the "Eloise" children's books, which were very popular.
One day Mr.
Knight met a little boy named Michael Paraskevas, who liked to draw pictures, too.
The famous illustrator looked at some of Michael's sketches and told the boy's mother, "He definitely has a lot of talent." Michael kept drawing and one day he had his own children's book character, Junior Kroll, who some people call the Eloise of the Hamptons.
Twenty-five years after the illustrators first met, their trademark characters, Eloise and Junior Kroll, are meeting on the walls of Giraffics Gallery in East Hampton.
Until Dec. 17, a two-man exhibition of paintings and illustrations documents the careers of these two successful commercial artists who enjoy a respectful friendship.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
HISTORY THE IRAN-CONTRA SCANDAL The Declassified History.
Edited by Peter Kornbluh and Malcolm Byrne.
New Press, cloth, $40; paper, $24.95.


Immigrant Is the 40th Cabdriver to Be Killed This Year
The morning after her husband was shot to death -- the 40th cabdriver to be killed in New York City this year -- what remained for Clayvell Buddan yesterday were the photographs.
There were the pictures taken one day last summer at Six Flags Great Adventure in New Jersey, a day that Peter Buddan, 30, took off from his long hours behind the wheel of his livery cab as a special treat to his wife and 8-year-old daughter, Crystal.


Forget the Doilies and Ruffles
IN Cape May, N.J., the Fairthorne bed and breakfast beckons with glowing electric candles nestled in lace curtains, behind the Valentine-pink wicker porch furniture.
Potted blooms spill down the grand steps of Captain Mey's Inn, and in front of a quarter-acre of gingerbread down the street, a white-on-red sign scripted in a Victorian hand announces the Humphrey Hughes House, "for ladies and gentlemen on seaside holiday."
So I stayed at the Heritage Motor Inn, across the street from Morrow's Nut House.


Giants' Alphabet Goes From D to W
For the Giants, it is indeed a very simple thing.
The Phoenix Cardinals are in town, and the Giants are on a roll.
To keep the good times going and to take advantage of the Dallas Cowboys' Thanksgiving loss, the Giants must win.
For this game, that's all there is to it.
No star quarterback to stop.
No all-universe running back to worry about.
No Hall of Fame coach breaking down your offense.
The Giants face none of these things.
The Cardinals are a team that has been struggling all year and injuries, particularly to the No. 1 draft pick, Garrison Hearst, have practically brought the team to its knees.


Fashion's Latest 'Wow'
Pamela Dennis, 33, a designer known for her glamorous dresses, is not a darling of the fashion establishment.
"They definitely think I'm a sucker, that I'm a sucker to merchandising," Ms.
Dennis said over lunch recently in her showroom at 550 Seventh Avenue, a few floors above those of Bill Blass and Oscar de la Renta.
"I know it's not a designer-y way to be, to find your niche in the market and cater to your customer."


Wild Western Flowers
The state of Texas is the habitat for more than 5,000 flowering plants, so it took some weeding to come up with just "100 Texas Wildflowers," a handsome 72-page soft-cover book published by the Southwest Parks and Monuments Association with the Native Plant Society of Texas.
Some of the names are as colorful as the photographs: Texas stork's bill, baby blue-eyes and antelope horns.
Just don't go looking for the yellow rose of Texas; it's not a native, according to the book's author, Dorothy Baird Mattiza.
The book costs $7.95 plus $3.50 shipping; (602) 622-1999.


Back and Forth on Buses; Transit Authority Seeks To Improve Efficiency
To the Editor:
Arline Bronzaft's contention that bus service is the stepchild of New York City transit ("Heading Down the Road to Extinction," Nov. 7) is, to say the least, inaccurate.
Over the past decade there has been significant investment by the Transit Authority in its network of 225 express and local bus routes.
Since 1983, 2,828 new buses have been purchased and considerable attention has been given to making service more efficient and customer oriented.


Prince's Music, Joffrey Dancers: MTV on Point
IF ONLY IT HAD BEEN Better.
That, one suspects, was the general feeling earlier this month when the Brooklyn Academy of Music presented "Billboards," the Joffrey Ballet's mammoth four-part production set to songs by Prince.
The choreographers -- Laura Dean, Charles Moulton, Margo Sappington and Peter Pucci -- were unevenly matched and tended to settle for fleeting rather than memorable images.
Yet for all its flaws, "Billboards" aroused the mix of curiosity and excitement through which the Joffrey has traditionally introduced new audiences to ballet.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 Al Angeloro is the cabbie's angel of the airwaves.
His music: world beat.
His mantra: "Are you watching your back?" NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 Lawyers, collection agents, liquidators -- they have long flourished in New York.
These days, they're working overtime.
MOVIE CLOCK 16 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 18 Echoes of Machu Picchu in the East Village; "Potato People" in Flatbush.
GOOD EATING 23 From Third Avenue to Park, seafood to steak: cha-cha shrimp at Chin Chin, prime sirloin at Sparks.
SOAPBOX 25 One woman's ambivalence about the prostitutes on her street.
Plus, back and forth on buses: a selection of letters.


Tunneling Into a World of Danger; Fatal Accident Puts Spotlight on Sandhogs' Perilous Job
The drills were deafening as they bored into the bedrock, as dust and water flew into the faces and onto the yellow rubber pants of the men who call themselves sandhogs.
At 2:45 P.M. the drills stopped.
The men were done for the weekend in shaft No. 23, a name that somehow does not capture the immensity of a hole that drops from the earth's surface 550 feet below Brooklyn.
Charles McWilliams lit a cigarette.
About 10 other sandhogs, their eyes white behind flecked masks of mud, climbed into an elevator cage at the pit's dim bottom.


NOV. 21-27: Childhood Savagery; A Pair of Young Killers Are Convicted in Britain
In the end, no one knows why two 10-year-old boys lured James Bulger from his mother's side in a Liverpool shopping mall, ledd the 2-year-old two and a half miles across town and then savagely smash in his skull with bricks, rocks and a metal bar.
But a jury in the northern English city of Preston took only five hours last week to decide that Robert Thompson and Jon Venables knew just what they were doing when they killed James last February.
The boys -- each now 11 -- will spend the rest of their formative years in juvenile treatment centers for a crime the trial judge described as an act of "unparalleled evil and barbarity." WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT


Corrections
A caption on Oct. 31, about "Liaison," by Joyce Wadler, referred erroneously to the pictured makeup and costume of Shi Pei Pu, the Beijing Opera performer whose relationship with the French diplomat Bernard Boursicot inspired the play "M. Butterfly." He was depicted in this instance as a male character.


Water Festival Begins in Cambodia


Karen Wassong, Anton T. Hios
Karen M. Wassong, the daughter of Mrs.
P.
John Mirtz of Rye, N.Y., and Laurence Wassong of Tryon, N.C., was married yesterday evening to Anton T. Hios, a son of Themis and Elfriede Hios of Old Greenwich, Conn.
Rabbi Robert Rothman officiated at the Westchester Country Club in Rye.
Mrs.
Hios, 27, is an account executive at Alcone Sims O'Brien, a sales promotion agency in Mahwah, N.J.
She graduated from Ithaca College.


Cheryl Weinstock, David Garfinkel
January wedding plans have been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Weinstock of Short Hills, N.J., for their daughter Cheryl Linn Weinstock and Dr.
David Adam Garfinkel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George B. Garfinkel of Woodmere, L.I.
Ms.
Weinstock, 29, graduated from Duke University and received an M.B.A. from Boston University.
She is an account supervisor at CHC Advertising and MED Communications, an advertising agency in Woodbridge, N.J.
Her father is the president of Weinstock Enterprises, a plumbing and heating supplies wholesale company in Newark.


Taking It Out in Trade
Money isn't everything.
There's compost, ice cream and beer, available free to employees at, respectively, Rodale Press (publishers of "Organic Gardening"), Ben &amp; Jerry's and the Miller Brewing Company.
For many Americans, getting a job would be enough.
But the lucky few get jobs plus perks (perquisites).
In hidden corners of the economy there is still a gravy, or perhaps an ice-cream, train.


Los Angeles
No major American city in recent times has suffered quite the body blow to its tourism industry that Los Angeles did after last year's devastating riots.
Those events changed the world perception of Los Angeles from one of a dreamy land of towering palms, movie stars and sunny escape to one of urban apocalypse, with violent street gangs and drive-by shootings.
If both notions were exaggerated, the result was that visitors avoided Southern California, and especially its intimidating core, Los Angeles.
The latest blow was the wildfires, and then mudslides, that afflicted the region in October and November.
Despite the horrific television images, though, few visitors will notice the damage except in parts of Malibu, Laguna Beach and suburbs remote from most tourist attractions.
Indeed, a year and a half after the riots, visitors are returning.
With the peaceful reaction to verdicts in both the retrial of four white police officers who beat a black man and the trial of two young black men accused of brutalizing a white truck driver, Los Angeles has regained a measure of self-confidence.


THE NURSES OF VIETNAM, STILL WOUNDED
I found Laura Palmer's article "The Nurses of Vietnam, Still Wounded" (Nov. 7) very moving.
I hate to sound stupid and insensitive -- and male centered, I guess -- but I had never thought about the scars of the war in that regard.
It was truly consciousness raising, if that term is still O.K.
JOHN K. DELLINGER Lititz, Pa.


Raising the Curtain on the World of Opera
IT was a tough room.
For two days, successive groups of squirming high school students from Fairfield County reluctantly filled the back rows of the Palace Theater in Stamford to learn about opera.
But as Connecticut Grand Opera and Orchestra docents explained the bizarre plot of Jacques Offenbach's "Bluebeard" -- an 1866 comic opera -- and stage crews hammered, adjusted and hollered around the set behind them, an amazing thing happened: attitude was replaced by interest.


Any Number Of 'Musketeers'
To the Editor:
Having read Michele Willens's article "Give Tim Curry a Role and He'll Provide the Relish"  [ Nov. 7 ] , one can already envision Mr.
Curry as a marvelously cunning Cardinal Richelieu in Disney's new film "The Three Musketeers," easily the equal of Vincent Price's scheming churchman in MGM's 1948 "original," as Ms.
Willens calls it.


Why Question His Mental Powers?
To the Editor:
In Stephen Holden's article "Pop's Patriarch Makes Music Along With His Heirs"  [ Oct. 31 ] , in which he recounts Frank Sinatra's triumphant return to the recording studio, the author notes that some people question the performer's mental powers.
Really?
How many of us are as sharp as we were 30 years ago?
Talk about a low blow.
Who wouldn't be nervous returning to a medium after 10 years?


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
ROUND UP THE USUAL SUSPECTS The Making of "Casablanca" -- Bogart, Bergman, and World War II By Aljean Harmetz.
Hyperion, $12.95.
The stars are dead but the film will live on, for reasons the author reveals.
Her study of what may be America's best-loved movie "deploys telling details and illuminating anecdotes," Desmond Ryan said here last year.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: November 28, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) Three couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.
2
6
THE KILLER ANGELS, by Michael Shaara. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The Battle of Gettysburg.
3
5
THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $6.50.) The investigation of the murder of an officer, a general's daughter.
4
5
INADMISSIBLE EVIDENCE, by Philip Friedman. (Ivy, $5.99.) A prosecutor struggles to convict a real estate tycoon of murder.
5
48
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-American women and their mothers.
6
4
KEEPER OF THE HEART, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A woman flees yet yearns for a man chosen to be her mate on a distant planet.
7
9
THE AGE OF INNOCENCE, by Edith Wharton. (Collier/Macmillan, $5.95.) The 1920 novel.
8
1
ALONG CAME A SPIDER, by James Patterson. (Warner, $5.99.) Detective Alex Cross on the trail of a serial killer in Washington.
9
4
THE COPPER BEECH, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $5.99.) Behind closed doors in an Irish village.
10
41
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court Justices.
11
85
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions during a trial.
12
14
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."
13
1
HERE THERE BE DRAGONS, by John Peel. (Pocket, $5.50.) A "Star Trek" story in which the Enterprise tries to protect a developing world.
14
1
THE REMAINS OF THE DAY, by Kazuo Ishiguro. (Vintage, $11.) The life of an English butler and the "great gentleman" he served.
15
5
DEVIL'S WALTZ, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $6.50.) A psychologist-detective investigates a small child's strange illnesses.
16*
1
RED SQUARE, by Martin Cruz Smith. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The detective Arkady Renko returns to Moscow after the fall of Communism.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
11
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
2
4
RARE AIR, by Michael Jordan. (Collins, $25.) Photographs and observations.
3
525
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
4
1
EVERYTHING SHE EVER WANTED, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) The case of a Southern woman whose idyllic wedding was followed by a series of murders.
5
5
SUBMARINE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $14.95.) A tour through a nuclear warship.
6
8
THE PRESIDENT'S HEALTH SECURITY PLAN. (Times Books/Random House, $8.) The Clinton Administration's health care proposals.
7*
41
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
8
111
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
9*
31
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
10
5
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $10.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
11*
20
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $6.99.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
12*
15
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on life's commonplaces.
13
2
A CALL FOR REVOLUTION, by Martin L. Gross. (Ballantine, $8.99.) More examples of Government waste, and how to stop it.
14
132
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
15*
13
PRINCESS, by Jean P. Sasson. (Avon, $5.50.) Life as lived by a member of the royal family and other women in Saudi Arabia.
16*
9
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Bantam, $6.99.) The autobiography of the general.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
9
THE DAYS ARE JUST PACKED, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A new collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
145
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
3
3
THE FAR SIDE GALLERY 4, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A new collection of cartoons.
4
1
MTV'S BEAVIS AND BUTT-HEAD, by Sam Johnson and Chris Marcil. (MTV/Callaway/Pocket, $10.) Cartoon humor featuring the television characters.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Nov. 13, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Harassment Ruling Leaves a Puzzle for Bosses
To the Editor:
Re "Court, 9-0, Makes Sex Harassment Easier to Prove," front page, Nov. 10: The Supreme Court in restricting its ruling in the Harris case to redefining sexual harassment in the workplace, did indeed leave "a number of questions unanswered."
One important question, from an employer's standpoint, is whether or not a person who believes herself to be the victim of sexual harassment has a deputy to lodge a complaint with her employer and seek an amicable solution of her grievance before taking legal action.


The Executive Computer; The New Patent That Is Infuriating the Multimedia Industry
UNITED STATES Patent Number 5,241,671 may turn out to be one of the most nettlesome patents of the digital age, vexing everyone from Microsoft and Time Warner to the smallest startup.
Or it may simply be the latest example of a patent system that is overwhelmed by the pace and complexity of today's high-technology industry.
Patent 671 appears to give Compton's New Media, a division of the Tribune Company, control over the most popular techniques for searching for information in multimedia data bases.
Compton's applied for the patent in 1989, shortly after the publication of Compton's Interactive Encyclopedia on CD-ROM.


Data Bank/November 28, 1993
Data Bank/November 28, 1993
New Orders for Durable Goods
Oct.
Sept.
Aug.
Monthly percent change
2.0
1.1
2.5
Coal Production
Nov. 12
Nov. 5
Oct. 29
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
19,294
19,003
18,384
Auto Production
Nov. 19
Nov. 12
Nov. 5
In units, weekly total
136,766
140,808
134,642
Truck Production
In units, weekly total
115,485
112,681
115,612
Weekly Jobless Claims
In thousands
339
338
358
3-Month Treasury Bills
Nov. 26
Nov. 19
Nov. 12
Rate in percent
3.10
3.10
3.09
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
3.25
3.26
3.22
30-Year Treasury Bonds
Yield in percent
6.30
6.33
6.15


On Sunday; Amid a Season Of Good Cheer, A Dissent
THERE are popular public occasions about which it is risky to demur on one's own, and that's when George Bernard Shaw comes in handy.
For example, at the emotional leadup to the next in the modern superpower cycle of tidy, winnable wars, a pacifist might bear Shaw in mind: "Patriotism is a pernicious, psychopathic form of idiocy." In the same spirit there is Shaw on Christmas: "Christmas is forced on a reluctant and disgusted nation by the shopkeepers and the press: on its own merits it would wither and shrivel in the fiery breath of universal hatred; and anyone who looked back to it would be turned into a pillar of greasy sausages."
All right, so you can't quite agree.
But keep in mind that in wielding his pen like a nasty shard of truth, Shaw could just as easily have been idly window-shopping here and now, taking Shavian note of some of the Yuletide features offered in neighborhood boites for consumers searching beyond the everything already possessed.
There is Assumption Abbey fruitcake, for example, on fancy display for a pretty penny in one East Side shop, and so valued because it is made to the recipe of "world-class chef Jean-Pierre Auge" and baked in the Ozarks by silence-enshrouded Trappist monks whose lives are, incidentally, dedicated to the world-class messiah of the current seasonal tidings.


How Doctors Learn to Think They're Doctors
THIS fall, 150 brand new medical students at Columbia University's College of Physicians and Surgeons donned white coats and recited the Hippocratic Oath as an initiation ceremony designed to welcome them into the fraternity of medicine.
They had not yet seen a patient.
During the ceremony Dr.
Linda Lewis, associate dean of student affairs, told the students -- many just months out of college -- that those white coats were "cloaks of compassion," symbols to remind them of the importance of humility in their careers.
But to the public, those white coats have also at times come to symbolize the arrogance and greed of an exclusive fraternity.


From Little Packages Come Big Sounds
WHEN "CROSSROADS," A FOURCD boxed set chronicling the career of Eric Clapton, went gold shortly after it was released in 1988, the recording industry took notice.
Record companies, eager to tap the vast catalogues they had amassed, saw an opportunity to sell old wine in new bottles.
"Crossroads" has gone on to sell more than two million copies in this country alone, and the boom that it sparked has, if anything, accelerated.
Boxed sets, once the fare of late-night television commercials, have become big business, a particular favorite for holiday gifts.
Here are 15 choices that Times critics found worthy of note.
Prices are suggested retail. 'The Complete Blue Note Recordings of Don Cherry  Mosaic Records 145 (35 Melrose Place, Stamford, Conn., 06902); 2 CD's ($30) or 3 LP's ($39)


Michelle Thomas, Tommy Cartagena
Michelle Denise Thomas, a daughter of the Rev. and Mrs.
Alvin Thomas of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., and Tommy Cartagena, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Luis A. Cartagena of Spartanburg, S.C., were married yesterday at the First Presbyterian Church in Ramsey, N.J.
The Rev.
Robert A. Colman officiated.
The bride, 26, graduated from Williams College.
She is a research chemist at Akzo Chemicals, the manufacturer of Diamond Crystal salt, in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
The bride's father is the supervisor of music and art at the Hendrick Hudson High School, a public school in Montrose, N.Y.
He is also the pastor of Christ Evangelistic Association, an Apostolic church in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride's mother is a literacy and educational consultant in Briarcliff Manor.
The bridegroom, 26, attends Bergen County Community College and is an electro-mechanical technician at Tajima America, an embroidery-machine manufacturing company in Franklin Lakes, N.J.
His father is the production supervisor at Hoke Inc., an engine valve production company in Spartanburg.


Deirdre Oakley, Henry Gerling 3d
Deirdre Ann Oakley, the daughter of Francis and Claire-Ann Oakley of Williamstown, Mass., was married there yesterday to Henry Bernhardt Gerling 3d, the son of Mr.
Gerling Jr. and Natalie Gerling of Cheektowaga, N.Y.
The Rev.
William Cyr performed the ceremony at St.
Raphael's Roman Catholic Church.
Ms.
Oakley, 33, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Bowdoin College and received a master's degree in geography from the State University at Albany.
Tomorrow she is to become the research assistant at the National Resource Center on Homelessness and Mental Health, a nonprofit research institute and clearinghouse in Delmar, N.Y.
Her father is the president of Williams College in Williamstown, and a professor of history there.


Art Lovers, Take Your Seats. Now, Stay There for Hours.
Life is short.
Art is long.
Actually, these days, very long.
And getting longer all the time.
Tony Kushner's "Perestroika," which opened last week on Broadway, runs at operatic length: three and a half hours.
And it's only half of a theatrical diptych, seven hours over all.
"The Kentucky Cycle," also on Broadway and also in two parts, runs six hours.
And this year's revival (Broadway needs at least one each season) is "Abe Lincoln in Illinois," which runs three and a half hours.
So much for abstracts and brief chronicles.


Los Angeles
No major American city in recent times has suffered quite the body blow to its tourism industry that Los Angeles did after last year's devastating riots.
Those events changed the world perception of Los Angeles from one of a dreamy land of towering palms, movie stars and sunny escape to one of urban apocalypse, with violent street gangs and drive-by shootings.
If both notions were exaggerated, the result was that visitors avoided Southern California, and especially its intimidating core, Los Angeles.
The latest blow was the wildfires, and then mudslides, that afflicted the region in October and November.
Despite the horrific television images, though, few visitors will notice the damage except in parts of Malibu, Laguna Beach and suburbs remote from most tourist attractions.
Indeed, a year and a half after the riots, visitors are returning.
With the peaceful reaction to verdicts in both the retrial of four white police officers who beat a black man and the trial of two young black men accused of brutalizing a white truck driver, Los Angeles has regained a measure of self-confidence.


A School Rating Scale Needed an Asterisk
To the Editor:
Your article "The Performance Scale: What It Means, How It Was Done" (Sept. 26) offers a short disclaimer to explain why certain schools' performance ratings may not seem on a par with other schools: a concentration of "new immigrants with special problems." But relevant schools are not identified.
Our school, P.S. 253 in Brooklyn, has a most productive and talented faculty and a motivated student body.
However, English is not the primary language for 90 percent of entering kindergarten children; many immigrant students enter third or fourth grade with limited formal education; 37 percent of all students are in the English-as-a-Second-Language program.


The Season Is Upon Us


NOV. 21-27: The Brady Bill; Handgun Control, Such as It Is, Finally Is Adopted
In the end, seven years after it was introduced, the handgun-control law known as the Brady bill achieved passage by Congress last week through a surrender.
The law itself is expected to change crime statistics only marginally, but it is at least a sign that politicians dare not appear unresponsive to a surge of anger from voters who feel unsafe in their homes.
The final action on the measure came in a voice vote in the Senate, without debate, after Bob Dole, the minority leader from Kansas, announced the end of a Republican filibuster in the face of public support for the measure.
"All of us will be happy to have this behind us," he said.


Leora Frankel, Yosef Shlosberg
Leora Miriam Frankel, a daughter of Drs.
Jonathan and Edith Frankel of Jerusalem and New York, was married on Thursday to Yosef Shlosberg, a son of Arieh and Devorah Shlosberg of Pardes Hannah, Israel.
Rabbi Avraham Eliezer Rosenthal performed the ceremony at the Nirvana Hotel on the shore of the Dead Sea in Israel.
Ms.
Frankel-Shlosberg, 27, graduated magna cum laude from Brown University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a freelance journalist.
The bride's father is a professor of history at Hebrew University in Jerusalem.
Her mother, a political scientist, is the director of Hebrew University's New York office of academic affairs.


For New Haven, Numbers Don't Add Up to a Victory
The University of New Haven, which averaged 54.7 points a game while going 11-0 during the regular season, scored 35 today to equal its lowest scoring output of the year.
More important than mere statistics, though, the low point total meant defeat for the Chargers, who fell to Indiana (Pa.), 38-35, in the second round of the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division II playoffs.
Indiana is now 12-0.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
ANGELS ON EXHIBIT
Angels as elements in Christianity, Judaism and Islam and as a timeless inspiration to artists, writers and composers are the subject of an exhibition at the College of New Rochelle through Jan. 16.
They are represented in paintings, sculpture and photographs on view in the Castle Gallery.
Three hierarchies of angels are identified.
The first hierarchy includes Seraphim, who guard God's throne; Cherubim, protectors of sacred things, and Thrones, characterized as examples of steadfastness.
The second hierarchy consists of Dominations, who are free from anything terrestrial or degrading; Virtues, who possess unshakable courage, and Powers, who can be both good and evil.


Hanukkah Events On Two Coasts
Hanukkah, the eight-day Jewish holiday that starts Dec. 8, will be celebrated across the country with a variety of public events.
Here is a sampling from both coasts:
In Beverly Gardens Park, across from City Hall in Beverly Hills, Calif., a 27-foot brass menorah with gas-powered flames will be lighted at dusk on each evening of the holiday.
On Dec. 12, starting at 4 P.M., there will be a concert preceding the candle-lighting ceremony, featuring the Los Angeles Boys Choir.
The menorah is sponsored by Chabad House, a nonprofit Jewish social services organization.
For information: (310) 208-7511.
At the Judah L. Magnes Museum, 2911 Russell Street in Berkeley, Calif., there will be a reading of the winning entrants in the Anna Davidson Rosenberg Award for Poems on the Jewish Experience, on Dec. 12 from 2 to 4 P.M.
The poetry event is, according to its sponsors, the only nationwide competition for unpublished poems in English about Jewish culture.
There is a suggested donation of $3.
For information: (510) 549-6950.
Visitors can see "Shtetl Life," a show of paintings, prints and folk art about the Jews of Eastern Europe, at the museum, which has a permanent collection of Jewish ceremonial objects and works of fine and folk art, both Sephardic and Ashkenazic, as well as a library of rare Judaic manuscripts and books.


Melissa Coley, Jay P. Rutter
Melissa Jane Coley, a daughter of Jacqueline L. Coley of Fayetteville, N.Y., and the late Daniel E. Coley, was married yesterday to Jay Paul Rutter, the son of Winona Rutter of Bernardsville, N.J., and H. Paul Rutter of Venice, Calif.
The Rev.
James O'Brien performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception in Syracuse.
Ms.
Coley, 36, is keeping her name.
She manages the arts and events program at the World Financial Center in New York for Olympia &amp; York, the real estate developer.
She graduated from Colgate University and received a master's degree in international politics from New York University.


Landscape Inspires A Clothing Designer
ON the linings of the breast pockets inside of thousands of men's suits in stores throughout the country, the labels read "Allyn Saint George -- American Classic" or "Allyn Saint George -- American Couture."
"The first label is on proper business attire; the second group has a more upscale look," said Allyn St.
George, the designer.
He draws inspiration for his clothing collections, he said, from the grounds of his 19-acre estate here, called Saintland.


Gadgets to Ease The Journey
THE trend in travel gadgets this year is safety.
Where once catalogues showed a portable cocktail bar, they now offer a device to bolt the door or put a seal on your luggage.
We tested a few of these, and they seemed too heavy or complex, or sometimes too fear-evoking.
But some items are worth their heft and will make welcome gifts for people who travel a lot, even if it's only back and forth to work.
How to make a long-distance call without revealing the account number on a credit card or phone card to eagle-eyed thieves in airports and train stations has become a matter of concern.
One solution is a gadget that circumvents the all-too-visible keypad on the pay phone, allowing you to punch the numbers into a small keypad placed against the phone's mouthpiece, which can be held out of view.
The phone registers the device's tones as dialing.
A popular model, often out of stock, is Radio Shack's Budget Pocket Tone Dialer, catalogue number 43-139, which is 4 by 2 1/4 by 3/4 inches.
It costs $15.99, and requires three AAA batteries.
A similar device is offered in Magellan's catalogue as item ET311 for $12.85, batteries included, plus $3.75 shipping.
Magellan's, Post Office Box 5485, Santa Barbara, Calif. 93150-5485; (800) 962-4943.


The Challenge By Democrats To Whitman Will Be Ended
After three weeks of legal and political wrangling over whether Republicans tried to suppress the urban black vote, the New Jersey Democratic chairman said yesterday that his party plans to abandon its legal campaign to overturn Christine Todd Whitman's narrow victory over Gov.
Jim Florio on Nov. 2.
The party chairman, State Senator Raymond J. Lesniak, said hours of lawyers' questioning of Edward J. Rollins, Ms.
Whitman's political strategist and campaign manager, and of her brother, Webster B. Todd Jr., had failed to provide enough evidence of payments to black ministers and to Democratic workers to justify continuing the challenge of Mrs.
Whitman's election.


MAKING IT WORK
Appetite for Burritos Is Spreading in Manhattan
First there were hamburgers, then salad-bar salads, then sushi.
Now, burritos.
Fast Mexican takeout is cropping up all over.
Capitalizing on the city's taste for cheap rice and beans and sloppy guacamole is the California Burrito Company.


Solving the Stuck-Truck Problem: Lowering a Street Is Opposed
No one in Kingsbridge disputes the need to prevent trucks from getting stuck, as they do about once a week, beneath the elevated subway line stretching along Broadway, the neighborhood's main shopping strip.
But the solution proposed by the city's Department of Transportation -- to excavate the street and lower it by as much as two feet -- has run up against a torrent of community opposition.
Community Board 8 recently passed a resolution to reject the agency's $2 million project, joining a growing band of residents and merchants who say the plan would cause more harm than good.
The resolution is not binding, but the city agency says it is seeking to address community concerns in its wake.


Protesters Go to the Top to Demand Clean Streets
June Beckett has lived in West Harlem for 35 years but says she has never seen it so dirty.
"The situation is getting worse," she said.
"There is trash in our streets, trash in our buildings. I don't like dirt."


Shareholder-Suit Limits Gain Support in Assembly
Under pressure from business groups, the New York State Legislature is moving toward restricting a form of securities litigation that allows shareholders to sue corporate officials for mishandling company affairs.
Known as shareholder derivative suits, the litigation is a powerful weapon for minority shareholders seeking to influence the actions of corporate boards otherwise more accountable to majority shareholders.


The Designs Behind the Surprises
BILL CLINTON has just completed maybe the most successful month of his Presidency, with victories ranging from trade to gun control to labor disputes.
But just when his Administration seemed to be taking off, the President's deputy chief of staff and legislative affairs director quit from exhaustion and Mr.
Clinton blew up at reporters from Rolling Stone Magazine for never getting "one damn bit of credit" from the "knee-jerk liberal press."
Such contradictory scenes have become a fixture of the Clinton Presidency, which is why pundits trying to make weekly judgments are constantly shifting between proclamations that he has finally "turned the corner" and denunciations that his White House is in irreparable "disarray."


David A. Brand, Rajinder K. Sidhu
Mr. and Mrs.
Parmpal S. Sidhu of Scotch Plains, N.J., have announced that their daughter Rajinder Kaur Sidhu will marry David Alan Brand, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Burton R. Brand of Buffalo Grove, Ill., in January.
Both the future bride and the future bridegroom work at Robertet Flavors Inc., a flavor manufacturing company in South Plainfield, N.J.
Ms.
Sidhu is a food technologist; Mr.
Brand is a marketing coordinator.


Victoria Austin, Gregory Smith
Victoria Fleming Austin, an editor in the trade division of Harcourt Brace &amp; Company, and Gregory Brian Dominic Smith, the owner of Gregory Smith Graphic Design, both in San Diego, were married there yesterday.
The Rev.
Maryanne Lacey performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Cathedral Church of St.
Paul.
Mrs.
Austin-Smith, 38, is the daughter of Angeline F. Austin of Princeton, N.J., and Francis M. Austin Jr. of New York.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.
The bride is a great-great-granddaughter of Edwin Augustus Stevens, a founder of the New York Yacht Club and the Stevens Institute of Technology, an engineering school in Hoboken, N.J.
The bride's father, who is retired, was the president of Telesector Resources Group, a telecommunications company in White Plains.


Evil for Sale
Marlin (Bud) Hasher has a room in his New Jersey home with 45 mannequins in immaculate Nazi uniforms, as well as one dressed as Hitler ("The kids love that one") and another with a crudely penned beard and starkly carved face, wearing the stained garb of an inmate from Dachau.
One wall is lined with 100 helmets and caps, from the Luftwaffe, the Panzer corps, the Waffen SS, each bearing a swastika.
Another wall is covered with daggers, a third with swords.
Why?
The question reverberates because Bud Hasher, a mechanical designer, is Jewish.
Hasher started collecting at age 15, when uncles stationed in Europe mailed home such regalia, even while family members in Russia were being executed by the Nazis.
Today, Hasher, 63, is one of tens of thousands of Americans who avidly buy and sell memorabilia of the Hitler years.
What do he and other collectors find so engrossing in this perverse hobby?
In some cases, the items provide awful evidence of the unspeakable -- proof of the Holocaust.
Hasher lectures on the war years periodically.
But others are drawn by a macabre fascination with this century's most absolute evil.


Keino, Davis Win Titles
Bob Keino and Erin Davis, both using the steep hills as a weapon, raced to victory yesterday in the Footlocker Northeast Regional High School Cross Country championships at Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx.
Keino, an undefeated senior at Ridgewood (N.J.) High School and the son of the Olympic champion Kip Keino, ran the 5,000-meter course (3.1 miles) in 15 minutes 41.4 seconds to triumph by 50 yards.
Davis, a 14-year-old undefeated freshman at Saratoga Springs (N.Y.) High School, clocked 17:41.5 to win by 170 yards.


The Post-Apartheid Power Scramble
RETURN TO PARADISE By Breyten Breytenbach. 224 pp.
New York:  Harcourt Brace &amp; Company. $22.95.


Gauging Weatherstripping's Economy and Durability
SHOPPING for weatherstripping can be confusing.
First, it is important to realize that the presence or absence of weatherstripping will probably not greatly affect energy bills unless one lives in a small house having many large windows and doors.
But weatherstripping does stop drafts.
A homeowner may be able to lower the thermostat, and windows may develop less inside fog or frost.
Also, because weatherstripping is subject to wear and tear, most types eventually deteriorate.


Carriacou
To the Editor: The Grenada Board of Tourism is proud that you chose to include an article on Carriacou in your first color section ("Open Doors in Carriacou," Oct. 31).
Barbara Lazear Ascher's article was excellent and it is clear she was enchanted with the island; and so we wonder if she wanted to keep Carriacou a secret of sorts.
Ms.
Ascher correctly places Carriacou as a member of the Grenadine chain of islands, but we hope readers don't deduce that it is part of our neighbor, the country of St.
Vincent and the Grenadines.
Carriacou is a sister in the three-island nation of Grenada, the other being Petit Martinique.


Libraries Are Used More in Recession
It's too bad that the committee that was set up by County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke to investigate fees for use of the public library chose to solve the problem by seeking private funds  [ "Libraries Urged to Lobby for Funds," Oct. 24 ] .
Public library operations should be supported by public funds.
That's what will keep a library public!
Each public library in Westchester is having monetary problems and to suggest that private industry (which is having its own problems) will freely give money to the public libraries with no strings attached seems rather naive.
I was offended by the elitist statements attributed to Dr.
Sal J. Prezioso, who suggests merging the public libraries.


In Jets' Scheme of Things, the Tight Ends Can Virtually Do It All
Before signing with the Jets as an unrestricted free agent, James Thornton sat down with the team's coaches and listened as they explained how they planned to use the tight ends in the offense.
And although the five-year veteran of the Chicago Bears liked what he heard, it seemed unimaginable that the Jets' tight ends could be used as extensively as advertised.
Thornton ran smack into reality last week in the game against the Bengals when he found himself on the field for all 67 of the Jets' offensive plays.
If it hadn't been Thornton it would have been some other tight end because the Jets now run a substantial amount of their offense from formations utilizing two and three tight ends.


Specific Job Training Has Only Specific Value
To the Editor:
In his article "Training is Futile Unless a Job's Waiting" (Viewpoints, Oct. 31), Amitai Etzioni argues that the best place for training programs is in the private sector because that is where the jobs are.
His argument lacks merit.
Businesses that have jobs but no qualified workers can either move to where qualified workers can be found or create qualified workers through training.
They will do whichever leads to greater profits.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
A Gathering of the Tribes
DOWNSTAIRS in the Milleridge Inn the cloakroom was filled with overcoats.
Upstairs it was filled with turkey feathers.
Headdresses of every hue hung on the hangers.
Thanksgiving took on special meaning this week as representatives from 13 Long Island Indian groups gathered in Jericho for a turkey dinner.
"This is a first," said Robert Wyandanch Cooper of East Hampton, a Montauk Indian.
"I'm euphoric about our coming together to celebrate Thanksgiving."


34 Seconds of Overtime Is All It Takes for Flyers' Dineen
Flyers 4, Lightning 3
Kevin Dineen of the Philadelphia Flyers scored 34 seconds into overtime to defeat the Tampa Bay Lightning, 4-3, at St.
Petersburg, Fla., last night.
Rod Brind'Amour carried the puck to the right of the Lightning net and shoveled a pass in front to Dineen, who tipped it inside the right post.
Maple Leafs 4, Bruins 2
Wendel Clark scored his league-leading 23d goal in his 23d game, leading host Toronto to victory over Boston.
The victory was the fifth in six games for the Maple Leafs, the league's overall leader with a 17-4-4 record for 38 points.
Canadiens 4, Kings 0
Pierre Sevigny scored his first N.H.L. goal and added an assist as Montreal handed visiting Los Angeles its fifth straight defeat.
Patrick Roy made 30 saves for his third shutout of the season and 23d of his career in the rematch of last June's Stanley Cup finalists.
Sharks 1, Mighty Ducks 0
Arturs Irbe made 15 saves, leading host San Jose to the first three-game winning streak in team history.
The Sharks, who completed a weekend home-and-home sweep of the Mighty Ducks, now have 26 points for the season, matching their total for the entire 1992-93 season.
Red Wings 10, Stars 4
Mike Sillinger and Sergei Fedorov scored two goals apiece and the Detroit Red Wings cooled off the visiting Dallas Stars to reach the .500 mark for the first time since the opening week of the season.
The Red Wings (10-10-2) reached .500 for the first time since being 1-1-0 on Oct. 8.
Penguins 2, Senators 2
Jaromir Jagr scored with 2:30 left in the third period to give the Penguins a 2-2 tie with Ottawa at Pittsburgh despite 47 saves by rookie goalie Darrin Madeley.
Whalers 4, Panthers 0
Jeff Reese stopped 31 shots for his fourth career shutout and Michael Nylander and Robert Kron each had a goal and an assist as host Hartford defeated Florida.
Nordiques 2, Sabres 2
Mike Ricci banged in a rebound with 3:52 to play, capping a two-goal Quebec comeback against visiting Buffalo.
Dale Hawerchuk scored for the Sabres late in the second period before assisting on Alexander Mogilny's goal that moved Buffalo ahead by 2-0 at 6:25 of the third period.


A Distinctive Shade of Darkness
ADA McGRATH, THE IMPASsioned 19th-century heroine of Jane Campion's eerily beautiful film "The Piano," has chosen not to talk since she was 6.
In the voice-over that begins the film, the rare and lilting voice of Ada's inner mind is heard offering a plausible explanation for her silence: "My father says it's a dark talent, and the day I take it into my head to stop breathing, it will be my last."
"The Piano" is about those dark talents -- the eccentric bordering on the crazed -- that spring from the depths of one's soul and imagination to meet an exquisite and threatening landscape.
Ada evokes generations of Gothic heroines, from Catherine in "Wuthering Heights" to the schoolgirls who vanish in the woods in Peter Weir's classic 1975 film, "Picnic at Hanging Rock." And though "The Piano" is distinctly and unmistakably the work of Jane Campion, it is also a rich example of the Gothic impulse that has shaped much Australian film.


Good Seats
To the Editor: For several months last year, I was flying American from La Guardia to O'Hare in Chicago, a route on which both American and United had an hourly flight.
Each ticket was for a half-empty afternoon flight, reservations were made at least a week in advance and I was paying full-fare coach.
I am also a long-standing AAdvantage member.
Nevertheless, I was never able to reserve an aisle seat, even though many were available both before and during the flights.


Piano Teachers Hear Sour Notes
To the Editor:
"Traditional teachers" are offended by part of Russell Miller's "Play 'Misty' (Again and Again) for Me" (Nov. 7).
It speaks of "old-style practice books full of joyless exercises" and a piano economy that David Sudnow "considers dependent on discipline, failure and frustration." This is supposedly due to "old-fashioned lessons." Where has Mr.
Sudnow been?
That kind of teaching went out with the bustle!
Nowadays, first lessons send the student home playing tuneful pieces.
Teachers are professional musicians, often with master's degrees or doctorates.
We have no quarrel with Mr.
Sudnow's kooky method and claims.
We do object to his delineation of the serious piano teacher as a dull, ineffective, old-fashioned dodo.
MURIEL BROOKS  President, Piano Teachers Congress New York


His Life Reformed, Queens Man Is Slain on Street for a Coat
He had turned his life around.
From a troubled dropout on drugs and in jail, he had become a young man of promise with a diploma, a job, a place in college, and the young woman who had given him courage was soon to give birth to their child.
They knew it was a girl and had already picked a name, Bianca Alexis.
Alexander Ortiz would have been 22 years old yesterday, but on Friday night, as he walked home from a movie with his arm around Arlyn Gonzalez, who is 23 and seven months pregnant, two men approached them at Rockaway Boulevard and 86th Street in Woodhaven, Queens.
One drew a gun.
They demanded her shearling coat and his leather jacket.


High Hopes In Hoboken
The Frank Sinatra committee has yet to be formed.
Nancy Sinatra Lambert has made her father's hometown no promises.
But ever since the singer's eldest daughter passed through Hoboken a week and a half ago, scouting possibilities for a Frank Sinatra library and museum, the local Frankophiles have been in a tizzy, spreading the news that Frankie's back in town.


Playoff System Reaches the Finals Stage
This was more than the first-ever state championship.
This was more than the whole towns of Caledonia and Mumford and Chittenango driving here in freezing rain to gather in the center seats of the Carrier Dome to watch their brothers, sons and friends.
This was history in the making, a unifier of high school state football.
And it was a little complicated.


Where Broadway Meets Hollywood
New York City Ballet's opening-night benefit, Lincoln Center, Nov. 23.


101 Uses for an Empty Lot (Sadly, They All Cost Money)
Last week the skies were clear, so the lot on 87th Street east of Columbus Avenue stayed pretty dry.
Still, it held a very large puddle, one that William L. Plummer says drains continually into the basement of the building he lives in next door.
The paved lot was also clean last week, cleared about a month ago by the Department of Sanitation.
But it never stays that way, said Mr.
Plummer, the president of the co-op board for 53 West 87th Street.
And when the garbage returns, so do the rats, he said.


Irish Fans Not Hooligans
To the Sports Editor:
With reference to Alex Yannis's article ("Wednesday's the Day as Qualifying for the World Cup Finally Ends," The Times, Nov. 14) in which he places the Irish soccer fans in the same category as English and Dutch hooligans, I would like to point out a few things:


Bathing the Bronzes
As golden autumn sunlight bathed Central Park's Conservatory Garden the other day, the three maidens that dance perpetually in the garden's Untermeyer Fountain were getting scrubbed with something a little stronger.
It was a chemical compound, mostly methyl pyrrolidone, specially formulated to peel a decade-old layer of protective lacquer from the bronze sculpture without wrecking the artwork or harming the pansies planted in wavy patterns nearby.


Hamman's Team Leads Bridge Tournament
A group that includes two of the world's best partnerships led in the Reisinger Board-a-Match Team Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals here today.
Bob Hamman and Bob Wolff, both of Dallas, Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla., and Eric Rodwell of Naperville, Ill., topped Friday's qualifying play in a team headed by Nick Nickell of Raleigh, N.C., and including Dick Freeman of Atlanta.
Hamman, who is the world's top-ranked player, had won another major title, the Blue Ribbon Pairs, on Thursday.


From Little Packages Come Big Sounds
WHEN "CROSSROADS," A FOURCD boxed set chronicling the career of Eric Clapton, went gold shortly after it was released in 1988, the recording industry took notice.
Record companies, eager to tap the vast catalogues they had amassed, saw an opportunity to sell old wine in new bottles.
"Crossroads" has gone on to sell more than two million copies in this country alone, and the boom that it sparked has, if anything, accelerated.
Boxed sets, once the fare of late-night television commercials, have become big business, a particular favorite for holiday gifts.
Here are 15 choices that Times critics found worthy of note.
Prices are suggested retail. 'Paul Simon 1964-1993'  Warner Brothers 2-45394; three CD's ($59.98)


Old-Time Movie Theater Girds for Multiplex Attack
Stephen phen Homa cannot quite remember if he was in the audience the day the Community Theater opened with a silent movie and a live organist on April 19, 1922.
But throughout his teen-age years, Mr.
Homa, who is 89 years old, figures he saw hundreds of movies there.
And he was in his usual spot last Friday night in the lobby -- where he has worked as a part-time doorman for almost 30 years -- while a few miles away National Amusements opened the town's first multiplex theater, the nine-screen Fairfield Cinemas at Bullard Square.


'Sing Back the Sun' to Mark the Winter Solstice
LEAVES and berries still cling to some trees, the afternoon light is golden and warm, and joggers can be seen in shorts.
But the inevitable is coming -- December is near, and in 23 days it will be winter.
This year the solstice occurs on Dec. 21 at 3:26 P.M., the moment that the North Pole points most acutely away from the sun, but the Hudson River Revelers are not waiting to mark that celestial occasion.
The Revelers, a mixed group of professional singers and dancers and residents who have auditioned to take part, will observe the year's shortest day twice next Saturday, at 3 and 7:30 P.M. at the Irvington Town Hall Theater here, with a solstice celebration called "Sing Back the Sun."


Sweet Bay Scallops For Holiday Soirees
BAY scallops from Peconic Bay on Long Island and Nantucket Bay in Massachusetts are in fairly good supply this year.
They are rather expensive and therefore more suitable for special holiday occasions.
Their slightly briny sweetness and manageable size make them excellent to use in a variety of dishes.
These are not tiny scallops.
They are usually around an inch in diameter, so they retain a certain appealing succulence when cooked.
If they are not available, it is better to substitute sea scallops, quartered, than to use the smaller calico scallops.


Rabbi Quits Housing Plan
A Williamsburg rabbi has pulled out of a project to rehabilitate an apartment building that would have been shared by Hasidic and Hispanic residents, saying he could not trust his Hispanic partners.
The move comes nearly two months after 200 Hispanic squatters took over a new housing project out of fear that the majority of the apartments would go to Hasidim.
The event highlighted the anger between the two groups, as they continue to grow at about the same rate and clash over housing.


Amy Rosenzweig and Kenneth Comess
Amy Claire Rosenzweig, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard L. Rosenzweig of Pittsburgh, was married there last evening to Dr.
Kenneth Michael Comess, a son of Dr.
Morton Comess of Phoenix, and the late Shirley Comess.
Rabbi Walter Jacob officiated at the Rodef Shalom Temple.
Ms.
Rosenzweig, 26, is keeping her name.
She graduated summa cum laude from Amherst College and is a Ph.D. candidate in chemistry at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where her husband earned his doctorate in that subject.
Her father is a lawyer in Pittsburgh.
Her mother, Linda Rosenzweig, is a history professor at Chatham College there.


Karen J. Herman, Leonard Breslow
Karen Joy Herman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen P. Herman of Dix Hills, L.I., and Leonard Jeffrey Breslow, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard S. Breslow, also of Dix Hills, were married last evening at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Rabbi Howard R. Buechler performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Breslow, 25, is an associate at Newman Tannenbaum Helpern Syracuse &amp; Hirschtritt, a law firm in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University, as did the bridegroom, and received her law degree from Fordham University.
The bride's father is a vice president of Valu Rx Ltd., a pharmaceutical company in Melville, L.I.


From Drugs and Homelessness Back to Self-Respect: One Man's Round Trip
When Christopher Phillips first became homeless, he spent his days riding the No. 2 subway line from end to end and his nights sleeping fitfully in the Clark Street Station in Brooklyn.
At first, he tried to doze sitting up, he said, so people would think he was waiting for a train.
But the tactic was as much for his own state of mind.
"I didn't think of myself as homeless at first," Mr.
Phillips said recently at a Queens Y.M.C.A., where a modest room recently became his home after nearly two years on the streets, when crack cocaine controlled his life.


No Headline
"I don't want to be cursing and acting silly around them. I got respect for old people. Some of them are 40, 45 years old." -- ALEX LEE of DuSable High School in Chicago, where some parents have returned to class.  [ 30:3. ]


Boston University Needs Both Rally and Overtime
Persistence and good fortune blended for Boston University today as the Terriers continued their remarkable season with a 27-21 double-overtime playoff victory over Northern Iowa of the Gateway Conference.
The first-round match of the Division I-AA tournament at Nickerson Field ended when Zack Burwell, the sole running back in the Terriers' run-and-shoot offense, bolted up the middle from the 4-yard line to score the winning touchdown against a Northern Iowa defense that had played so well.


Iraqi Regime Fights To Kill a Way of Life
IN the flicker of light cast by burning piles of dried reeds, gaunt men in long robes bobbed up and down in a traditional dance, waving their right hands over their heads and holding the hems of their robes as they chanted: "We do not fear you, your majesty Saddam. We do not fear you because we are united. We are strong. You are like the insects of the marsh."
But it was all bravado -- a pathetic display, in fact, by dozens of marsh Arabs, a uniquely isolated people who inhabit the southern Iraqi swamps below the meeting point of the Tigris and the Euphrates.
Their homes, their farms and their ancient civilization itself are under threat of obliteration now in a ruthless campaign by Saddam Hussein's army.


The Longest Yards; To Byrd, It Seems More Than a Year of Climbing Uphill
Dennis Byrd's life was altered forever last Nov. 29 when he slammed headfirst into the chest of his teammate Scott Mersereau while trying to sack Chiefs quarterback Dave Krieg.
The impact fractured Byrd's fifth cervical vertebra and left him partly paralyzed.
It seemed quite possible he would never walk again.
In fact, Byrd went on to make a remarkable recovery, regaining nearly full use of his arms and legs and resuming an active life, although one different from when he was a respected defensive lineman for the Jets.
And now comes the one-year anniversary of the injury.


Cybele Fisher And Todd Koppel
Cybele Elizabeth Fisher, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
I.
Jack Fisher of Riverdale, the Bronx, was married last evening to Dr.
Todd S. Koppel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Koppel of East Northport, L.I.
Rabbi Stephen Franklin officiated at the Park Lane Hotel in New York.
The bride, 27, is the vice president of development at the Free Money Company, a fund-raising and consulting concern in New York.
She graduated from Vassar College.
Her father is a senior account executive in New York at DeVry Tech Inc., an owner and operator of technical schools.
Her mother, Phyllis Fisher, is a reading specialist in the New York City public schools.


Continental Drift
A recent magazine advertisement and a cable TV commercial for Qantas, the Australian airline, promised "a welcome as warm as the sun on our beaches." The beach shown, however, was on Oahu.
Qantas's U.S. advertising agency at the time, D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, used Hawaii because of the cost of shooting in Australia and the unpredictability of winter weather there, according to Joy Fauvre, the account supervisor.
The Mojo network of agencies, which had been doing Qantas's Australian advertising, was subsequently named to handle its advertising worldwide.
A spokeswoman for Qantas said the change "had absolutely nothing to do with the Hawaii photograph."


NOTES
Gabrielle Reece, a 6-foot-3 model and professional volleyball player, has cleared a hurdle at Nike.
The athletic-shoe company, which has million-dollar deals with Michael Jordan and Charles Barkley, is planning to bring out its first shoe line with a female athlete.
Ms.
Reece, 23, who began appearing in ads for Nike in August, said: "This is the first time at Nike that a woman has, from the base up, said: 'This is how I want it to look. This is how I want it to feel.' "


Wizardry on the Keyboard
MUSICAL LEGENDS are thick on the ground in New Orleans, and the inflation of reputations by fans is always a danger.
The pianist James Booker, who was plagued by alcohol and drug addiction and neurosis and died in 1983 at the age of 43, seemed like a victim of this: until now, he always sounded a shade more stellar in anecdote than on records.
But those who saw him in concert claimed that he took more chances on the keyboard than other New Orleans wizards.
Now the full Booker prowess can finally be heard on two complementary collections, "Resurrection of the Bayou Maharajah" (Rounder 2118; CD and cassette), which features vocals, and the all-instrumental "Spiders on the Keys" (Rounder 2119; CD and cassette).


Correction
A short listing of hotels and restaurants on Nov. 7 with an article about Chester, England, misstated a subsidiary title of the Prince of Wales.
He is the Earl of Chester, not the Count.


How New Chief Is Putting Park Back on Map
With a new administrator firmly in place, efforts are under way to revive the threadbare landscape of Forest Park, a vast stretch of ancient forests and rolling meadows that rivals Brooklyn's Prospect Park in size.
The person propelling this is Jacqueline Langsam, the park's first administrator and the second one to be appointed in Queens.
The first was Arne Abromowitz, who was appointed several years ago to salvage Flushing Meadow-Corona Park from years of neglect.


Russia's Military: A Shriveled and Volatile Legacy
Dismembered and demoralized, unloved at home and no longer so feared in the West, the Russian armed forces are the most unwieldy and troublesome legacy of the Soviet empire.
Draft evasion is rampant, and if the current call-up goes as badly as some fear, officers might actually outnumber enlisted men.
Young officers are quitting in droves, leaving behind a top-heavy and hollow force.
By some accounts, there are more generals now on the Russian General Staff than there were in the Soviet days, even though the Russian Army is less than 40 percent of what the Soviet force was.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
HUMOR ALL ABOUT MAN  By Frank Gannon. Longstreet, $17.95.


Improvisation Class Is For Fort Hill Players
I am writing to make you aware of misinformation included in "Improvisation as a Method of Acting" (Oct. 31), made completely because of overzealousness, lack of communication and a case of haste makes waste, on our part.
In the fourth paragraph, it was stated that one does not have to become a member of the Fort Hill Players (our community theater group) to take the class.
This is not true.


A Sanctuary, Yes, but This Is Not a Place to Hide
ARCHES SOARING INTO DIM infinitude, hazy light filtered through colored glass or clouds of incense, walls inscribed with arcane symbols: in the secular imagination, religion is often depicted as an architecture of obscurity, as if to evoke a formless world that lies beyond reason or the grave.
The Metropolitan Community Church, a striking new building in Washington, honors a different idea: that a religion makes it possible to see things with the utmost clarity.
This nondenominational house of worship, which was dedicated in March, ushers its congregation and guests into a realm of literal and metaphoric transparency: a place where space, structure and function have been rendered into lucid, accessible form.


World Markets; A Missed Opportunity in Japan?
MIORIHIRO HOSOKAWA's entry into the Prime Minister's office last August was like a breath of fresh air.
With his promises to battle political corruption and to weaken the vise-like grip of Government regulators over the economy, he has given long-suffering Japanese consumers cause for optimism, and they have rewarded him with the highest approval rating of any postwar leader -- more than 70 percent.
So why is the stock market plummeting?


BENEFITS
M. S. Holiday Party
MONDAY -- Le Bar Bat, 311 West 57th Street, will be the setting for a holiday party sponsored by the Manhattan Society to raise money for the New York City chapter of the National Multiple Sclerosis Society.
The evening includes dancing and a cash bar.
Tickets, $10, at the door.
Information: (212) 463-7787.
Golden Crafts
TUESDAY -- A show and sale of precious jewelry by William Harper, Breon O'Casey, Wendy Ramshaw and Takashi Wada, among others, will benefit the American Craft Museum.
A champagne reception from 5 to 8 P.M. at the museum, 40 West 53d Street, will open the exhibition, which runs through Saturday.
Reception tickets, $50, from (212) 956-3535.
Y.M.C.A. International
TUESDAY -- John W. English, the past vice president and chief investment officer for the Ford Foundation, will be honored by the Y.M.C.A.'s International Program Services.
Gabriel A. Pall, the senior vice president of international business for the Juran Institute, quality-management consultants, will speak.
The evening of cocktails and a dinner buffet is from 5:30 to 7:30 P.M. at the Merchants Club, 26 Thomas Street.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 727-8800.
Music and Autism
TUESDAY -- Pete Townsend and cast members from "The Who's Tommy" will perform at a dinner honoring Mr.
Townsend at Roseland, 239 West 52d Street.
The evening, which includes an auction, will raise money for the Nordoff-Robbins Music Therapy Foundation, which treats autistic and special-needs children with music therapy.
It begins at 8 P.M. with cocktails, followed by dinner, the auction and the performance.
Auction items include a walk-on part in Herbert Ross's new film starring Whoopi Goldberg and a stay at the Four Seasons Hotel in Nevis.
Tickets, $500, from (212)541-7948.
PEN Evening
TUESDAY -- Wynton Marsalis will perform at a reading by Arthur Miller, Derek Walcott and Wendy Wasserstein, among others, sponsored by the PEN American Center to benefit Bosnian writers.
Zlatko Dizdarevic, an author and journalist from Sarajevo, will be the guest of honor.
The program, at Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway at 95th Street, begins at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets, $20, from (212) 864-5400.
For Women's Rights
TUESDAY -- Bianca Jagger and Tony Kushner will be among the hosts of a preview performance of "Njinga the Queen King," the story of a 17th-century Angolan queen, to raise money for Madre, the international women's rights organization, which is celebrating its 10th anniversary.
The work, by Pauline Oliveros and Ione, is part of the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Next Wave Festival at the Majestic Theater, 651 Fulton Street in Brooklyn.
The evening begins at 6 P.M. with a buffet dinner, followed by a birthday party and the performance at 7:45.
Tickets, $100, or $30 for the birthday party and performance alone, from (212) 627-0444.
Help for Eating Disorders
TUESDAY -- Anna Quindlen, Op-Ed page columnist for The New York Times, will be honored at a cocktail reception for the American Anorexia/Bulimia Association.
The event, at the Palace Hotel, includes a silent auction of more than 120 items, including a chance to be an extra in a music video and dinner with Wendy Wasserstein.
It is from 6 to 9 P.M.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 737-7758.
AIDS Relief
WEDNESDAY -- The works of four composers who have died of AIDS will be featured at a concert to benefit the United AIDS Relief Program of the Middle Collegiate Church.
The 8 P.M. concert at the church, 50 Second Avenue at Seventh Street, will be preceded by a 6 P.M. reception at Flamingo East, 219 Second Avenue between 13th and 14th Streets.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 750-8977, or $10 for the concert alone from (212) 477-1594.
Planned Parenthood
WEDNESDAY -- A holiday cocktail party and raffle will raise money for Planned Parenthood of New York City.
Raffle prizes include a haircut by Frederick Fekkai and a membership at Body Design by Gilda.
The event, from 6:30 to 9:30 P.M., is at Reebok Station, 670 Broadway at Bond Street.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 274-7260, or $60 at the door.
AIDS Resources
WEDNESDAY -- Robert La Fosse will be the host of an evening of performances by John Kelly, Natalie Gamsu and Betty Buckley to benefit the AIDS Resource Center.
The event, at the Manhattan Center, 311 West 34th Street, begins with cocktails at 6:30 P.M. and includes dinner, an auction of art by Peter Max and other artists, and dancing.
Tickets, $200, or $100 for cocktails and the show alone, from (212) 633-2500.
Jewish Civilization
WEDNESDAY -- Tony Randall will be the master of ceremonies and Tovah Feldshuh will perform at a dinner to raise money for the Yivo Institute for Jewish Research, which studies the Jewish civilization of Eastern Europe.
Bernard W. Nussbaum, the counsel to the president, will be honored.
The evening, at the Plaza, begins with cocktails at 6:30, followed by dinner, at which dietary laws will be observed, and the program.
Black tie.
Tickets, $600, from (212) 535-6700.
Lenox Hill Bazaar
WEDNESDAY -- Bill Blass, Princess Marcella Borghese and Mario Buatta are among those who have created gift baskets to be auctioned at the opening of the Lenox Hill Neighborhood Association's holiday bazaar.
Brooke Astor and Annette de la Renta are the chairwomen of the event and the preview party at the association, 331 East 70th Street, from 5:30 to 9 P.M.
The bazaar, which includes a flea market of one-of-a-kind objects donated by members, will be open through Friday.
Preview tickets, $45, from (212) 744-5022, ext. 354.
Friends of Thirteen
THURSDAY -- Julia Child will be honored by Jacques Pepin and the Friends of Thirteen, a fund-raising organization for the public television station WNET.
Several chefs, including Pierre Franey, David Bouley and Anne Rosenzweig, will also attend the event at Tavern on the Green, Central Park at 67th Street.
It begins with cocktails at 7 P.M., followed by dinner and dancing.
There will also be a silent auction of several items, including dinner at the Russian Tea Room with Dr.
Ruth Westheimer, as well as 10 pre-Castro Cuban cigars from Nat Sherman's private humidor.
Black tie.
Tickets, $400, from (212) 560-2800.
A Tree Trimmed in Brooklyn
THURSDAY -- More than 30 decorated trees will be auctioned along with ornaments signed by, among others, Michael Jordan and Anjelica Houston at a cocktail reception to benefit Heartshare Human Services of New York's programs for children in foster care.
The evening, at Brooklyn Union Gas headquarters, 1 Metrotech Center in Brooklyn, begins at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets, $20, from (718) 330-1101.
Free to children under 12.
New York Cares
THURSDAY -- An African safari will be the theme of an evening to raise money for New York Cares.
Guests can fulfill the wishes of a needy child by answering a letter to Santa with a gift, as well as contributing to a raffle of prizes, including stuffed animals and tickets to National Football League games.
The event, which includes live music, an open bar and hors d'oeuvres, is from 9 P.M. to 1 A.M. at the Puck Building, 295 Lafayette Street at Houston Street.
Tickets, $60, from (212) 228-5000.
Refugee Women
THURSDAY -- The harpsichordist Igor Kipnis, will be among the performers at a concert for the Refugee Women Council, which helps women newly arrived in this country to cope with their new environment.
The concert, at the Church of St.
Mary the Virgin, 145 West 46th Street, begins at 8 P.M.
It will be followed by a wine reception.
Tickets, $35, from (212) 679-1105.
Chinese-American Groups
THURSDAY -- The cellist Yo-Yo Ma and the violinist Cho-Liang Lin will join the violinist Lynn Chang, the violist Hong-Mei Xiao, the cellist Jian Wang and the pianist Li Jian in a concert to benefit the China Institute in America, the Committee of 100 and the Chinese-American Planning Council.
The concert, at 8 P.M. at Alice Tully Hall, will be followed by a reception at the Juilliard School of Music.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 744-8181, extension. 121, or $50 for the concert alone from (212) 721-6500.
Asian Women's Center
FRIDAY -- An evening of auctioned art, crafts sales, live jazz and a buffet of Asian foods will raise money for the New York Asian Women's Center, which assists battered women.
The event is from 6 to 10 P.M. at the Puck Building, 295 Lafayette Street at Houston Street.
Tickets, $40, from (212) 732-5230, or $45 at the door.
Puerto Rican Advocates
FRIDAY -- A reception and dancing to salsa music at Club Broadway, 2551 Broadway at 96th Street, will benefit the Institute for Puerto Rican Policy, a research and advocacy group.
The reception, from 7 to 9 P.M., includes a Creole buffet, open rum bar and the music of Yomo Toro.
The dance, to the music of Willie Colon, Tito Nieves and Johnny Ray, among others, will be from 9 P.M. to 5 A.M.
Tickets, $60 for the reception and dance, or $30 for the dance alone, from (212) 564-1075, or $70 and $35 respectively at the door.
Bar Harbor Music
FRIDAY -- A performance by the conductor and violinist Francis Fortier, the violinist Jeffrey Ellenberger, the harpsichordist Frank Jacobson and the pianists Vladimir and Nadia Zaitsev with the members of the Bar Harbor Festival String Orchestra will benefit the festival's summer concerts and its touring program.
The evening begins with a cocktail reception at 6:45 P.M. followed by dinner, the concert and dancing to Strauss waltzes.
It is at the Liederkranz Club, 6 East 87th Street.
Black tie.
Tickets, $100, or $50 for the concert, dancing and champagne starting at 9:15, from (212) 222-1026.
Civil Liberties
FRIDAY -- Representative Maxine Waters, Democrat of California; Thomas Stoddard, the lawyer and gay rights activist, and the historian John Hope Franklin of Duke University will be honored by the National Emergency Civil Liberties Committee.
The event, to raise money for the committee, will be at the Sheraton New York Hotel beginning at 7 P.M.
Tickets, $85, from (212) 673-2040.
Children's Wishes
FRIDAY -- Teach for America, Love Heals and the Alison Gertz Foundation for AIDS Education will benefit from a party at Nell's, 246 West 14th Street, beginning at 8 P.M.
There will be dancing, an open bar and hors d'oeuvres donated by restaurants, including Dish, Campagnola and the Healthy Candle.
There will also be a raffle of clothing and cash and a chance to answer letters to Santa Claus submitted by public school students and children orphaned by AIDS served by the two organizations.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 371-1335, or $60 at the door.
Dancing in Westchester
SATURDAY -- The St.
Vincent's Alliance will sponsor a dinner-dance at the Larchmont Yacht Club, on Ocean Avenue in Larchmont, N.Y., to raise money for the Westchester branch of St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center in Harrison, N.Y.
The benefit begins at 8 P.M. with cocktails followed by dinner and dancing to Al Kraven and the Diamonds.
Tickets, $75, from (914) 967-6500, extension 411.
Tower of Hope
DEC. 5 -- The Israel Cancer Research Fund will honor Fred Lebow, director of the New York City Marathon, and Dr.
Peter I. Pressman, a surgical oncologist, at its fund-raiser at the Pierre.
Lainie Kazan, the cabaret singer, will perform at the dinner-dance, after a reception at 6 P.M.
Dietary laws observed.
Black tie.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 969-9800.
Costumes at the Met
DEC. 6 -- The opening of the exhibition "Diana Vreeland: Immoderate Years," which runs through March 20, will be the occasion for the annual Costume Institute benefit at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The evening begins at 7:30 P.M. with cocktails followed by dinner and dancing.
Black tie.
Tickets, $900, or $125 for the dance beginning at 9:30, from (212) 570-3948.
Dance tickets also available at the door.
Inner-City Scholarships
DEC. 6 -- John L. Dowling, the executive vice president of Cushman &amp; Wakefield Inc., will be honored at the annual award dinner of the Inner-City Scholarship Fund, which provides money to schools of the Archdiocese of New York.
Cocktails and dinner, at the Waldorf-Astoria, begin at at 6:30 P.M.
Music is by the Emery Davis Orchestra.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 753-8583.
City Parks Benefit
DEC. 6 -- The world premiere of the film version of "Six Degrees of Separation," the John Guare play, starring Stockard Channing, Donald Sutherland and Will Smith, will benefit the City Parks Foundation.
The playwright and the actors will be among the guests at the theater.
The 6:30 P.M. screening, at the Loews Astor Plaza Theater, 1515 Broadway at 44th Street, will be followed by dinner at Tavern on the Green, Central Park West at 67th Street.
Buses will transport guests from the theater to the restaurant.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 360-1399.
Guild for the Blind
DEC. 6 -- The Jewish Guild for the Blind will raise money at a dinner-dance at the Plaza.
The benefit, which begins with cocktails at 7 P.M., includes casino games, shopping boutiques and western and traditional dancing.
Black tie or western dress.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 769-6239.


Anger Grows Over Plan for Water Plant at Jerome Park Reservoir
A plan to build a seven-building water-treatment plant along a bucolic stretch of the Jerome Park Reservoir is drawing intense opposition from residents and the battle is coming to a head.
The city's Department of Environmental Protection will hold its first public hearing on the plan for the project on Dec. 13, providing residents with a detailed blueprint of the project as the city starts its environmental review.


Living Like Refugees in a Tiny Room: No Toilet, No Privacy
This well-kept military base 40 miles north of Moscow is the home of Russia's 18th Unified Motorized Brigade, which includes tank, artillery and anti-aircraft battalions.
It has also become a squalid housing project for officers and their families back from Germany and Lithuania after the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Capt.
Andrei A. Tarada and his wife, Larissa, both 30 years old, and their children, a son of 12, and a daughter, 8, are living like refugees.
All of them, and their white angora cat, live in a single tiny room in a wooden office building, with a revolting communal toilet, no kitchen and no privacy.


Q and A
The Tour de France


Q and A
The Tour de France
Q.
Do you know how I might find out the route of next year's Tour de France bicycle race?
And is there an agency in the United States that can offer lodgings and make recommendations about the best areas for viewing the race? -- Gail Van Gorder, Portland, Ore.


Delaware Law: From A Muddle, Owners Win
THE shareholders have won at Paramount Communications, and judicial deference to the business judgment of directors has been knocked down another notch.
Investment bankers involved in takeover cases may have to start acting as if they represent the interests of owners -- and not just the management -- of the companies that hired them.
Cut through the verbiage in the Thanksgiving-eve opinion of Vice Chancellor Jack B. Jacobs, and it boils down to this: The Paramount directors sincerely believed that the best long-term interest of the shareholders was to merge with Viacom rather than QVC.
That is a decision they are allowed to make, but only if it is reasonable.


Lending-Bias Rules Create Quandary for Banks
THE bank's lawyer glared at her senior officers and directors, who against her advice had been fighting Federal charges that the bank was discriminating against minority borrowers.
Finally, in exasperation, she turned toward her audience -- for this was not real life, but a staged presentation -- and said, in an aside that drew scattered but enthusiastic applause: "They still don't get it. But look at them, they're all white males. It's no wonder!"


U.S. Won't Discuss Embargo Terms With Iraq
The United States has refused to discuss its terms for lifting the oil embargo against Iraq directly with Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz during his current visit here, although representatives of the other 14 Security Council members have met informally with him, a senior Administration official said today.
The official said there was no reason for the United States to meet with Mr.
Aziz because he "already knows exactly where we stand." The official added that the United States would not consider lifting the ban on Iraqi oil sales until "we have a proven track record" of Iraqi compliance with the long-term monitoring of its military industries and Baghdad has complied with the Security Council's other disarmament demands.


Bookshelf
FROM SEA TO SHINING SEA: A Treasury of American Folklore and Folk Songs.
Compiled by Amy L. Cohn.
Illustrated by Molly Bang, Marcia Brown, Barbara Cooney, Donald Crews, Leo and Diane Dillon, Richard Egielski, Trina Schart Hyman, Anita Lobel, Jerry Pinkney, John Schoenherr, Marc Simont, Chris Van Allsburg, David Wiesner and Ed Young.
Scholastic. $29.95. (Ages 5 and up) This lavish and engaging collection of Americana in song and story has been organized into thematic historical sections, each richly illustrated by an American artist who has won the Caldecott Medal or illustrated a Caldecott Honor Book.
THE COMPLETE FAIRY TALES OF CHARLES PERRAULT.
Translated by Neil Philip and Nicoletta Simborowski.
Illustrated by Sally Holmes.
Clarion Books. $18.95. (Ages 5 and up) Fresh new translations and dainty illustrations accompany familiar stories, like "Cinderella" and "Little Red Riding Hood," and unfamiliar ones, like "Donkeyskin."


China's Not Preparing To Fight the U.S.
To the Editor:
A report from Beijing that China's military regards the United States as its main enemy in the future states that China "treats any discussion of military strategy, doctrine and planning as the most treasured of state secrets" (some editions, Nov. 16).
Yet Chinese publishing companies and journals, especially outside the capital, regularly publish on almost any topic, including the military.


'Angels' Finds A Poignant Note of Hope
"PERESTROIKA," THE concluding installment of Tony Kushner's two-part epic, "Angels in America," does not go out in a blaze of glory.
It goes out in a blaze of compassion, which may be better.
Anyone who's been fearful of a letdown can set fear aside.
The virtues that Mr.
Kushner demonstrated in the initial installment ("Millennium Approaches") -- an intrepid theatricality, stinging intelligence and an engaging proclivity for undercutting himself with humor -- remain intact.
What's more, they are thrown into high relief by the sadness that permeates "Perestroika." The two parts are now alternating at the Walter Kerr Theater, and if you've seen neither, my advice would be to see them as close together as possible.


Building Depth Is Secret Kansas Formula
For all of the fury and excitement generated by the Preseason National Invitation Tournament at Madison Square Garden, coaches reminded their players and players had to reminded themselves that it was still only November.
There's plenty of basketball to be played before a national champion is crowned next April.
With that disclaimer aside, it seems safe to predict that Kansas, which became the first two-time champion of the preseason tournament on Friday, will again be a serious contender for the national championship.
Despite losing four key players from last year's Final Four team, the Jayhawks are back again -- this time with depth, frontcourt power and quickness at the guards.


From Little Packages Come Big Sounds
WHEN "CROSSROADS," A FOURCD boxed set chronicling the career of Eric Clapton, went gold shortly after it was released in 1988, the recording industry took notice.
Record companies, eager to tap the vast catalogues they had amassed, saw an opportunity to sell old wine in new bottles.
"Crossroads" has gone on to sell more than two million copies in this country alone, and the boom that it sparked has, if anything, accelerated.
Boxed sets, once the fare of late-night television commercials, have become big business, a particular favorite for holiday gifts.
Here are 15 choices that Times critics found worthy of note.
Prices are suggested retail. 'Tougher Than Tough: The Story of Jamaican Music'  Mango/Island Records 162-539-935-2; four CD's ($59.95)


But Who Gets The Juicy Roles?
To the Editor:
According to Rick Marin's article "What's the Problem? He Won't Say"  [ Nov. 7 ] , the brooding, conflicted male -- who is as old as Hamlet -- is a product of the women's movement.
Mr.
Marin finds his sex in deep trouble because of Hollywood's recent spate of films providing men with "role models" that encourage "the depiction of men as confused, stymied souls" who "have become as weak, inert and indecisive as the men that a lot of women are heard to complain about in real life." (It's a woman's fault, no matter how you slice it.)


RECORD BRIEFS
John Adams: Hoodoo Zephyr Elektra Nonesuch 9 79311; CD and cassette.


THE NURSES OF VIETNAM, STILL WOUNDED
Lieut.
Joan Furey and Lieut.
Lynda Van Devanter worked side by side with me in the 71st Evacuation Hospital, Pleiku, South Vietnam, in 1969.
I can recall operating with a team of surgeons and nurses for 10 hours on an American soldier who had an extensive head injury and received 72 units of blood, only to find out that one hour after surgery he died.
It is hard to recover from these experiences without the support of your country and its citizens.
ALBERT HORNBLASS, M.D New York, N.Y.


Pecking Order of a Chinese Court, Told in Porcelain
EVERY PIECE OF ART TELLS A story about the culture that produced it.
That's the argument of the "new" art history, and it's true.
In the case of public monuments, the message is usually transparent, even insistent.
But the intimate objects referred to as decorative or applied arts are often less easy to read.
A small, beautiful exhibition at New York's China Institute in America on East 65th Street in Manhattan turns an interpretive eye on just such material -- 18th-century Chinese porcelains, all from the collection of the Taft Museum in Cincinnati -- and reveals rich layers of political and personal meaning in dishes small enough to fit in the hand.
Most of the 65 porcelains in "As You Wish: Symbol and Meaning on Chinese Porcelains from the Taft Museum" (on view through Jan. 15) were produced during the first century or so of the Ching Dynasty (1644-1911), an extended period of esthetic brilliance preceding the calamitous Opium Wars and incursions from the West of the 19th century.
The Ching rulers were themselves, in fact, foreigners, members of a northern tribe known as the Manchu.
Brought in as mercenaries by the last, harried Ming military ruler, they sent him off on an errand and usurped the throne.


From Little Packages Come Big Sounds
WHEN "CROSSROADS," A FOURCD boxed set chronicling the career of Eric Clapton, went gold shortly after it was released in 1988, the recording industry took notice.
Record companies, eager to tap the vast catalogues they had amassed, saw an opportunity to sell old wine in new bottles.
"Crossroads" has gone on to sell more than two million copies in this country alone, and the boom that it sparked has, if anything, accelerated.
Boxed sets, once the fare of late-night television commercials, have become big business, a particular favorite for holiday gifts.
Here are 15 choices that Times critics found worthy of note.
Prices are suggested retail. 'Complete Ella Fitzgerald Song Books'  Verve 314540150; 16 CD's ($250)


6 Firefighters Hurt as Blaze Destroys Store
Six firefighters were injured yesterday while battling a fire that gutted a wholesale store on the first floor of a 13-story building in the Chelsea section of Manhattan, the New York City Fire Department said.
The fire started on the first floor about 10:15 A.M. and quickly spread to the second and third floors of the building, which are unoccupied and under construction, Deputy Fire Chief Joseph Hovsepian said.


Lisa J. Sandler, Michael Tierney
Lisa Jeanne Sandler, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael H. Sandler of Lawrenceville, N.J., was married there yesterday to Michael Robert Tierney, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Tierney of Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dr.
H.
Dana Fearon 3d officiated at the Presbyterian Church of Lawrenceville.


State Moves On Cemetery
Following accusations that bodies were being buried in a 40-foot heap of construction and demolition debris at Cypress Hills Cemetery, the Attorney General's office moved last week to oust the cemetery's board of directors immediately.
It was the latest development in a lawsuit that the state filed late last month when it charged that the cemetery and its directors were violating a state law that prohibits burying bodies in such debris, a charge that the directors have flatly denied.


In a Lonely City, the Sisterhood of the Salon
WHEN I walked in the other day, Andrea Frias-Mojica and Josephina Silveri, the hair stylists, were eating their lunch in the little room in the back.
Two women of a certain age were under the dryers in the front, thumbing through The Daily News as the radio blared an insistently joyous merengue.
I asked Andrea about her baby.
She smiled and said in her husky Spanish-accented English that he had a cold but he was O.K.
Two weeks ago she had left the shop near tears when word came that he was ill, leaving behind rows of unbeautified heads cooing words of support.
This is Edda's Unisex in Morningside Heights.
Outwardly, it is just an Amsterdam Avenue hair salon with a black and white linoleum floor, walls painted green and yellow, a mural of a white-sand beach and rows of felicitous beauty products.
Add the women -- and the occasional man -- and it is a New York community, one of those small universes of camaraderie that help make this buzzing city of disharmonious parts begin to make sense.


Clinic Means Health to Some, No Parking to Others
A plan to open a health clinic to serve growing numbers of Russian immigrants has come under a barrage of criticism from neighbors who see the plan as nothing less than a parking disaster.
The clinic, which Kingsbrook Jewish Medical Center wants to open at 122 West End Avenue, would serve 8,000 patients -- more than the population of the small middle- and upper-class beach community.
But residents of the area say that while they recognize the need for a new clinic, to build one at the intended site would only worsen their already serious parking problems.


Handicapping the Scramble for an Oscar Nomination
JUST IN TIME FOR THE HOLIDAYS, Hollywood is trotting out films about AIDS, the Holocaust and Vietnam.
You were expecting sugar plums?
Forget it.
Holiday time is the kickoff of the Oscar-campaign season.
The studios save their best Oscar possibilities for December so they will be fresh in Academy voters' minds. (Eligible films must open by Dec. 31.) In the next month nearly a dozen heavyweight dramas will arrive.
Tom Hanks loses weight as a lawyer with AIDS in "Philadelphia." Oliver Stone loses the Vietnam War again in "Heaven and Earth." Steven Spielberg may well lose money with "Schindler's List," a black-and-white film about a German who saved Jews from the Holocaust.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA  $345,000
465 West 23d Street  (London Terrace)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, 500-sq.-ft. terrace, pool, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,158, 55% tax-deductible, listed at $365,000, 32 weeks on market (Brokers: Halstead Property Co.; Debra Kameros &amp; Co.)


American Exodus
In 1941, at the age of 23, the artist Jacob Lawrence began documenting an epic chapter in the tortured story of American race relations.
"The Migration Series," a monumental project chronicling the mass movement northward of millions of Southern blacks seeking economic and political opportunity in the first three decades of the century, was the ambitious 60-painting cycle that resulted.
Though every bit in step with the cultural revolution taking place in Harlem at the time, Mr.
Lawrence owed much of his early success to the art dealer Edith Gregor Halper, who, after showing the panels in her Greenwich Village gallery, succeeded in selling half of the series to the Museum of Modern Art and the remaining paintings to the Phillips Collection in Washington.
The Phillips has now reunited the paintings in a traveling exhibition for which it has produced this handsome catalog, JACOB LAWRENCE: The Migration Series (Rappahannock Press, 1627 I Street, Suite 610, Washington, D.C. 20006, $40), edited by the show's curator, Elizabeth Hutton Turner.
Ten scholars, including Henry Louis Gates Jr., have contributed historical footnotes to Mr.
Lawrence's career, as well as lucid commentary on the sources of the social and political conditions that gave rise to the mass black exodus north.
Most telling, however, are the paintings themselves, which dramatize the story of the migration -- not only the hopes, fears and hardships of a people leaving home and friends for the unknown, but the anonymity and despair many experienced once they had arrived, finding tenement life, dead-end jobs, and a new form of racial discrimination based on custom rather than law.
"We are absolutely a people telling stories," Mr.
Lawrence has said, a concept that he illustrates with particular grace in these eloquent paintings.
ANDREA BARNET


Getting Into College With a Consultant's Help
FOR high school seniors, Thanksgiving break means more than turkey leftovers.
It is college-application time, and thousands of students have been spending their weekends filling out forms and polishing essays, which they hope will gain them entry into the colleges of their choice.
But the pursuit of a college education is no longer as simple as it once was.
Only 20 years ago, the majority of students who applied for college entrancetargeted a handful of schools, usually with the help of their high school guidance counselor.
There was little formal preparation for such standardized tests as the Scholastic Achievement Tests, known as SAT's, and at most, an application strategy might mean the inclusion of a "safety" school -- one to which the student would almost certainly gain admission.


Marvin Feldman, Retired Head Of Fashion Institute, Dead at 66
Marvin Feldman, who was president of the Fashion Institute of Technology for 21 years during which its enrollment and academic scope increased dramatically, died on Friday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
He was 66 and had lived in retirement in Newport, R.I.
The cause of death was cancer, said Loretta Lawrence Keane, the school's director of college relations.


Technology; Memories Linger but the Tapes Fade
TAKE out some ancient home movies and you can laugh at yourself as an infant, your mother's hair style and your father's 1953 De Soto.
But 40 years from now, when your child views the videotapes you made this holiday season, there may be little to laugh about: the sound and image may have faded into static.
Both formal studies and anecdotal evidence indicate that videotapes may last 15 years or less.
Like photographic film, whose colors fade as the film grows brittle with age, videotape is hurt by time and chance.


Will Love Conquer All?
TO: The Powers at ABC's "General Hospital" FROM: The Fans RE: The Return of Luke and Laura
IN every episode of every soap opera there comes a moment when one character turns to another and says, "There's something I have to tell you." We, the fans, are having one of those moments.
It's about Luke and Laura.
And it's complicated, because nothing is ever simple in Soapland.


Michele Cestari, Douglas Schimmel
Michele Denise Cestari, the daughter of Dr.
Robert and Flora Jean Cestari of Rockville Centre, L.I., was married yesterday to Douglas Evan Schimmel, the son of Erwin and Myrna Schimmel of Lawrence, L.I.
The Rev.
Melvin Hawthorne, the chaplain for the United Nations, performed the ceremony at the Metropolitan Club in New York.
Mrs.
Schimmel is an associate counsel and assistant vice president of Anchor Savings Bank in Hewlett, L.I.
She graduated from Emory University and received a law degree from St.
John's University.
Her father is an obstetrician and gynecologist in Rockville Centre and New York.


POSTINGS: Higher Loan-to-Value Ratio; Fannie Mae Eases Refinancing Rules
The Federal National Mortgage Association, the country's largest source of home mortgage funds, has revised its policy to make it easier for some homeowners to refinance their mortgages and take advantage of current low interest rates.
The change expands Fannie Mae's mortgage refinancing policy to include home loans with as high as a 95 percent loan-to-value ratio.
Previously, refinancing required no more than a 90 percent loan-to-value ratio.


Where Man Meets Beast, A Conflict
BARE feet crunching on the coral sand of Espanola Island, a tour group recently savored the Galapagos experience -- walking within inches of wild sea lions snoozing peacefully in the equatorial sun.
For one sunny moment on that morning in September on Gardner Beach, man and beast seemed to be reconciled.
Then, a young sea lion emerged dripping from the Pacific Ocean surf.
Around his neck was a white plastic bag.
"A little world within itself" was how Charles Darwin described the rare laboratory of biological evolution that is the Galapagos, an archipelago of 19 islands 600 miles west of South America.


Japan Finds Ways to Save Tradition of Lifetime Jobs
With a degree from the prestigious Keio University, Hiroshi Matsuo was working his way up the Mazda Motor Corporation's personnel department when he got a new assignment.
After three days of training, he donned an apron and oil-stained work gloves, and began unloading auto parts and delivering them to the assembly line here.


Foyt Selects Jones for Long Haul
When A. J. Foyt had to look for a new driver to replace Robby Gordon after this season, it didn't take much imagination to guess that Davy Jones would be the choice.
Foyt, who announced on Tuesday that he had chosen Jones to drive for his team starting next year, had patriotic and practical reasons to choose Jones.


Wall Street; Stock Dive Brings On Lawsuits
FEW investors would fault their mutual funds for the occasional misstep.
But investors have much more of a grievance when the caretakers of their cash stick with a bad apple, long after the worm has been spotted.
Consider the mess that the Policy Management Systems Corporation, a once high-flying supplier of computer software and related services to the insurance industry, has gotten itself into this year.


Karen Kornbluh and James Halpert
Karen Kornbluh, an aide to Senator John F. Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, was married last evening to James J. Halpert, a legislative counsel to the People for the American Way Action Fund, a civil liberties organization.
Both work in Washington.
Rabbi David Saperstein officiated at the Cosmopolitan Club in New York.
Ms.
Kornbluh, 30, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College and received a master's degree in public policy from Harvard University.


Profile: Victor A. Kaufman; No Armani Jacket. No Glitz. Just a Savvy Film Executive.
VICTOR A. KAUFMAN is hardly the typical movie mogul.
While most film executives live in glitzy, art-drenched mansions in Bel Air or Beverly Hills, Mr.
Kaufman lives sedately on Long Island.
Buttoned down and bespectacled, Mr.
Kaufman would seem utterly improbable in the jeans, Gap shirts and Armani sports jackets favored by many of his Hollywood buddies.
When Mr.
Kaufman, the former president and chief executive of Columbia Pictures, earned more than $30 million from the sale of the studio to Sony in 1989, his life barely changed.
He did not unravel, undergo plastic surgery, enter new-age therapies, divorce his wife or do the usual Hollywood mid-life crisis thing.


Egypt Cracking Down on Islamic Student Groups
Battling a rising tide of Islamic militancy, the Government of President Hosni Mubarak is moving to stamp out the powerful Islamic student organizations at Egyptian universities.
The crackdown has led to half a dozen student demonstrations, including one at Alexandria University a month ago that left at least 10 students injured after it was broken up by the police.


Neighborhood Report; Will 'Clang, Clang, Clang' Be Heard on 42d St.?


Corrections
Because of a change in the producer's plans after the section went to press, a picture caption on page 5 of the Arts and Leisure section today misstates the date of the opening of "The Red Shoes." The opening, at the Gershwin Theater, has been postponed to Dec. 16.


Miss O'Malley And Mr. Quinn
Katherine Ann O'Malley, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James A. O'Malley of Little Silver, N.J., was married yesterday to Mark Woodward Quinn, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert O. Quinn of New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
Joseph W. Hughes officiated at Holy Cross Roman Catholic Church in Rumson, N.J.


School Districts Seek Solutions to Overcrowding
A DECADE after many school districts sold many of their underused buildings, increases in enrollment are leading communities to find solutions for overcrowding.
Because of tight budgets and high construction costs, officials are turning their attention to redistricting and redesignating existing spaces.
One development is the re-emergence of separate kindergarten-only or early childhood centers.


Service Scholarships Face Uncertain Future
On a recent night at the Homeward Bound Runaway Shelter in Covington, Ky., Bill Sargent made dinner, supervised cleanup and shepherded a dozen teen-agers to a session on how to keep a budget.
Later, he took tennis balls and bowling pins out of a gym bag and began juggling them.
A few youths huddled around a video game, while others also began tossing balls into the air and clamoring for Mr.
Sargent's approval and attention.
Neither he nor his college think of it as a direct exchange, but as a service fellow at Xavier University here, Mr.
Sargent must work at least 10 hours a week to receive a full scholarship worth more than $16,000 a year.


Abuse of Power By the Poll Voters
To the Sports Editor:
In regard to the most recent poll of sportswriters by The Associated Press, I am outraged by Florida State's being ranked ahead of Nebraska.
Not only is it an injustice to the Cornhuskers, but the partial, self-serving voting by the sportswriters also represents an abuse of power that threatens the health of the game.


Using Advanced Tools in Search of Missing Children
To the Editor:
Congratulations to the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children in Arlington, Va., for using computer networks and advanced graphics to search for these children ("He Finds Missing Children With Help From Industry, Sound Bytes, Nov. 14).


Toying With Women
THE Arena Players Repertory Theater in East Farmingdale is presenting through Dec. 12 "Toyer," a play by Gardner McKay that is notable primarily for its shock effects.
The gruesome story purports to be about a man who toys with women like a cat toys with a mouse.
But instead of killing his victim he plays a game of terrorization and seduction.
And when finished playing with his victims, he severs their brain stems, leaving them helpless, nonfunctioning living toys.


Public &amp; Private; Suffer the Children
To: Mayor-elect Giuliani Re: Kids
In a matter of weeks you will take on the second-hardest job in city government.
This memo is about the hardest one.


Gauging Weatherstripping's Economy and Durability
SHOPPING for weatherstripping can be confusing.
First, it is important to realize that the presence or absence of weatherstripping will probably not greatly affect energy bills unless one lives in a small house having many large windows and doors.
But weatherstripping does stop drafts.
A homeowner may be able to lower the thermostat, and windows may develop less inside fog or frost.
Also, because weatherstripping is subject to wear and tear, most types eventually deteriorate.


San Francisco Considers a City-Run Brothel
Responding to complaints from merchants and residents, city officials are considering whether to establish city-run brothels that would rent rooms to prostitutes, check their health and collect taxes on their earnings.
The city's Board of Supervisors has created a 20-member group that includes three former prostitutes to consider legalizing prostitution and other steps that might help neighborhoods where men and women sell sex on street corners.
The supervisor who proposed the group, Terence Hallinan, said it would be looking to other places that have legalized prostitution, among them a county in Nevada and some foreign cities.


Mason Starts And Knicks Zoom Away
Starting is not the issue.
Finishing may not be either, unless these Knick "pizza blowouts" soon become the exception instead of the rule.
Anthony Mason has it all figured out.
There are more than enough minutes in between to make his points, rebounds, assists and, most of all, his defensive stops.
On the day Charles Smith returned to active duty, if not the starting lineup, Mason started his eighth straight game yesterday, giving Coach Pat Riley a forget-me-not performance, as the Knicks pummeled the Detroit Pistons, 112-85, yesterday at Madison Square Garden.
It was another defensive clinic in which the Knicks' only failure was the inability to hold the opponent under 85, costing the fans in the sellout crowd of 19,763 a complimentary pizza.


POSTINGS: 30,000 Square Feet for Galleries; West Wing Renovated At Brooklyn Museum
Without expanding an inch, the Brooklyn Museum has 30,000 square feet of new galleries, with 10,000 square feet of offices to come.
The space has been gained through the renovation of the 96-year-old West Wing, designed by McKim, Mead &amp; White, some of which has not been used for exhibitions since the 1930's.
The renovation was designed by the architectural team of Arata Isozaki &amp; Associates and James Stewart Polshek &amp; Partners.
It is part of a $31 million reconstruction that also includes the new Iris and Gerald B. Cantor Auditorium, which opened two years ago, and new art storage space.


Volunteers Line 'Safe Corridor' for Schoolchildren
Last month, two teen-agers mugged 11-year-old Timothy Atkins while he was walking to his sixth-grade class at the Roberts Vaux Middle School here.
"They said, 'Give me your money, or damage will be done,' " Timothy said.
"I gave them 50 cents. That was my lunch money."
Timothy must walk through seven blocks of one of the roughest sections of North Philadelphia to get to school -- past a housing project, burned-out buildings, crack houses and vacant lots.


Reporter's Notebook; Will Blast Jury Drown In a Flood of Minutiae?
In a trial where minutiae have often seemed to reign supreme, almost a full morning of the World Trade Center bombing trial last week was devoted to a close examination of a minor traffic accident in New Jersey that took place a month before the trade center explosion and involved two suspects in the case.
One was Mohammed A. Salameh, the lead defendant, and the other Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, who left the country the day of the explosion and whose whereabouts are unknown.


Squad Rehearses for Raising the Rafters
THE cheers resounding in the halls of the dance building at the State University of New York here lighted up Dayema Woodall's face.
All morning, Ms.
Woodall, the choreographer of the college's new cheerleading squad, had been exhorting the fledgling cheerleaders to get with it, wake up and put some spirit into their practice cheers for the Purchase College Panthers, the new basketball team.
Now back from lunch after a grueling three-hour rehearsal of the kicks, steps and splits they would perform at the team's first game that evening, the group was showing just the kind of energy Ms.
Woodall, a junior at the school, expected of them.
The trouble was, there were classes going on in the dance building at the time, and the cheerleaders, whose shouts had erupted spontaneously in the hall, were asked to stop immediately.
And furthermore, said the building's stern-faced manager, who had come by at that moment, they could not continue practicing in the dance studio where they had spent the morning.
That would be against insurance regulations because they had no official letter of permission with them, he said.


A Benefit for AIDS
Art auction, Barneys New York, Madison Avenue, Nov. 22.


Wall Street; Investors' Thirst for Snapple May Finally Be Sated
SNAPPLE, the iced tea company, has not faltered in the grocery stores of America.
This summer shortages even developed because of exuberant consumer demand.
But the seemingly insatiable demand of investors may have finally been satisfied.
Perhaps not so coincidentally, Snapple's decline has followed the decision by insiders to unload 8 million shares.
They sold them in a Paine Webber underwriting early this month for $23 each.
But last week the stock dipped below $20 before closing at $21.50.


More Louvre to Love, Ready or Not
I'VE ALWAYS BEEN INTIMIDATED by the Louvre.
After countless visits, it remains boundless and insurmountable, the Everest of museums.
And me without a pickax.
Now the Louvre has gone from vast to vaster.
With the opening of the much-anticipated Richelieu wing this month, it has added 230,000 square feet of exhibition space to the 325,000 it already had and put 12,000 works on view in 165 new rooms and three skylighted courtyards.
In President Francois Mitterrand's Napoleonic scheme of public projects called the Grands Travaux, the Grand Louvre is the grandest of all, and the Richelieu wing, named by Napoleon III for the 17th-century cardinal, was to be its capstone.


Stripes and Stars
AN AMERICAN PLACE *** (212) 684-2122; 2 Park Avenue, entrance on 32d Street; $$$$; all major cards


Sports of The Times; Laimbeer's Last Laugh: No Pizza Run
IF you can't beat 'em, starve 'em.
This is how it is ending for Bill Laimbeer.
He used to derive psychic satisfaction from clotheslining the opposition and winning world championships with a silent-movie-villain snicker.
Now it comes down to cutting off the free pizza for the fans in the Garden.
That's all there was to celebrate yesterday after a 112-85 defeat for the Pistons.
The former Bad Boys of basketball could only rejoice that they had foiled the giveaway in the closing seconds.


Examining Culture Through Its Castoffs
ART TENDENCIES ARE BORN AND art tendencies die, but rarely do they seem to attain both states within the span of a single exhibition.
This is the primary distinction of "Poverty Pop: The Esthetics of Necessity," a timely yet problematic show at Exit Art/The First World in SoHo.
Its focus is the widespread practice among youngish artists of parlaying found, often worn, materials and objects into art.
Such efforts constitute the visual equivalent of grunge, but they also perpetuate one of the most resilient, if cliched, legacies of Modernism: assemblage, the common cockroach of 20th-century techniques.
At least since Kurt Schwitters and the Dadaists, artists have been inspired to work with things found on the street, in the attic or dustbin or at the dime store.
It saves money on materials and at the same time makes a statement about materialism, both in art and in the world at large.
In the downscale 90's, the art of recycled objects has been on the upswing, a symptom of the straitened economy, of growing environmental awareness and also of the decade's rejection of its predecessor.
In the 80's, artists appropriated glamorous images and sparkling new merchandise, critiquing commodity culture while producing rather desirable commodities themselves.
Now, commodity culture is more often examined through its castoffs.


Princeton's Fraternities Growing
The kegs of Princeton University's eating clubs used to provide the school with almost all of its weekend entertainment.
But since 1991, when the last two of the all-male eating clubs voluntarily agreed to admit women, the university's underground fraternity system has supplied more and more of the fun.
Spurred by a desire to spend time with their peers in a same-sex environment, about one-third of this year's freshmen class will join a fraternity or sorority -- at a school that 10 years ago had no Greek organizations.


A COLOMBIA REGION FIRST IN VIOLENCE
For the easants who scrape out a living in this banana-growing region, it is getting hard to tell the difference between rebels and rightists, or even to tell where a death threat is coming from.
In September, a bomb that leftist guerrillas had intended for the Colombian Army exploded in front of the leftist Mayor's office and killed two laborers, aggravating the situation.


Q and A
The Tour de France


Awaiting Esplanade Ruling
Should the 120-year-old esplanade in Manhattan Beach become completely accessible only to an exclusive few lucky enough to have their backyards facing the Atlantic Ocean?
Or should it remain open to the public?
More than 800 residents in the quiet, upscale beach community are awaiting a ruling on the issue by Justice Leonard E. Yoswein of State Supreme Court.


Dog Days


Alcohol Abuse Among the Elderly: A Growing, Often Hidden Problem
AFTER 50 years of heavy drinking, a 72-year-old woman from Fairfield County was forced to confront her alcoholism when her son threatened to move out of the house he shares with her if she did not stop drinking.
"I won't stay here and watch you die," he told her.
The woman entered a program for older people at Meridian Center in Stamford, which offers outpatient treatment for drug and alcohol abuse.
Although she agreed to seek help to please her children, she said, the woman soon realized that her decision saved her.
For the first time in her life, she said, she learned that her drinking problem was actually a disease.
"The fact that I had a disease is what I needed to hear," she said.
"You can control an illness."


From Little Packages Come Big Sounds
WHEN "CROSSROADS," A FOURCD boxed set chronicling the career of Eric Clapton, went gold shortly after it was released in 1988, the recording industry took notice.
Record companies, eager to tap the vast catalogues they had amassed, saw an opportunity to sell old wine in new bottles.
"Crossroads" has gone on to sell more than two million copies in this country alone, and the boom that it sparked has, if anything, accelerated.
Boxed sets, once the fare of late-night television commercials, have become big business, a particular favorite for holiday gifts.
Here are 15 choices that Times critics found worthy of note.
Prices are suggested retail.
Joan Baez: 'Rare, Live &amp; Classic'  Vanguard VCD3 125/2; three CD's. ($49.95)


From Little Packages Come Big Sounds
WHEN "CROSSROADS," A FOURCD boxed set chronicling the career of Eric Clapton, went gold shortly after it was released in 1988, the recording industry took notice.
Record companies, eager to tap the vast catalogues they had amassed, saw an opportunity to sell old wine in new bottles.
"Crossroads" has gone on to sell more than two million copies in this country alone, and the boom that it sparked has, if anything, accelerated.
Boxed sets, once the fare of late-night television commercials, have become big business, a particular favorite for holiday gifts.
Here are 15 choices that Times critics found worthy of note.
Prices are suggested retail. 'The Complete Stax/Volt Soul Singles -- Volume 2'  Stax SCD-4411-2; nine CD's ($125)


Third Ave. to Park, Seafood to Steak
CHIN CHIN ** (212) 888-4555; 216 East 49th Street; $$$; all major cards
This may be the best-looking and most stylish Chinese restaurant in town.
It is near the summit when it comes to food, too.
The cooking cuts across various ethnic borders, and while most dishes are full-flavored, few are seriously spicy.
If you like wine with Chinese food, the selection here is impressive, exceptionally well chosen and fairly priced.


Islanders Punch a Nasty Hole in Rangers' Streak
Today's Ranger-Islander game at Nassau Coliseum was a Saturday matinee from the movie genre of King Kong vs.
Godzilla.
It was loud, it was long and it was wild.
There were plenty of children, a few belligerent adults and dozens of security guards among the 16,297 fans who packed the building.
"Fights would start on the ice and then they would start in the stands at the same time," said Darius Kasparaitis, the Islander defenseman.
"It's the kind of game you like to play and then like to sit on the bench and just watch. Always hit somebody and then watch your back." It took three hours to play and it ended in a 6-4 Islander victory that either broke or extended several significant streaks.


Back and Forth on Buses; Blame Double-Parking And Delivery Trucks
To the Editor:
As someone who uses buses to get uptown, downtown and crosstown six days a week, may I suggest that we not blame the New York City buses but rather examine the real reasons buses can't run on schedule:
The city is constantly under construction and traffic lanes are reduced to accommodate Con Ed and the phone companies.
Delivery trucks like United Parcel and Federal Express and moving vans stop wherever their drivers find it convenient.
So do double-parked cars, many of them oversized limousines.
Taxicabs stop for fares in bus lanes and take left turns from right lanes.
Pedestrians tend to stand in the street.


Eyeful


That's Entertainment
They're putting up a big white tent in Mackinaw City, Mich., next summer, but it's not the circus that's coming to town -- not the Ringling Brothers kind, anyway.
The first Soap Opera Fan Fair, planned for June 1 to 5, will be held in the 25,000-square-foot tent along the waterfront, where the stars will greet fans, sign autographs and have their photos taken with admirers.
Planners expect some 100 actors, producers and writers from "General Hospital," "One Life to Live" "As the World Turns," and other shows.
Day pass $25; five-day tickets $75. (800) 817-7627.


Brooklyn Museum Opens West Wing
The oldest section of the Brooklyn Museum becomes its newest Dec. 3, with the opening of the renovated West Wing, designed in 1893 by McKim, Mead &amp; White.
For the first time since the 1930's, all the exhibition space in the wing will be open to the public.
Three floors of the wing will serve as exhibition space, and one floor will be offices.
The centerpiece of the new space will be a display on the third floor of more than 500 pieces from the museum's renowned Egyptian collection.
In one section, some 300 works will be arranged chronologically from 1350 B.C. and cover more than 1,300 years to the end of the reign of Cleopatra in the Ptolemaic Period.
Among the objects will be the Akhenaten Nefertiti, a limestone relief from the Amarna Period, about 1300 B.C., and the head of a priest carved from diorite about 50 B.C. and known as the Brooklyn Black Head.
Other pieces will appear in an exhibit titled, "Temples, Tombs and the Egyptian Universe."


Indians Ready to Open the Vaults if a Pitcher Will Just Agree
In 25 years of division play, they have never finished first.
They haven't finished first in any alignment in 39 seasons.
They have had seven straight losing seasons and only 10 winning seasons since they last finished first.
The Cleveland Indians, though, sense a change in life style and have spent the off season trying to spend dollars to turn that sense into reality.
"We're the little mouse that roared," General Manager John Hart said.


Frequent Fliers
To the Editor: The Practical Traveler column "Frequent Flying for Dilettantes" (Aug. 1) and a letter to the editor (Oct. 10) discussed partnerships that airlines set up in these programs.
This is my experience:
I flew from New York to Los Angeles on American last year, then switched to Qantas for my trip to New Zealand.
Later I flew from Australia to Los Angeles on Qantas and again took American to New York City -- a lot of mileage!


Sponsors Are More Elusive Than the Breeze in the America's Cup
It's as if a dampener has been placed on the fires of the America's Cup.
The flames of energy that usually heat up the four-month yacht racing series a year before the event begins are mere embers this time.
With the next cup trials scheduled to start in January 1995, modern practice dictates that most contenders would be packing now to move to San Diego.
But the only team among 14 challengers that seems to be stirring is the Japanese.
Money, it appears, is at the root of the problem as never before.


The Knit Fit


Abstinence Bill Passes First Key Test
Proposed legislation that would mandate that New Jersey schools teach that sexual abstinence is the best way to prevent AIDS has cleared its first legislative hurdle.
The bill, sponsored by Senator Gerald Cardinale of Demarest, passed the Senate Education Committee last week and now faces a test with an Assembly committee before it reaches the Legislature for a vote.


Understating the Scope of the AIDS Crisis
To the Editor:
Barbara Presley Noble's piece on AIDS in the workplace may leave a mistaken impression regarding the scope of the epidemic ("Attitudes Clash on Jobs and AIDS," Nov. 7).


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
BELLES LETTRES  LITERARY REFLECTIONS  Michener on Michener, Hemingway, Capote and Others.
By James Michener.
State House, $21.95.


The Two Sides of Rollins
Edward J. Rollins's actions in the New Jersey gubernatorial race restored his reputation not only as a savvy campaign manager but also as a political workhorse who regularly says impolitic things.
Article, page 48.


THE NURSES OF VIETNAM, STILL WOUNDED
I cannot get your article out of my mind.
Although such an endless stream of broken bodies and death is itself impossible to fully imagine, it is the rapes that continue to haunt me.
These military women and their rapists were supposed to be on the same side of the war.
It looks as if rape is just another way to die by friendly fire.
LESLIE SCHWARTZ Rochester


Living Vicariously Captures Brooklyn
New York staged its final fling for star-class racing until next spring yesterday, and the stars rocketed in many directions: Strategic Maneuver and Go for Gin cast shadows into 1994 when they won the juvenile stakes, Turnback the Alarm ran second in her 22d, and last, race, and Living Vicariously won the Brooklyn Handicap after the favorites Missionary Ridge and Prospector's Flag both suffered pulmonary bleeding.
No championships were at stake, but some careers were enhanced and others dimmed, notably in the 105th running of the Brooklyn Handicap when the 3-year-old Living Vicariously atoned for a year of frustration and outran older horses.


Yes, Virginia, the Past Can Be Plasticized
TWO weeks ago the Walt Disney Company disclosed plans for a "Disney's America," a suburban Washington theme park billed as a rollercoaster ride through American history and dominated by an ersatz Civil War fort, erected from scratch after the real McCoy.
And a good thing, too.
For the following week, the town council in nearby Leesburg, Va., gave the boot to the real McCoy, a crumbling, earthen, star-shaped Civil War revetment called Fort Johnson.
Given a $480,000 state grant to restore the site as a historical attraction, the town fathers balked after angry citizens accused them of placing the cause of preservation above the desires of two men, ages 81 and 89, who refused to sell their land to the city.
Let the damn thing crumble, voters cried -- and so the city gave the money back.


Sweet Bay Scallops For Holiday Soirees
BAY scallops from Peconic Bay on Long Island and Nantucket Bay in Massachusetts are in fairly good supply this year.
They are rather expensive and therefore more suitable for special holiday occasions.
Their slightly briny sweetness and manageable size make them excellent to use in a variety of dishes.
These are not tiny scallops.
They are usually around an inch in diameter, so they retain a certain appealing succulence when cooked.
If they are not available, it is better to substitute sea scallops, quartered, than to use the smaller calico scallops.


Rare Total Eclipse Of the Moon Is Due Very Late Tonight
A total eclipse of the moon, a relatively rare event, will grace the darkened sky across most of the United States and Canada tonight, but remnants of a storm expected to move through the New York area early today may offer moon-gazers only sporadic views through breaks in lingering clouds.
"There's one heck of a storm moving north along the East Coast," said Fred Gadomski, a meteorologist at Pennsylvania State University.
"By evening, while the rain will have ended in New York, there will still be clouds in the area. So viewing of the eclipse may have to be a peek-a-boo affair."


Council to Review Ban on Street Art Sales
As artists marched outside City Hall chanting, "Art is not a crime!" a City Council committee last week took the first steps toward changing the law under which artists are being arrested for selling their work on downtown streets.
And, citing the Council's planned review, the Manhattan District Attorney's Office moved to drop charges in about a dozen cases.


Gangster Rappers: The Lives, The Lyrics
FROM Mozart to Frank Sinatra to Michael Jackson, popular music has a long history of run-ins with the law.
But the recent arrests of three major hip-hop artists on charges including sexual assault and murder have heightened concerns that some of these performers, particularly the stars of gangster rap, have become dangerous emblems for an immensely popular, primarily black musical genre that celebrates violence, gangs, guns and sexual conquest.
In the aftermath of the arrests, public officials and other critics of rap are again asking what influence, if any, the music and its artists have on the larger society.
"For years, these rappers have been preaching drug culture and violence," said Curtis R. Tucker Jr., a California Assemblyman whose district embraces many black areas of Los Angeles.
"But now they are openly living that life style, and that will have a devastating affect on our young people who emulate the way these rappers dress, talk and act."


IN SHORT: FICTION
FARCICAL FANTASY  WHEN BOBBY KENNEDY WAS A MOVING MAN  By Robert Ellis Gordon.
Black Heron, paper, $10.95.


Barbie Lives
What kind of retribution strikes a society that sells $1 billion worth of Barbie dolls a year?
Barbie comes to life, that's what.
And this time she's anatomically correct, in the form of Xuxa (pronounced SHOO-shah), a blue-eyed, flaxen haired, seductive kiddie-show host from Brazil.
This fall, Xuxa, the first Latin American to be listed among Forbes's 40 richest entertainers, premiered in the United States. (She claims to be seen in 80 percent of the American daytime television market.) Clad in hot pants, fish-net stockings and go-go boots, the former Brazilian Playboy model dances, makes kissy faces and attracts more adults than Captain Kangaroo ever did.
Among the 50 million Latin American viewers who adore her is Alfredo Stroessner, the former (not nice) leader of Paraguay, now living in Brasilia.


A Chance to Speak Out For Partitions in Cabs
To the Editor:
In "Hungry and Full of Hope: In Defense of the Immigrant Cabby," Nov. 21, cabdriver William Mersey calls for the Taxi and Limousine Commission to require taxi owners to install safety partitions.
In 1989 the commission proposed a rule to mandate safety partitions.
At the required rule-making hearing, however, drivers voiced intense opposition, testifying that the partitions made them hot and uncomfortable and inhibited communication with passengers.
The commission therefore voted to keep the rule unchanged so the installation of partitions remains voluntary.


Virginia Donelson And James Collins
Mrs.
R.
F.
Hays Jr. of Charlottesville, Va., and Dr.
Martin Donelson Jr. of Danville, Va., have announced February wedding plans for their daughter Virginia Dance Donelson and James Connell Collins, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bradley I. Collins of Palm Beach, Fla.
Miss Donelson graduated from Hollins College and the Webber Douglas Academy of Dramatic Art in London.
She is a playwright, a comedy writer and an actress in New York.


Rabin Faces Criticism Over Peace Talks From Within His Own Party
It comes as no surprise to Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin that his peace efforts have brought criticism from Israelis like rightist opponents, settlers in the occupied territories and rabbis who believe that Jews must claim all of the biblical Land of Israel.
But lately Mr.
Rabin has also heard grumbling from allies in his own Labor Party.
They warn that Government policies may weaken Israeli security, especially along the Jordan River border with Jordan and on the Golan Heights, the strategic plateau captured from Syria in the 1967 Arab-Israeli war.


Despair Grows In Brooklyn
THE VILLE Cops and Kids in Urban America.
By Greg Donaldson.
Illustrated. 401 pp.
New York: Ticknor &amp; Fields. $22.95.


In the Region/Westchester; After Losing Unicef, What Now for New Rochelle?
AFTER an intense two-year campaign to become the new headquarters city for Unicef, New Rochelle learned last month that the United Nations children's relief agency had decided to remain in Manhattan.
Now the city is trying to salvage as much of its ambitious development plan as possible.
City officials have already spoken to several foreign missions and to the Irish Tourist Board, said Joseph G. Madonna, Commissioner for the Department of Development -- so far without results.


From Little Packages Come Big Sounds
WHEN "CROSSROADS," A FOURCD boxed set chronicling the career of Eric Clapton, went gold shortly after it was released in 1988, the recording industry took notice.
Record companies, eager to tap the vast catalogues they had amassed, saw an opportunity to sell old wine in new bottles.
"Crossroads" has gone on to sell more than two million copies in this country alone, and the boom that it sparked has, if anything, accelerated.
Boxed sets, once the fare of late-night television commercials, have become big business, a particular favorite for holiday gifts.
Here are 15 choices that Times critics found worthy of note.
Prices are suggested retail. 'The Complete CBS Buck Clayton Jam Sessions'  Mosaic Records 144; six CD's ($90) or eight LP's ($104)


To Asia With Hope: Opportunity Lures A U.S. Executive
At a time when Asia is enjoying an economic revolution, executives from Sun Microsystems Inc., the $4.3 billion-in-sales maker of computer systems, visited eight countries there during two hectic weeks earlier this month.
They were led by the chairman and chief executive of Sun, Scott McNealy, 39.
Mr.
McNealy, who received a degree in economics from Harvard and an M.B.A. from Stanford, co-founded Sun in 1982.
Mr.
McNealy's impressions, recorded in a diary he kept during the trip and later agreed to release for publication, offer a sense of the opportunity that so many American businesses see in Asia -- and of how much American businessmen still have to learn about Asian economies and cultures.
Here are excerpts from the diary: Jakarta, Indonesia, Oct. 30
The next two weeks will take us through Jakarta, Singapore, Kuala Lumpur, Bangkok, Hong Kong, Beijing, Shanghai, Taipei and Seoul.
We see a mutual opportunity here: to learn from their efforts as well as to share our technology, which will open markets for our company and their countries.
The developed world is tied to outdated technology and keeps investing in it because they must make it pay off.
For example, while many companies in the United States understand why network computing -- distributing the workload among many computers rather than relying on just one central one -- makes the process quicker and less vulnerable to logjams and breakdowns, the fact is, they've got this heavy investment in old proprietary systems.
Countries out here, however, can start fresh.
En Route to Singapore, Nov. 1
We decided to wear a "uniform" on this tour to give it a sense of continuity and teamwork.
For the Jakarta visit, we donned colorful Indonesian batik shirts.
But otherwise we're all wearing white polo shirts with Sun's logo on the sleeves and khaki slacks.
Somebody told us at breakfast that we look like a soccer team.
I had wanted to go in blue jeans and T-shirts, my standard work clothes at Sun (that's what I wear to board meetings).
But the sales staff said these cultures would find that offensive.
They wanted me to wear a suit.
So we compromised.
A group of us this morning paid a visit to a Dr.
Bacharuddin Jusuf Habibie, an important Indonesian Government minister who oversees something like 12 industries.
We met in his office, which is more like a museum for model planes, hundreds of them.
I eased into my pitch: how Sun can help Indonesia modernize its infrastructure.
We provide enabling technology.
Dr.
Habibie, in his mid-50's, is an energetic Renaissance man who knows and understands technology from aerospace to computers, including Sun's.
His engineers use them.
But he doesn't believe a network of computers can be made secure.
I made note of the fact that the United States intelligence community is a big Sun customer and well known for meeting strict security requirements.
Dr.
Habibie didn't care.
Why should he?
He believes the way to security is to load his files on his Macintosh Quadra at home and have his driver hand-deliver the floppy.
Most of us in the room were trying to envision any business in the United States being profitable using couriers to deliver floppies.
It looked like an impasse.
Then a member of my team suggested that rather than discuss our differences on network security, we show Dr.
Habibie and his engineers what our technology can do.
We suggested a seminar with demonstrations from key scientists and engineers at Sun.
Dr.
Habibie loved the idea.
Singapore, Nov. 2
This is a remarkable island-city-nation that the United States could learn a thing or two from.
In a meeting this morning with the National Computer Board, we were briefed on Singapore's plan to build an information highway.
They are light years ahead of the United States on this endeavor, and remarkably more organized.
Of course, it's easier to do in an island nation of 2.5 million, as opposed to 250 million.
But this may be the first real "test bed" of that technology.
The model they're using is very close to our philosophy of distributed computing with an architecture that is not proprietary but instead open to all who might want to innovate.
This is an English-speaking country, but some analogies just don't translate.
I like to describe the "master-slave" mainframe computing model as a "hairball" -- a massively complex web.
An American colleague suggested "bowl of noodles."
We got started on politics at lunch.
I've never been one to hold back what's on my mind, and these people seem to find it amusing.
The brash American, somebody said.
The Asians are more reserved.
We put our cards on the table, but we don't always know what they're thinking.
This puts us at a disadvantage in dealings.
After less than 24 hours in Singapore, I'm more of a capitalist than ever.
Low taxes, no capital-gains tax, no unemployment, mandatory savings instead of Social Security.
What's right with this picture?
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, Nov. 2
A very positive meeting this morning with the Malaysian Institute of Microelectronic Systems.
This Government-sponsored research and development group was started in 1985 to help drive Malaysia to a position as a worldwide player in the microelectronics industry.
The most hopeful aspect of the meeting is that they understand and endorse open-computing systems.
Bangkok, Thailand, Nov. 2
The ride in from the airport was amazing.
They're working feverishly to build new freeways but they're not keeping up.
Traffic jams are the worst I've ever seen.
I don't think I've ever seen so much construction in one place.
Kuala Lumpur is a close second.
These countries intend to be serious players in the world economy.
If anything holds them back, it will be this traffic.
Bangkok, Nov. 4
Lunch with customers today was very tough.
Definite language problem.
Even with an interpreter.
The jokes just don't translate.
Hong Kong, Nov. 7
I try to get a little work done on the plane.
But I always have a difficult time reading and writing on the road.
At home, the minute I get on the elevator something switches in my brain and I'm mentally at work.
Out here, the switch doesn't seem to click.
I am better connected than in the past, however.
Now, I'm at least able to log on to my computer at work with a portable (an H.-P. Omnibook).
I check the 150 to 200 electronic mail messages I get each day, so I'm able to keep up with the office chatter and memoranda.
Of course, my managers hate it because it means they can never get away from me now.
People ask me what's the most "mission critical" application at Sun.
I usually answer e-mail.
For a global company, e-mail is the one sure method of communication.
We have 12,500 employees doing a million e-mails a day.
We have a saying at Sun that the network is the computer.
I'm advising Government officials out here that the next computers they buy should be ones that communicate with other computers, not just process information.
Also, get on the Internet.
Beijing, China, Nov. 7
Everything is dull brown and gray, like going from Oz back to Kansas.
But the economic growth rate here is 12.8 percent, and there is no sign of abatement.
Yet based on my extended meetings with officials here, it's hard to gauge where China is going.
They seem to be advocating free enterprise, yet talk about controlling growth and a return to Communist values.
Beijing, Nov. 8
Just finished a walk before breakfast.
About 100 yards from the hotel is a river that serves as an open sewer, a garbage dump and a place to bathe.
Capitalism is often criticized for seeking profits at the expense of the environment.
Here's all the proof anyone would need that a centralized, socialist government is not the answer.
I'm excited because the Chinese appreciate the value of our computing model.
But I'm concerned because some companies are still trying to push yesterday's technology and these countries are, too often, taking that advice.
The Bank of China met with us today and told us they understand the value of open-systems network computing.
But the Federal Reserve Bank in the United States is advising the bank to buy mainframes.
I tried to explain that the Fed is espousing the technology it knows and understands, purely for traditional reasons.
When one mainframe goes down, it's a big problem.
With 500 servers, when one goes down, it's one-500th of a problem.
This is the sort of advice we can transfer to these areas.
In exchange, they can help us by converting our software applications into their own tongue, growing the market for Sun and partners.
Shanghai, China, Nov. 9
Opened the curtains to my hotel room to check the view.
And there was a huge banner across the street, "Hewlett-Packard No. 1 in Unix." Ugh.
Guess we've got some work to do getting the message out around this town.
Shanghai and Beijing are the consummate study in contrasts between Communism and capitalism, all in one country.
Beijing, a centrally planned, centrally run economy, can feel lifeless, dormant.
Shanghai is alive with energy.
There are shops springing up on every corner.
Skyscrapers are going up.
The mayor explained today about the city's plan for developing a whole separate city called Pudong, which will be a free-enterprise zone.
Taipei, Taiwan, Nov. 10
Gen.
Kuo Yun, the vice chairman and president of the Institute for Information Industry, joked that R.O.C. stands for Republic of Computers, not Republic of China.
Little wonder, since 80 percent of PC's worldwide are made here.
Still, those are PC's cranking out proprietary operating systems.
General Kuo's principal job is to oversee a strategy for the computerization of government and private industries.
I'm trying to imagine the United States being that farsighted.
The United States, meanwhile, is caught up in the possibility of bringing movies on demand into the home rather than developing a fiber-optic-based information highway to help businesses be more competitive.
With priorities like that, it's not difficult to see who is going to get ahead in the information-based economy of the future.
The general introduced me in English for a speech I gave (with an interpreter).
I learned that this was the first time he had spoken English in public, which is very unusual, and should be considered an honor to me.
It's little things like this that you need to pick up on when doing business here.
Fortunately for us, we rely heavily on partners for business in many of these countries, and they understand the customs and culture.
Seoul, South Korea, Nov. 11
The last leg on the trip.
One question that comes up often is when Sun will open a manufacturing plant in South Korea.
I try to explain that our business model does not include looking for new sites for low-cost labor.
For some reason, it seems to carry more weight in the press to open a plant and employ low-wage workers than it does to forge partnerships with local companies that involve transferring knowledge to them.
En Route to San Francisco, Nov. 12
Prepared for serious jet lag: 348 hours on the road, 45 in flight, about 12 in immigration and baggage-claim lines, 18 in cars, 140 in presentations, press interviews and meetings.
That left 84 hours for sleep, 30 or so for checking into hotels, packing and unpacking and catching up on e-mail and phone calls.
I think that left us a grand total of 18 or 19 hours of free time.
Forty-five speeches given, 500 or so business cards collected, 1,600 business and government leaders and partners who heard our message and delivered their messages to us.
Was it worth the expense, the time, the effort?
I think so.
American companies usually approach emerging markets as a chance to sell a lot or to pay low wages for menial labor.
Yet the intellectual capital available in Asia is tremendous.
American companies that realize this and figure out how to become partners with these countries will be successful in the 90's and beyond.


Lisa G. Jacobs, Christopher Conti
Lisa G. Jacobs, a daughter of David A. and Roberta Jacobs of Boston, was married there last evening to Christopher L. Conti, a son of Joseph and Heidi Conti of Massapequa, L.I.
Rabbi H. David Werb officiated at the Four Seasons Hotel.
Mrs.
Conti, 30, is the director at Pinnacle Group International, an insurance executive search firm in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
FLATBUSH  A Potato Family Tries Its Hand at Camping
As part of its annual Familytime Series, the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts will offer Theater Beyond Words, a Canadian theater company, in "The Potato People Survive the Great Outdoors," a show in mime about camping.
The attempts of Poppa (couch potato), Momma (boss potato) and Nancy (baby potato) to commune with nature are depicted with masks, music and sound effects.
Characters also include the Beanstalk children and a forest ranger.
The Familytime series opened in October with Magic Lynn, a magician, and runs through May.
"Colonial Nutcracker," a version of the classic ballet set in early America, is to be performed in December by the Dance Theater in Westchester.
Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts, Brooklyn College, Campus Road and Hillel Place; today, 2 P.M.; $7; (718) 951-4500.
LOWER EAST SIDE  Merging Theater and Art In a Play on Race Relations
The Working Playground and 8 Street Productions, in their first joint production, will present Abigael Sanders's play "King of Pleasure." Pictured below, Eagle-Eye Cherry and Anjua Warfield.
The production has elements of theater and art.
During the show, Masashi Ohtsu, a painter, will create a mural onstage, and the set incorporates a photography show of the work of Paige Hall.
The play, which seeks to capture the atmosphere of a downtown Manhattan club, concerns the racial conflict between a white band manager from South Africa and a mixed-race American musician he manages.
The Working Playground, a year-old nonprofit organization, has produced two plays.
"King of Pleasure" is the first presentation of 8 Street Productions, founded last spring.
Teatro la Tea, 107 Suffolk Street, 2d floor, between Delancey and Rivington Streets; Dec. 1 to 4 and Dec. 15 to 18;, Wednesdays through Saturdays, 8 P.M., $10; Saturday matinees, 2 P.M., $8; (212) 592-3041.
FOREST HILLS  Holiday Shopping at the Y: From Knitwear to Judaica
The Performance Space, the cultural division of the Y.M.-Y.W.H.A., is presenting its first Holiday Fine Arts and Craft Fair and Exhibit today.
More than 40 New York area exhibitors will sell handmade knitwear, stained glass, tapestry, seriagraphs, ceramics, jewelry and Judaiaca.
Free child care will be provided.
Susan Kiok, the Y's cultural arts director, said she had created the fair to meet a community need.
"Queens is a desert in terms of good crafts fairs," she said.
The artisans will also provide samples of their work for a holiday gift boutique.
Central Queens Y.M.-Y.W.H.A., 67-09 108th Street; fair and exhibit, today, noon to 7 P.M. $2, free for children under 12; boutique, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M., tomorrow through Jan. 10; (718) 268-5011.
EAST VILLAGE  Edith Wharton Revisited At Old Merchant's House
In a double parlor complete with black-and-gold marble fireplaces and scarlet silk drapes, the New York Art Theater will present "Old New York: False Dawn," a tale of the city from the 1840's to the 1910's.
The play is adapted from Edith Wharton's novel "Old New York."
The Old Merchant's House, a single-family brownstone built in 1832 that has been a museum since 1936, will be the setting.
The Greek Revival house contains belongings of its original occupants, the Treadwell family.
The theater's artistic director, Donald T. Sanders, adapted the play for the museum.
Reviewing a 1987 performance, Stephen Holden of The New York Times wrote, "Henry Threadgill's incidental music, played on a synthesizer, provides an appropriately Gothic ambiance to a nastily amusing comedy of manners."
Old Merchant's House, 29 East Fourth Street; Thursday through Saturday, 8 P.M.; Sunday, 3 P.M.; $24; Reservations required: (212) 226-6211.
ERIN ST.
JOHN KELLY


Manager's Profile
Tom Spalding
Fund: Nuveen Municipal Value , $1.8 billion in assets.
Manager since 1987 inception. (Sponsor: John Nuveen &amp; Company, Chicago.)  Born: July 31, 1951; Oakland, Calif.


West Indians In Pursuit of the American Dream
WHEN Monica Watson began her long shopping list a week ago for the 60 guests expected for Thanksgiving dinner, she included more than just the traditional turkey and trimmings.
The menu for the holiday this year was also to include delicacies like curried mutton and Jamaican spice cake -- favorite dishes from the land of her childhood.
Mrs.
Watson, 49, said she was proud to be the hostess to a large and extended family of relatives from her native Jamaica who have settled in the United States.
And this year, she said, the holiday dinner would be served in the grand dining room of the home she and her husband, Vernon, 51, recently purchased -- a sprawling 13-room, turn-of-the-century house on North Columbus Avenue here.


A Life Without Jeans
Everybody in the world wears jeans -- except me.
They are one of those fashion cum cultural phenomena that have somehow eluded me.
When I was growing up, denim was what my grandfather and the farmhands wore for barnyard work.
That's where it belonged.
My 50's school years were prejeans time, too.
Besides, as a fashion student, all I dreamed about was looking at least 35, and as stylish as the Duchess of Windsor.
In the 60's, when young women really started wearing men's Levi's, I was deep into my true 30's, and the haute chic of pearls and sleeveless little black dresses.
The 70's, though, changed a lot of fashion notions.
It was a time of rebellion, and jeans fit right in.
They were defiantly antifashion: guy's clothing -- work clothes, to boot -- that looked very sexy on women.
So suddenly, jeans became fashion with a capital F. When Calvin Klein started making jeans, I just had to try them.
When an assignment came up that involved spending a weekend on Fire Island, I decided it was the perfect moment to make my denim debut.
At last, to be casually chic!
I got my legs in O.K., but then the soft, squishy part of me refused to submit.
No way could I zip the fly.
A colleague came to the rescue.
"Now, don't panic," he said.
"Just lie down on the bed. This is the way the kids do it." He tugged as hard as he could, yanking on the pants and flattening me, with, I think, his knee.
I saw beads of sweat on his brow.
I know there were some on mine.
At last, the blasted zipper closed.
He hoisted me up, and I strutted around, stiff-legged, the rest of the evening.
It was impossible to sit down.
When I left the next day, the jeans stayed.
Let Brooke Shields have them.


'I Lombardi' Was Just an Opera Away From a Masterpiece
ALTHOUGH VERDI WAS A notorious reviser of his operas, only twice did he refit an existing score with a new libretto and turn it into a more or less new work.
By design or chance, the Metropolitan Opera's pair of Verdi premieres this season presents the original forms of these operas.
"Stiffelio" (1850) has had its turn; "I Lombardi Alla Prima Crociata" ("The Lombards on the First Crusade," 1843) arrives on Thursday evening, with Luciano Pavarotti reprising a role he sang in a celebrated Rome production almost a quarter-century ago.
Apart from this historical linkage, Verdi's 4th and 16th operas have little in common, and casual comparison is likely to prove unkind to the earlier, considerably less polished work.
In fact, it may be surprising that the composer thought "I Lombardi" a worthy candidate for transformation.
In 1847, presented with the opportunity to produce an opera for Paris on notice too short to permit creation from scratch, he returned to "I Lombardi," to produce "Jerusalem."


Why Treat Bicyclists Worse Than Motorists?
To the Editor:
In Robert Lipsyte's Nov. 21 column "A Civility Quiz: Do You Believe in 'WALK'?" he has Councilman Charles Millard bemoaning the lack of civility shown by some bicyclists in his Upper East Side district.
The Councilman's first-line solution is legislation.
What about mediating?
What about educating, starting with a campaign of public service messages designed to remind all street users of the ample laws already on the books, instead of singling out one group?
It is disingenuous of Mr.
Lipsyte to imply that this bill is balanced by one of Mr.
Millard's other bills that calls for fines for motorists caught in bike lanes.
In the previous week's City section, it was reported that the Avenue of America bike lane is being removed and that to "appease" cyclists the city was installing bike racks there.
Imagine the cries of boondoggle were the city to build a parking garage and then remove the road leading to it.


Susan Barasch, David Carrieri
Dr.
Susan Amy Barasch, a clinical fellow in ambulatory pediatrics at Bellevue Hospital in New York, was married last evening to Dr.
David Alan Carrieri, a family physician in Riverdale, N.J.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel officiated at the Rainbow Room Pegasus Suite in New York.
Dr.
Barasch, 30, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received her medical degree from the State University Health Science Center in Brooklyn.


America's Team? K.S.U., Perhaps
To the Sports Editor:
Sports fans everywhere deserve to know that a geniune America's Team is thriving in Manhattan, Kan.
This moniker is not some hyped marketing play, a la the Dallas Cowboys, but the real McCoy, a la the 1960 United States Olympic hockey team.


Proposal Would Return 'Clang! Clang! Clang!' to 42d
Some say it will provide quieter, cleaner transportation.
Others call it the nostalgia trip of a few visionaries.
Decades after making its last trip in New York City, the trolley car is resurfacing -- or at least the idea of it.
Mayor Dinkins, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan and various civic groups like the Parks Council have expressed support for the return of the trolley along 42d Street.


Shannon Kelly, Scott L. Gilmour
Shannon Grace Margaret Kelly, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerrold Dean Kelly of Dallas, was married there yesterday to Scott Luther Gilmour, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ross Blye Gilmour of La Canada, Calif.
The Rev.
Sherwood Strodel performed the ceremony at the Highland Park Presbyterian Church.


The Disabilities Act Is for the Blind, Too
To the Editor:
Although I am glad that you chose to publicize the Americans with Disabilities Act -- landmark civil rights legislation that protects all people with disabilities -- I was dismayed that your article headed "For the Disabled, Some Progress" on Oct. 24 would lead the reader to believe that it exclusively deals with such things as installing ramps, widening doorways and lowering restroom fixtures.


Ellen Wasserman and Stuart Goldstein
Ellen Meri Wasserman, the daughter of Florence and Perry Wasserman of West Orange, N.J., and Stuart Marc Goldstein, the son of Jeanette and Martin Goldstein of Westfield, N.J., were married last evening.
Rabbi John S. Schechter performed the ceremony at Singers, a catering establishment in Spring Valley, N.Y.
The bride, 33, graduated cum laude from Brandeis University.
She is a senior vice president and the media director of the direct marketing division of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, the New York advertising agency.
The bride's mother is the manager of member services for Weight Watchers of North Jersey Inc.
The bride's father is retired.


Uncertain Future in Shrinking Army Puts Strain on Troops and Families
Anxiety and uncertainty are constant companions of soldiers in today's shrinking military, but perhaps no single unit has been whipsawed more than the Dragon Battalion, a veteran Army artillery unit that was transferred here from Europe.
When the unit returned in May 1991 to its base in Hanau, Germany, after service in the Persian Gulf war, it learned it would probably be moved to another post in Germany.
But shortly after, the 581-man battalion was told it would be disbanded.


Scott Merrill Siegler, Jody Ann Cukier
Jody Ann Cukier, the senior vice president of marketing and operations at Savoy Pictures, a movie distribution company in Beverly Hills, Calif., was married last evening to Scott Merrill Siegler, the president of Columbia Pictures Television in Culver City, Calif.
Rabbi Joel Goor officiated at the Mark Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Siegler, 36, graduated cum laude from Harvard University, from which she also received an M.B.A.
She is a daughter of Sam and Carolyn Cukier of Seaford, L.I.
The bride's father owns South Shore Custom Kitchens in Westbury, L.I.


Corrections
A review on Oct. 31 about "Opera in America: A Cultural History," by John Dizikes, cited the book erroneously for an omission.
The book does include a biographical and artistic sketch, slightly less than a page long, of Kurt Herbert Adler, artistic director, then general director, of the San Francisco Opera from 1953 to 1981.


Corrections
An article on page 24 of the Arts and Leisure section today, about handicapping the Academy Awards, omits a heading in some copies.
The paragraph about Daniel Day-Lewis opens the discussion in the Best Actor category.


INSIDE
Life on Mend Ends in Attack
After time in jail, Alexander Ortiz turned his life around.
But he died pleading with two men not to shoot his pregnant girlfriend.
Page 45.


One Town's Stores Plot Survival As Wal-Mart Grows in Northeast
The J. C. Rogerson Company hardware store hasn't changed much in the 161 years it has anchored the main street of this small city on the northeastern edge of the Catskills.
Nails and screws are still dispensed from rows of wooden drawers installed in the 19th century, and graffiti scrawled by employees who have long since died remain visible on the beams supporting the store's basement.


In N.F.L. Expansion Math, Plus One May Become Plus Three
When the National Football League club owners meet Tuesday in Chicago, they will supposedly do nothing more than select one expansion team to start playing in 1996.
However, several club owners have said privately that they have discussed adding two teams for 1998 as well, and that subject may come up again at this meeting.
When the owners met five weeks ago, they hoped to pick two expansion cities for 1996.
They settled only on Charlotte, whose team will be known as the Carolina Panthers.
They will choose another city Tuesday from among the remaining candidates: Baltimore, St.
Louis, Jacksonville and Memphis.


Ms. Brickman, Mr. Bonner
Ravelle Silberman Brickman, a freelance technical writer and public relations consultant, and J. Michael Maurice O'Reilly Bonner, the vice president of marketing at Argus Investors' Counsel, a New York investment management firm, were married on Thursday.
Rabbi Dennis N. Math performed the ceremony at the Village Temple in New York.
Ms.
Brickman is keeping her name.
She graduated from Smith College.
She was until recently the president of the Brickman Group, a marketing and public relations agency in New York.


Students' Mural at the Yonkers Station
THE photographers posed them this way and that, television reporters put microphones under their noses, and their proud parents beamed through the ceremony.
If fame, however fleeting, meant drinking as much chocolate milk as they wanted and skipping school for the morning, then the young artists who painted "The River That Flows Both Ways," a mural that will be on view for a year at the Metro-North station here, had a long, cool taste of such celebrity when the mural was recently dedicated.
Arts for Transit
The group of 12 fifth graders, who were in the fourth grade at the Museum School of Arts and Sciences at Public School 25 here when they began their project about the Hudson River, were joined for the dedication and party afterward by Sone Tower, the Ossining artist who thought up the mural.
Also on hand were representatives of the Hudson River Museum and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, the co-sponsors of the project.


A Symbol Worthy Of a Star
WHAT: Shaquille O'Neal's modest tattoo on his left upper arm, done this summer, of the Superman emblem.
The background and border are blue; the big "S" is his own brown hue.
This simple symbol conveys the sudden superstardom of the 7-foot-1, 305-pound rap-singin', megawatt-smilin', head-shavin', Reebok-endorsin', Pepsi-swillin', Shaq-Attaqin', ram-bam-slammin' center for the Orlando Magic of the National Basketball Association.
EVIDENCE OF SUPER POWERS: Kareem Abdul-Jabbar had his sky hook.
Wilt Chamberlain had his finger roll.
Michael Jordan had his air-defying reverse layups and jams.
But the 21-year-old Shaq Attaqer's nastiest weapon is a potent SLAMMMMM! that makes arenas shudder.
It is his maneuver of choice, one that has him leading the N.B.A. in scoring.
He raps about it on his recently released debut album, "Shaq Diesel" (Jive): "Do you want me to shoot it?/ No!/ Do you want me to pass it?/ No!/ Do you want me to slam it?/ Yeah!"


Glaring Omission?
To the Editor:
Herbert Muschamp's critique of the Bard College library addition  [ "Democratic Decorations at Bard College," Oct. 31 ]  must be a satire.
To call this ugly decorated box a Greek temple's "dream of itself in another life" and "a gentle maze for the pursuit of knowledge" is right out of Lewis Carroll.


Michael Courts and Karen Hicks
Karen Lane Hicks, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred H. Hicks of Westbury, L.I., and Michael Christopher Courts, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Courts Jr. of Wayne, N.J., were married on Friday.
The Rev.
Richard R. Guice, a Methodist minister, and the Rev.
Hugh Murphy, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the United Methodist Church in Westbury.
Mrs.
Courts, 26, manages the New York office of Keith Prowse &amp; Company USA, a tour operator based in Amsterdam.
Her father is the president of Hicks Nurseries Inc., a horticultural business in Westbury that has been in the Hicks family for five generations.
Her mother retired as a librarian at the Green Vale School, a private school in Glen Head, L.I.
The bride and bridegroom graduated from Gettysburg College.


Angela C. Willis, Douglas D. Altchek
Angela Colette Willis, a daughter of Colette M. Willis of Melbourne, Australia, and the late Leslie P. Willis, was married yesterday to Dr.
Douglas David Altchek, the son of Dr.
Victor S. Altchek and the late Muriel S. Altchek.
Rabbi Joel S. Goor performed the ceremony in the Tiffany Room of the Seventh Regiment Armory in New York.
The bride, 40, graduated from Mercy Hospital School of Nursing at Melbourne University.
She is a senior nurse in the neoplastic clinic of Mount Sinai Hospital in New York.
The bride's father played professional Australian-rules football for the St.
Kilda Saints, and later worked as a superintendent in the firearms department for the Victoria state government.


Storm Cancels Aqueduct Card
Rain and high winds yesterday morning, and the prediction of stormy weather for the afternoon, forced cancellation of Aqueduct's Sunday card.
The featured $60,000 Iroquois Stakes for New York-bred fillies and mares, 3 years old and up, will be run on Wednesday.
"Racing was canceled early rather than start a program that may have had to be stopped because of the adverse conditions," said Dick Hamilton, a steward for the New York Racing Association.


Cheered by Solid Weekend Sales, Merchants Still Won't Celebrate
Reviews were upbeat yesterday for the traditional opening weekend of the holiday shopping season, but merchants refused to read too much into the sales data flooding into their laptop computers.
The 29 days between Thanksgiving and Christmas will be the most profitable time of year for many retail companies, but consumer spending during the first weekend is no longer considered a reliable barometer because shoppers now do the bulk of their holiday shopping in the final week of the season.


Palermo Out of Hospital
The former major league umpire, Steve Palermo, has left the Massachusetts hospital where he underwent more than 10 hours of spinal surgery with hopes he will return to his old job.
Palermo, 43, underwent the risky surgery Nov. 19 at the University of Massachusetts Medical Center in Worcester.
The surgery was to remove scar tissue from around spinal nerves where Palermo was shot two years ago trying to stop a robbery in Dallas.


Dvora Gershen and Dominic Gennello
Dvora M. Gershen, a daughter of Mrs.
Alvin E. Gershen of Princeton, N.J., and the late Mr.
Gershen, was married in Princeton last evening to Dominic Gennello, a son of Margaret and Dominic F. Gennello Jr. of Hamilton Township, N.J.
Rabbi Allan Blaine, an uncle of the bride, performed the ceremony at the Jewish Center of Princeton.
Mrs.
Gennello, a graduate of Boston University, is the vice president of the Moderate Income Management Company in Trenton, a real-estate-planning concern of which her mother, who is known professionally as Mildred Blaine, is the chief executive.
The bride's mother is also the chief executive of Alvin E. Gershen Associates, an urban-planning firm in Trenton that was founded by the bride's father.


Serbian Shelling Kills 5 in Sarajevo on the Eve of Peace Talks
Serbian shellfire killed five people in Sarajevo today on the eve of a new round of peace talks, pointing up the bleak prospects as the fierce Balkan winter begins to bite into the war-ravaged Bosnian countryside.
As leaders of the shattered pieces of the former Yugoslavia left for Geneva, Serbian nationalist leaders who have seized much of Bosnia and Herzegovina voiced defiance against the compromise called for in the new initiative as the price of easing economic sanctions.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  None  Wednesday  Revised G.D.P. . . . 3d Qtr.
Thursday  Personal Income/Consumption . . .
October  New-Home Sales/Prices . . .
October  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Employment . . .
November  Leading Economic Indicators . . .
October  Factory Orders . . .
October  Auto Sales . . .
November


India's Two Major Political Parties Stumble in Regional Elections
India's two major political parties, the governing Congress and the opposition Bharatiya Janata Party, appeared to have lost ground today in a series of regional elections, the results of which are to be released over the next several days.
Over the last month, four Indian states and the nation's capital held elections for state assemblies.
The elections were seen in part as a referendum on the stewardship of Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao, but perhaps more as a gauge of the politics of Hindu nationalism represented by the Bharatiya Janata Party.


DDB Needham Unit To Move Its Offices
Berlin Wright Cameron, the spinoff of DDB Needham Worldwide's flagship New York office, is leaving its parent's quarters on Madison Avenue, effective today, for space of its own.


Van Service Saves Parents the Chore of Shuttling Children
On any given day, the three Visser children may all have to be at different after-school activities at the same time.
Candice, 11 years old, and Celina, 13, participate in dance and figure skating.
Christopher, 12, enjoys hockey and baseball, and all three attend religious education one day a week.
Their father, Jan Visser, an engineer, works 30 miles from their home in Manlius, an affluent suburb of Syracuse, and cannot help his wife, Denise, with car pooling.
Mrs.
Visser, a dietary supervisor, works from 6 A.M. to 2 P.M. two days a week, and 12-hour shifts on Saturdays and Sundays.


CHRONICLE
Over the years it has been facetiously suggested that the missing "a" in BARBRA STREISAND's name was used for Art Deco or Art Nouveau, both of which she is known for collecting with as much wisdom as passion.
Lately, tongues still in cheeks, word has it that the elusive letter stands for auction -- or at least it will in March of next year, when, following preview exhibitions in Paris, Tokyo and Los Angeles, Ms.
Streisand's collections of Deco and Nouveau will be put up for auction in New York.


Miscellany
*
DDB Needham Worldwide has opened an agency in Sofia, Bulgaria, called Olympic DDB Needham Bulgaria.
Theodore Dimitripoulos was named to head the office, which will serve clients like S. C. Johnson, as managing director. *
Grey Advertising Inc., New York, has acquired a substantial equity stake in its affiliate in the Middle East -- Camp, Saadeh &amp; Skaff.
The agency network, with 36 employees and offices in Kuwait, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, has been renamed CSS &amp; Grey.


Pension Arithmetic With Low Rates
Low interest rates may be good news for many, but in a certain way they are wreaking havoc with the nation's pension plans.
Government regulators, fearing that too few corporations are setting aside enough for future retirees, are forcing businesses to use current interest rates in calculating their pension plan obligations.
The result is that many companies will have to put aside millions of dollars more and the nation's uncovered pension liability will greatly increase.


Establishing Friendly Relations With a Diplomat


Warming Up for the Cup
In South Orange, N.J., Cryan's Beef &amp; Ale House installed a satellite dish to catch Ireland vs.
Northern Ireland on television two weeks ago -- while British troops patrolled the stadium in Belfast.
A few miles away in Garfield, fans of a different ethnic lineage packed Caffe La Gondola for Italy vs.
Portugal.
And in Sofia, Bulgaria's Parliament delayed taking a no-confidence vote on Prime Minister Lyuben Berov so members could watch their team play in Paris against France.
Soccer has that kind of grip.


Family Planning for All Families
By giving $13.2 million to the International Planned Parenthood Federation last week, and by resuming funding for the United Nations Population Fund next January, the Clinton Administration has retrieved a banner America dropped in 1984.
Once more the United States has a chance to make a deep impact on family planning all over the world.
The $13.2 million is only the first installment on a five-year, $75 million commitment to International Planned Parenthood, which, like the U.N.
Population Fund, has been denied Federal funding ever since certain Reagan Administration supporters promulgated the so-called Mexico City policy.
The policy, continued by the Bush Administration, banned Federal aid to any family planning agencies that so much as mentioned abortion -- despite the fact that American foreign aid has been sequestered, by law, from any abortion-related activities since 1985.


Bernard V. Bothmer, 81, Curator And Professor of the Art of Egypt
Bernard V. Bothmer, a noted authority on ancient Egyptian art who was a professor at New York University and a former department chairman at the Brooklyn Museum, died on Wednesday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 81 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, said his brother, Dietrich von Bothmer


Accounts
*
Whitbread Beer Co., Luton, England, to Bartle Bogle Hegarty, London, to handle media planning and buying for all its beer brands in Britain.
The media portion of the account, with total billings estimated at $35 million to $40 million, was previously divided between Bartle Bogle and Lowe Howard-Spink, London.
Each agency will continue to handle its separate creative brand assignments.


Natural Clothes Cleaning Presses Case
Newcomers say they come to Ecomat, a clothes cleaner and laundry at 90th Street and Lexington Avenue, simply because it is convenient.
It is not those "Perc-free" tags on the hangers that brings them to its door.
"It sounds good, but I don't know what it means," said Greg Fieser, a college student who lives at the 92d Street Y.M.H.A.
"I've been doing the Laundromat scene for a while and I've never heard of this."


Hit Twice, Town Feels Misled by U.S.
For more than a decade, this tiny northeast Mississippi community of 3,200 has been all dressed up with nowhere to go.
In the early 1980's, it eagerly awaited jobs and tax revenues as the Tennessee Valley Authority started building the Yellow Creek nuclear plant here.
But by 1985, after spending $1.2 billion, the agency halted work, saying it had overestimated the region's need for electricity.
Unemployment soared to as high as 30 percent in the area where Mississippi, Alabama and Tennessee meet.


Washington at Work; Though Her Bosses Are in Spotlight, An Aide Tries to Stay in the Wings
Margaret Williams, Hillary Rodham Clinton's chief of staff, stood behind her desk in the Old Executive Office Building, her round, normally cheery face looking reluctant and resigned.
After several weeks of discussions, she had finally agreed to be interviewed, but now she was wheedling, trying to negotiate the size of the article (small, she hoped) and trying to avoid being photographed.


Rabin Maneuvers to Woo Back an Orthodox Party
A divided Israeli Cabinet voted today to sponsor legislation that would prevent the importation of nonkosher meat into the Jewish state.
Whatever the move may say about future dining habits in Israel, it spoke volumes about the political headaches of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, who is trying to win back a religious party that walked out of his coalition a few weeks ago, leaving him in command of a minority Government.


Claudia McNeil, 77, an Actress Best Known for 'Raisin in the Sun'
Claudia McNeil, an actress known for her performances in stage and screen productions of "A Raisin in the Sun," died on Thursday in the Actors Fund Nursing Home in Englewood, N.J.
She was 77 and had lived in the home for nine years.
The cause was complications of diabetes, said Rita Madero, a friend.


U.S. Laws Catch Up to the New Russia
It's official: the cold war is over.
Without hoopla, Congress passed the Friendship Act before it adjourned last week.
Acknowledging that the arch-enemy that Ronald Reagan once called the Evil Empire has vanished, the act repeals laws that even suggest an adversarial relationship between the United States and the former Soviet Union.


Islanders Have Holes In Locker, And Effort
Anyone looking for symbolism at the Nassau Coliseum today didn't need to look further than the Islanders' locker room.
From the ceiling, water flowed from a leaky pipe.
On the floor, garbage bags and trash cans were strewn about to collect the moisture.
"Go in and ask them, they'll tell you how good they are," said Al Arbour, the coach, who spoke with sarcasm and anger in a loud voice.


Holiday Travelers Return to the City


Parcells Plan Is Fine, but Result Isn't
Knowing that sometime this season there would be a day like this, Coach Bill Parcells took his Patriots out in the rain and slop 10 days ago and forced them to practice.
He remembered Giants playoff games and what it took to play when the sun didn't shine and the wind blew.
Parcells's edge, though, was washed away today in a three-hour nonstop torrent in which his kicker virtually surfed a field-goal attempt and a catch that would have put the Patriots 10 yards from a victory was wiped out with a fumble.


Review/Music; Victory Won in 'Judas Maccabaeus'
Much in the same way the holiday shopping season begins before the Thanksgiving leftovers are consumed, the musical world kicks into gear right after Thanksgiving, and spends the rest of the year either encouraging devotion or spreading cheer.
The coming week brings the first of many performances of Handel's "Messiah." But with Hanukkah around the corner (it begins on the evening of Dec. 8), Handel's less frequently heard gloss on that holiday's historical backdrop, "Judas Maccabaeus," has jumped to the head of the parade.
Gerard Schwarz led his New York Chamber Symphony, the Mannes Chamber Singers and a solo quartet in a performance of the oratorio at the 92d Street Y on Saturday evening.
Actually, neither "Messiah" nor "Judas Maccabaeus" were composed for this time of year.
"Messiah" was written as an Easter work.
"Judas Maccabaeus" had its premiere on April 1, 1747.
It cannot really be thought of as a full-fledged Hanukkah piece, since it does not touch upon the miracle that Hanukkah commemorates, the burning of a single day's worth of oil for eight days.


Review/Folk; Arlo Guthrie's Holiday Tradition
It wasn't too long ago that Arlo Guthrie was folk music's new kid on the block, a brash and brilliant storyteller who combined his father's concern for social justice with Bob Dylan's cheek.
But almost three decades after he became famous with his humorous Thanksgiving Day saga, "Alice's Restaurant," Mr.
Guthrie has mellowed.
His shoulder-length locks are gray.
While he hasn't forsaken political music, he has matured into a family man whose songs and stories have exchanged a doctrinaire edginess for a broader humanitarianism.
The first of Mr.
Guthrie's two annual post-Thanksgiving concerts on Friday and Saturday at Carnegie Hall had the feel of a joyous extended-family reunion.


Music Notes; Orchestra Looks South For Festival Inspiration
The American Composers Orchestra, an ensemble that has traditionally devoted its concerts to composers from the United States, is starting an annual weeklong festival devoted to Latin American music.
Called Sonidos de las Americas and programmed by Dennis Russell Davies, the orchestra's music director, and Tania Leon, the composer, the festivals will include chamber music, master classes, lectures and an orchestral concert.
The orchestra's goal is to expand its repertory and, not incidentally, to tap New York's large Hispanic audience.
The first festival, from Jan. 29 through Feb. 6, is to focus on Mexican composers.
The chamber music performances be at Weill Recital Hall, the Americas Society on Park Avenue at 68th Street and at Hostos Community College on the Grand Concourse at 149th Street in the South Bronx.
The orchestral program, which closes the festival, will be at Carnegie Hall as part of the orchestra's regular series there.
Lest United States composers worry that a major forum for them is being diluted, the orchestra has expanded its season to five concerts from four to accommodate the program.


Books of The Times; For Doing, Looking, Traveling, Poring or Musing
Although to say so may not be a plug for literacy, you somehow want a gift book to be more than just a book to be read.
As Mark Twain once said to a woman who asked him if he thought a book was the most useful gift one could give: "A big leather-bound volume makes an ideal razor strap. A thin book is useful to stick under a table with a broken caster to steady it. A large, flat atlas can be used to cover a window with a broken pane. And a thick, old-fashioned heavy book with a clasp is the finest thing in the world to throw at a noisy cat."
What follows is a dozen or so items for propping up a table, for covering a broken window pane or, best of all, for simply reading.
They are arranged roughly in ascending price.


Transactions
Baseball  American League NEW YORK YANKEES -- Traded Domingo Jean, pitcher, and Andy Stankiewicz, infielder, to the Houston Astros for Xavier Hernandez, pitcher.
Basketball  National Basketball Association UTAH JAZZ -- Waived Dave Jamerson, guard.


World Economies


From Afghanistan to the Bronx, Immigrant's Journey Ends in Gun-Trafficking Charges
From the battlefields of war-ravaged Afghanistan to the underground railroad millions of refugees took into Pakistan before coming to the streets of New York City, the life of Fareedullah Nawabi could have been a blueprint for the experience of many Afghans in America.
That is, until last week.
Mr.
Nawabi was arrested on charges that he has sold a virtual arsenal of firearms, along with heroin and cocaine, to undercover police officers at his business, Mama's Fried Chicken, in the East Tremont section of the Bronx.


Plans for Whitman Gala
Despite the distractions of Federal and state investigations, plans are proceeding on schedule for the inauguration of a new Governor, Christine Todd Whitman, in New Jersey.
The Board of State Canvassers is to meet on Tuesday to certify the results of the Nov. 2 general election and to issue certificates of election to the winners.
It is the last official step before the Governor and the new Legislature are sworn in on Jan. 18.


The Big Airlines' Tricky and Changing Market
With the force and unpredictability of a wind shear, change has swept through the airline industry.
Only two years ago, the nation's biggest airlines -- American, United and Delta -- looked to many experts as if they were growing too strong and threatening healthy competition.
The list of airlines sending out distress signals included Continental and T.W.A., and Pan Am, Midway and Eastern had been grounded.
Today, Continental and T.W.A. have emerged from bankruptcy, the three largest carriers are flashing warnings of bleak futures, and several new airlines have emerged to answer the demands of consumers for low fares.


New York May Need To Expand Boundaries
"NO man is an island," the politically incorrect John Donne wrote.
No city is an island, either, even if some islands, like Manhattan, have been cities and some others, like Staten Island, still hope to be.
New York politicians who are wringing their hands over whether the city will be a lesser cosmopolis if Staten Island secedes are largely overlooking another alternative: Instead of letting one island go, get together with others.
Forget Staten Island.
What about Long Island?


People
*
Sarah Burroughs, senior vice president and general manager of the Atlanta office of Burrell Communications Group, was promoted to president and chief operating officer, based in Chicago, succeeding Charles H. Curry, who left to open his own shop, the Orpheus Connection, Chicago. *
Gary Conway was named to the new position of senior vice president and group creative director at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, Chicago.
He was previously an executive creative director at Leo Burnett, Hong Kong.


The Guns May Be a Bit Rusty but the Nuclear Arms Are Still Polished
Deep in the Ural Mountains, Russian engineers are busy building a vast underground command post to use in case of a nuclear war.
Equipped with an antenna for communicating with missile-carrying submarines and land-based mobile missiles, the bunker will be a new part of Russia's multi-billion-dollar effort to modernize its dwindling strategic nuclear forces.
Russia's soldiers may miss a paycheck or two, but the military is determined to maintain Russia's status as a nuclear superpower.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; What becomes a legend, or a loser? A game of 20 questions about recent campaigns.
QUESTIONS have always played an integral role in advertising, from "Why ask why?" and "Where's the beef?" to "Who put eight great tomatoes in that little bitty can?" and "Who says a good newspaper has to be dull?"
In that spirit, here are 20 questions inspired and provoked by some current and recent campaigns:


A German State Government Quits in Corruption Scandal
In the latest of a series of political scandals that have shaken Germany since the country was reunified in 1990, the government of the eastern state of Saxony-Anhalt resigned today after four officials were accused of corruption.
The Premier, Werner Munch, and three of his ministers were revealed to have received about $600,000 in undisclosed income over the last two years through payments for expenses and as compensation for lost income in their native western Germany.


Dividend Meetings


MEXICAN PRESIDENT BACKS A SUCCESSOR
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari's choice to be the governing party's candidate to succeed him was announced today by the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party.
The man chosen to run in the elections, scheduled for Aug. 21, is the Secretary of Social Development, Luis Donaldo Colosio Murrieta, 43, a popular technocrat who has run huge anti-poverty programs and whose views closely mirror those of President Salinas.


Corrections
The Sky Watch chart with the Weather Report yesterday misstated the timing of the lunar eclipse.
It was last night; it is not tonight.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Webber Injures Ankle  The visiting Golden State Warriors lost Chris Webber, but still had enough to defeat the Detroit Pistons, 91-88, last night as Billy Owens scored 21 points and pulled down a career-high 22 rebounds.
Webber, who sprained his left ankle 1:23 into the game when he tumbled over a fallen Bill Laimbeer, was taken to Pontiac Osteopathic Hospital for X-rays.
They were negative.
He will be examined further today at Oakland, Calif.
The hard-luck Warriors have already lost guards Tim Hardaway and Sarunas Marciulionis for the season with knee injuries and captain Chris Mullin has yet to play because of a torn finger ligament.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  RUSSIAN MILITARY IN TRANSITION  Three years after the breakup of the Soviet union, the Russian military is in transition, trying to create a lean, mobile force for the post-cold-war world but with few resources to make the changeover.
A1


Yankees Dig Into Astros' Lineup for Hernandez, Giving Up Jean and Stankiewicz
The acquisition of Xavier Hernandez, a "closer in waiting," indicates the Yankees decided to take care of the emptiness in their bullpen and abandon their effort to fill the void in their rotation with a front-line starter.
The Yankees obtained Hernandez from the Houston Astros Saturday night for Domingo Jean, one of their three most wanted young pitchers, and Andy Stankiewicz, a scrappy substitute infielder.


Review/Television; Raymond Burr in a Role That Belonged to Him
Although he had appeared in about 50 movies by 1957, the year he began starring in "Perry Mason" on CBS, Raymond Burr would spend the rest of his life as the very embodiment of that peculiar creature called a television star.
He would complain publicly and frequently about being the prisoner of a single role and an unchanging formula, but the money and the power, which he wielded with aplomb, proved irresistible.
He died at 76 in September, his last performing effort devoted to still another "Perry Mason" case, part of a series of periodic two-hour features carried on NBC since 1985.
Tonight's "Perry Mason: The Case of the Killer Kiss" involves, appropriately enough, a gaggle of soap-opera denizens, one of them murdered, the rest suspects.
Created in a series of best-selling novels by Erle Stanley Gardner, the lawyer and author, the defense lawyer Perry Mason moved on to radio in 1943 where, for 12 years, five days a week, he was a character in a series that was part soap opera, part detective story.
When that series was adapted in 1956 for television as the afternoon soap "The Edge of Night," the characters were given new names.
The name Perry Mason was reserved for the Raymond Burr weekly series that would run until 1966.
"The Killer Kiss" hews to basic cookie-cutter form.
Several characters are brought together, in this instance working on a soap opera.
One is always abrasive or worse, and he or she will wind up the murder victim.
The police pounce on a prime suspect, who often turns out to have some acquaintance with Perry Mason ("Her father was a judge," he will casually explain, "her mother a law clerk").
He takes the case, begins his investigation and, by the time of trial, everyone in the immediate vicinity is looking suspicious.
His devoted secretary, Della Street, played from the beginning by Barbara Hale, can always be depended on for some motherly hovering.
In increasing pain over the years from assorted ailments, the rather massive Mr.
Burr is almost always sitting or leaning on some sturdy prop.
The trial unfolds with the inevitability of Greek drama.
Viewers are assured of a tidy beginning, middle and end.
The prosecuting attorney opens with overweening confidence but, inasmuch as Perry Mason has lost only one trial over all these years -- in 1963, and only because his client refused to enter evidence that would save her -- viewers are hardly in doubt about the outcome.
Even the judges, apparently awed by basso-voiced authority, are prone to give Perry Mason unusual courtroom leeway.
And when the lawyer's investigative assistant rushes into the courtroom with the latest piece of uncovered evidence, it's only a matter of minutes before the true culprit blurts out something like: "He was going to take it all. I couldn't let him do that." Tonight's final installment, starring a slew of real soap-opera actors, doesn't miss a well-worn trick.
Like Eugene O'Neill's father doomed to playing the Count of Monte Cristo for much of his professional career, Raymond Burr may well have felt suffocated by the role of Perry Mason.
The problem is that Mr.
Burr did it to perfection, even when on automatic pilot.
For a while in the early 1970's, he did some wheelchair sleuthing as "Ironside," but that was just riding on Perry Mason's coattails.
CBS tried to revive the "Perry Mason" series in 1973 with Monte Markham in the title role.
No way.
Mr.
Burr had put a lock on the property.
The actor and the role were bonded forever.
It's one way, and certainly not the worst, to live the always precarious life of a performer.
Perry Mason The Case of the Killer Kiss  NBC, tonight at 9 (Channel 4 in the New York Area) Written by Gerry Conway and based on characters created by Erle Stanley Gardner.
Directed by Christian I. Nyby 2d.
Producers, Billy Ray Smith and Barry Steinberg; co-executive producer for Dean Hargrove Productions and the Fred Silverman Company in association with Viacom Productions, Joel Steiger; executive producers, Fred Silverman and Dean Hargrove.
Perry Mason . . .
Raymond Burr Della Street . . .
Barbara Hale Ken Malansky . . .
William R. Moses Alex Straub . . .
Stuart Damon Sandra Drake . . .
Linda Dano Kris Buckner . . .
Genie Francis Jim Watson . . .
Richard Grove Mark Stratton . . .
Sean Kanan Deputy Frank Bonner . . .
Christian LeBlanc Kevin Markham . . .
Charles Macaulay Lieut.
Ed Brock . . .
James McEachin Mimi Hoyle . . .
Karen Moncrieff


No Headline
"Anyone who would call the business after a day or two in this environment is either a gambler or clairvoyant." -- MYRON E. ULLMAN 3D, the head of Macy's, on retail sales over Thanksgiving weekend.  [ D3:2. ]


Dance in Review; By Jennifer Dunning
New York City Ballet  Ballo della Regina' and 'Other Dances' New York State Theater  The dances were familiar but several of the performances were newly dazzling when the New York City Ballet presented a program of ballets by George Balanchine and Jerome Robbins on Friday night.
To start there was Peter Boal, perfection in his classicism and dancing with an excitingly propulsive attack in Balanchine's "Ballo della Regina," a 1978 work set to music from Verdi's "Don Carlo." Mr.
Boal brought a welcome sense of continuity to this oddly disjointed feast of dancing, which veers between giddiness and regal aplomb.
Margaret Tracey made difficult choreography look difficult in an oddly dry performance.


New Zealanders Would Welcome U.S. Thaw
To the Editor:
Congratulations on your proposal in "Time to Warm Up to New Zealand" (editorial, Nov. 19) after 10 years of a United States-imposed nuclear winter on the relationship.
New Zealand is, as you state, an exemplary democracy, and New Zealanders have been present with the United States in many trouble spots around the world -- including Somalia and Kuwait.
Perhaps the starting point for a thaw could be trade.


Calm Before the Swarm: Preparing for the Kick
Although football is an emotional game, players try not to get too emotional while they play because their first concern is business, not excitement.
But there was emotion and excitement and nervousness and plain elation among the Giants on and off the field when Brad Daluiso kicked the 54-yard, last-minute field goal that beat the Phoenix Cardinals today, 19-17.
It was fourth-and-10 with 37 seconds left, the Giants trailed by 2 points and the minds started churning.
Should the Giants try another pass or risk an extra-long field goal into an unpredictable wind?
Coach Dan Reeves made a quick decision.


Review/Opera; Theatrical Vietnam: A Land Of Ghosts
"Tonkin," a collaboration by Conrad Cummings and Thomas Bird which received its premiere this evening at the Grand Opera House here, is an opera with an agenda, if in fact it is an opera.
At first exposure, it seemed more a theatrical work of an overreaching sort that has become familiar on Broadway, a simplistic historical pageant of noble ideas and spiritual uplift.
The action glances on three eras of recent Vietnamese history.
Act I deals with the end of the Japanese occupation in 1945; the historical Ho Chi Minh and a fictional young Vietnamese woman, Trung Minh Chau, aid a fictional downed American flier, John Paul Scott.
In Act II, in the 50's and 60's, Scott and his countrymen are allied with the South Vietnamese against Ho in the North; Trung shifts allegiance from North to South, then bails out of the country altogether.
Finally, in Act III, a Westernized Trung returns to present-day Vietnam, to find a country heavily populated with ghosts.


NEC Computer Profits Fall, Hurt by U.S. Rivals' Inroads
The NEC Corporation, which controls half of Japan's personal computer market, is seeing its profits from that business eroded by steep price cuts spurred by the invasion of Japan's market by aggressive American companies.
NEC on Friday reported a consolidated net loss of 9.3 billion yen for the six months that ended on Sept. 30.
That is equivalent to about $88 million at an exchange rate of 106 yen to the dollar.
Net sales for the period, the first half of NEC's fiscal year, fell 2.7 percent to 1.64 trillion yen, or about $15.5 billion.


It's Up, Up And Good! 54-Yarder Lifts Giants
David Treadwell watches his fellow kicker, Brad Daluiso, kick in practice all the time.
He has seen him boot field goals from as far as 60 yards.
So when Daluiso lined up with just over a half a minute left today for a 54-yard field goal that would turn a defeat into a victory for the Giants, Treadwell wasn't biting his nails like everyone else in Giants Stadium.
He knew the kick would be good.
"I was thinking, 'Just smooth it, Brad, just smooth it,' " said Treadwell, who does most of the field-goal kicking on the Giants and is Daluiso's closest friend on the team.
"That's what he did. It looked like the ball could have been good from another 15 yards."


Gale Drives Barge Ashore; Man Missing
Driven by gale-force winds and heavy seas, a 300-foot-long dredge being used to repair a breach caused by a storm last year ran aground on the beach here today, and a tugboat trying to pull it back out to sea capsized, throwing its two-man crew overboard.
One of the crewmen was quickly rescued, but the tug's captain was still missing this evening when the search was suspended as heavy fog and mist settled over the shoreline.


Paramount Struggle in New Arena
The outcome of the battle between QVC Network Inc.'s chairman, Barry Diller, and Viacom Inc.'s chairman, Sumner Redstone, for Paramount Communications is far from predictable, even though QVC won a clear victory in court Wednesday.
"It's not a slam dunk," said one exhausted investment banker involved in the deal, assessing the ruling in Delaware Chancery Court requiring Paramount to lift obstacles making it prohibitively expensive for a hostile bidder to gain control of the entertainment company.


Bernard V. Bothmer, 81, Curator And Professor of the Art of Egypt
Bernard V. Bothmer, a noted authority on ancient Egyptian art who was a professor at New York University and a former department chairman at the Brooklyn Museum, died on Wednesday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 81 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, said his brother, Dietrich von Bothmer


Machine Tool Orders Fall, But '93 Still Shows Big Gain
Machine tool orders at American manufacturers fell 8.5 percent in October from the previous month, but remained about 25 percent higher than in October 1992, according to the Association for Manufacturing Technology, a trade group.
Despite declining in three of the last four months, orders for machine tools so far this year are still nearly 30 percent ahead of a year earlier.
Because of exceptionally larger orders from automobile makers in March through June, Albert Moore, president of the trade group said, "this year is almost sure to be the best since 1988."  Searching for Clues
Although the $258.5 million of new orders for machine tools in October is less than two-tenths of one percent of the $135.8 billion of new orders for durable goods that month, the tool-making industry is watched for clues to the health of the manufacturing sector of the economy.
The machine tools tracked by the Association for Manufacturing Technology cut and form metal and are used in making an array of items from home appliances to engines.


Topics of The Times; A Winter's Gift
For New Yorkers looking for a tangible way to help those in need this holiday season, it's time to weed out those infrequently worn overcoats, jackets and parkas hanging in the hall closet.
Donating these used but wearable items to the annual New York Cares coat drive can make this winter a whole lot warmer for the homeless, the elderly poor, new immigrants and needy kids.
This valuable recycling program -- now in its fifth year -- collected 60,000 secondhand garments in 1992.
The goal this year is to collect 75,000 adult and child-size coats by the drive's end on Christmas Day.


Patents; An Outspoken Inventor Protests Efforts to 'Harmonize' Global Rules
AS do many independent inventors, George D. Margolin blanches at the suggestion that the patent system in the United States should be changed to conform to the systems of other countries.
Indeed, Mr.
Margolin, a mustachioed, bespectacled fellow of 63 who is a bluegrass mandolin picker in his leisure hours, sometimes makes analogies to rape and Pearl Harbor when he talks about the move toward "harmonization" of patent laws.


A City Like New York Has to Make Education Multicultural; Not a Custodian's Job
To the Editor:
I must correct an error in "Controlling School Custodians" (editorial, Nov. 18).
School custodians, at least in the school in which I taught, never actually clean a room.


Review/Theater: Gray's Anatomy; A Monologuist's Idiosyncratic Trip Through Disease and Healing
Like most people, Spalding Gray sees through two eyes.
The problem, in the section of his life covered in his latest monologue, "Gray's Anatomy," is that these eyes no longer see in the same way.
The left one, he learns, is afflicted with something called a macular pucker, which causes a blurring distortion of vision, like looking through "the bottom of a Coke bottle," he says.
At one moment, covering one eye and then the other, he sees alternative versions of the world outside him: "Ecstasy. Despair," he chants as he shifts his hand.
"Ecstasy. Despair."
In a sense, of course, Spalding Gray has always viewed the universe through at least two seemingly autonomous levels of perception.
Mr.
Gray has described himself as a "poetic journalist," and his particular skills as an observer have always hinged on a dialectic seesaw between satiric clarity and paranoiac murkiness.
At one moment, he can create a portrait of, say, a doctor's office with searing journalistic detail.
Then, like a mutating reality scene in a horror movie, things shift menacingly into a blur of arcane, incomprehensible images.


A City Like New York Has to Make Education Multicultural
To the Editor:
You report that Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines has asked his staff to devise a new multicultural curriculum for New York City's public schools (news article, Nov. 18).


Universities Seek Ways to Get Their Stars to Teach
When the poet and critic John Crowe Ransom taught at Kenyon College in the 1940's and 50's, aspiring writers like Robert Lowell, James Wright and E. L. Doctorow flocked there to learn the literary trade from a master.
But last year, when Amy McGoldrich came to the University of Chicago with visions of studying with the novelist Saul Bellow, she found that he taught no course that she could attend and was personally inaccessible.
And over the summer, Mr.
Bellow moved on to Boston University, eliminating any chance that she could study with him.


Jets Win (Splish) on First Shutout in 11 Years (Splash)
The weather conditions were the kind you might find in June during the Asian monsoon season, not during November in New England.
The rain came horizontally, driven by a 35 mile-per-hour wind that gusted to 68 m.p.h.
It seemed to get worse when the Jets' offense touched the ball.
"The weather was just brutal," said Jets Coach Bruce Coslet.


Corrections
A brief announcement on Thursday about a memorial service for John Butler, the choreographer, gave the wrong date.
The service, at the Bruno Walter Auditorium of the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, 111 Amsterdam Avenue, at 65th Street, will be at 7 P.M. next Monday, not today.


Rangers Put Quick Stop To Any Letdown Talk
The Rangers came to the rink as if it were any other hockey game.
The music blared in the locker room before game time.
Mike Hudson teased Greg Gilbert in the hallway.
Gilbert teased Esa Tikkanen.
Mike Richter made jokes at his own expense.
In reality, though, last night's game against the Washington Capitals meant a great deal to the Rangers.
On Saturday afternoon, the Islanders had taken advantage of the Rangers' mistakes and had ended New York's 14-game unbeaten streak.
In the locker room afterward, the Rangers seemed deflated and a bit lost.
They appeared, from the outside, to be ripe for a letdown.


Study Finds No Abnormality In Those Reporting U.F.O.'s
A study of 49 people who have reported encounters with unidentified flying objects has found no tendency toward abnormality, apart from a previous belief that such visitations from beyond the earth do occur.
The survey was designed to explore the suggestion that such sightings are associated with disorders like epilepsy, or a tendency to fantasize.
Abnormality of the temporal lobe of the brain, the outer, lower region, which figures in memory and learning, has also come under suspicion.
It has been proposed that abnormality of the temporal lobe may be associated with intense religious experiences, visions or apparitions.


French Love U.S. but Defend Their Films
The French are obsessed right now with the supposedly fragile state of their film and television industries, threatened by the mighty monopolistic blasts of the Hollywood dinosaur.
But that hardly means that their own thinking on the issue seems entirely clear, or that the French now hate all aspects of American culture.
What the French want from the latest round of international trade talks is to preserve their film industry, perhaps the last viable one in the Western world outside of Hollywood.
They also wish to promote French as an acceptable language for popular culture.
But they seem unwilling to face up to the confusions in their own position.


All the Rage
After cutting off her husband's penis, Lorena Bobbitt has become a symbol of female rage.
She has ardent supporters, people who consider her a heroine and a victim, people who will feel outraged and betrayed if she is convicted of malicious wounding, when her trial comes up in January.
In the reams of newsprint devoted to the details of the case -- his supposedly beating her, cheating on her and raping her, her slicing off his sexual organ -- they see the triumph of the oppressed over the oppressor.


Review/Rock; Post-Punk With a Splash of 60's Pop
Evan Dando, the lead singer and songwriter for the Lemonheads, mopes a bit, acts melancholic and spends entire sets with his hair in his face.
He's sensitive, but with a smirk.
He's literate without being intellectual.
And he's emotional without being messy about it.
Mr.
Dando, a 26-year-old hunk, is perfect for his huge audience of teen-age girls, and for much of his show on Saturday night at Roseland his audience sang along with his songs, producing a high-pitched sound that was mostly drowned out by the band's grinding sound.
He's everything a teen-ager would want to be: smart, good-looking, successful, and still wearing T-shirts and ratty jeans.
One of rock's main tensions has always between melody and sound, between the contours of a song and the exuberant annihilation of blasting, distorted guitars.
Mr.
Dando is an extraordinary melodist with a flair for a 60's pop sound, and his best songs have the sort of logic all great melodies share: they seem so obvious, and it's hard not to wonder why they hadn't been written before.
On his records, Mr.
Dando emphasizes his pop side, all within an alternative, post-punk framework that's not always convincing.


Cabby Chases Holdup Man; Arrest Made
A gypsy-cab driver who was robbed at gunpoint of his money and cab Saturday night flagged down two police officers, who then chased the car and arrested one of the two attackers, the police said.
Unfortunately for the cabby -- Lamine Kaba, a 30-year old immigrant from Guinea in West Africa -- the suspect crashed the stolen cab, a 1986 white Lincoln Town Car, into an elevated train pillar in the Bronx.
In totaling the car, the robber stole Mr.
Kaba's livelihood.


Bronx Baby's Death Is Ruled a Homicide
The death of a 15-month-old Bronx boy on Friday was declared a homicide yesterday by New York City's Medical Examiner and the mother was arrested and charged with murder.
The child, Shaun Reeder, of 2030 East 177th Street in the Soundview section, died from a brain hemorrhage and cerebral swelling caused by blunt force, said Ellen Borakove, a spokeswoman for the medical examiner's office.
Shaun had fractures of the skull, ribs, an arm and a leg and the injuries were "at various stages of healing, which indicated that they happened over a period of time," Ms.
Borakove said.


Giuliani Joins Los Angeles Mayor in Backing Gun Laws
Insisting on the need for urban reform, Republican leaders of two of the nation's largest cities -- Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York City and Mayor Richard J. Riordan of Los Angeles -- said yesterday that they support tough gun-control laws.
They also praised President Clinton.
And they said they would consider campaigning for Democrats in future elections if it would help their cities.
But in an appearance on the television program "Meet the Press" on NBC, Mr.
Giuliani and Mr.
Riordan also let their Republican colors show, talking of plans to reduce the size of city government, to explore privatizing some city services and to increase the number of police officers on the streets.


New Genetics Offers Agonizing Choices
To the Editor:
In "Beyond Cloning" (Op-Ed, Nov, 17), Robert Pollack, professor of biology at Columbia University, maintains that the next ethical dilemma to face scientists is whether or not to transfer synthetic genes to human embryos.
Perhaps so.


Dance in Review
'Head, Tail and Stomach'  Evolving Arts Theater Dance Space  The choreographers presented by the Evolving Arts Theater at Dance Space are often young and unknown.
Refreshingly, they tend to steer away from the orthodoxies of experimental dance that have ruled the last two decades; that is, they are not concerned exclusively with pure movement or emotional vignettes that deal with personal trauma.
A recent program by a trio of choreographers who work or teach at the Dance Space school proved true to form.
Especially interesting was a solo called "Sarajevo Requiem" by Shannon Hobbs, a newcomer who shared a program with Guido Tuveri and Luka Kito entitled "Head, Tail and Stomach."


100 Million Infernal Machines
Of modern weapons, none is more ubiquitous and invisible than the land mine.
Wars end, but these buried destroyers go on killing and maiming for decades.
They are inexpensive weapons, ideal for third-world conflicts.
A Chinese antipersonnel mine costs as little as $3; the popular U.S.-made Claymore, which can propel 700 steel balls forward in a 60 degree arc and kill at a distance of 50 yards, costs only $27.
So secretive are their sale and deployment that nobody really knows where or how many mines remain in the ground.
The State Department estimates that from 65 million to 110 million land mines infest 62 countries, notably Afghanistan, Cambodia, Angola, Mozambique, El Salvador, the Kurdish areas of Iraq and northern Somalia.
This and other disclosures fill a 510-page report by the Arms Project of Human Rights Watch, which makes the case for a total ban on the sale and use of antipersonnel land mines.


Treasury Sales This Week Will Be Confined to Bills
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to the bills markets, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
According to traders, by the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.09 percent and on the six-month bill 3.23 percent.


Topics of The Times; A Man Worth Commemorating
Commemorative stamps are useful, collectible, profitable and informative.
Each year, a Citizens' Stamp Advisory Committee sifts through thousands of suggestions to decide whom and what the U.S.
Postal Service should commemorate.
When it meets in early December, the panel has a chance to honor a selfless hero, Raoul Wallenberg, who vanished in 1944 after saving as many as 100,000 people from Nazi death camps.
Such a gesture would do justice to the memory of a remarkable man.
As a Swedish diplomat in Budapest, he provided life-saving documents to Jews who were marked for death.


Bridge; The prestigious Reisinger championship brings the Fall Nationals to a close.
The Fall Nationals of the American Contract Bridge League ends here today with the conclusion of the prestigious Reisinger Board-a-Match Team Championship.
Leading into the two final sessions were four experienced professionals, Brian Glubok of Manhattan, Chris Compton of Oklahoma City, Gaylor Kasle of Boca Raton, Fla., and Roger Bates of Mesa, Ariz.


Lyman Stansky, Lawyer, 93
Lyman Stansky, who practiced law in Manhattan for seven decades and specialized in cases involving art objects, died on Nov. 21 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 93.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


A Costly Distraction for Whitman
Distracted by the political brouhaha caused by her campaign manager's post-election comments, Christine Todd Whitman still faces the formidable task of appointing dozens of people to top state jobs to carry out policies like the 30 percent income-tax cut she proposed during the campaign.
Mrs.
Whitman has already assembled a transition team and announced the appointment of two top advisers.
But aides to the Governor-elect acknowledge that she has had to divert time to the furor surrounding Edward J. Rollins's comments -- which he later retracted -- that the Whitman campaign paid ministers and Democratic workers to suppress the black urban vote.


More Korean Groceries Failing as the Recession Drags On
After riding the boom of the 1980's and becoming among the most identifiable features of New York City, Korean groceries are suffering through the recession and many are on the brink of shutting down, Korean business groups say.
The grocers, who run the gamut from owning mom-and-pop shops on Brooklyn street corners to brightly lit salad bars in Midtown, mainly blame the recession for their troubles, but also cite harassment by city inspectors, constantly rising rents and increased competition.


Dredge Runs Aground Off Long Island as Storm Batters Region


CHRONICLE
In case politics doesn't pan out, United States Representative COLLIN C. PETERSON has a fallback: a singing career.
Mr.
Peterson, a Democrat from Minnesota, appeared Saturday night on the Grand Ole Opry and sang the Eddy Arnold hit "Make the World Go Away."


Rabin Maneuvers to Woo Back an Orthodox Party
A divided Israeli Cabinet voted today to sponsor legislation that would prevent the importation of nonkosher meat into the Jewish state.
Whatever the move may say about future dining habits in Israel, it spoke volumes about the political headaches of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, who is trying to win back a religious party that walked out of his coalition a few weeks ago, leaving him in command of a minority Government.


At CBS, a Just-Folks Approach to a Football Pitch
They have starred in more television commercials than the flirtatious Taster's Choice coffee neighbors and have appeared in more living rooms than Harry and Louise, the couple who worry over their medical bills on behalf of insurance companies lobbying against President Clinton's health care plan.
They are the Big Fans, who banter each week about CBS Sports' coming menu of professional football games in 10- and 20-second spots, which almost always end with Tony Hoty, a balding and burly actor, declaring, "I'm a big fan."


Spying on Moon in Central Park
The moon rose over Central Park last night, but it was eclipsed not long after midnight.
For nearly 80 curious souls who gathered in the chilly air on the bleachers of the Delacorte Theater, the lunar eclipse began at stage center, just where Shakespearean actors perform each summer, and gradually drifted to the right, until it seemed to rest atop over the Belvedere castle.


A Quiet K-III Is Gaining Attention
In early 1991, the buzz in the magazine world was about who might buy the publications that Rupert Murdoch was rumored to be selling.
Because these included high-profile magazines like New York and Seventeen, almost every major publisher was said to be interested -- Conde Nast, Hearst, Meredith, Cahners, and foreign publishers like Bertelsmann of Germany and Hachette of France.
But the buyer turned out to be an outsider, a dark horse with absolutely no experience in consumer magazines.
It was K-III Holdings, a partnership controlled by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company, the New York buyout firm.
The group, which previously acquired trade magazines, encyclopedias and specialized directories, paid $650 million for eight of the Murdoch magazines and the highly profitable daily newspaper The Racing Form.


Unbending Regulations Incite Move to Alter Pollution Laws
A three-year study of pollution and how best to clean it up at a small Amoco Corporation refinery here is prompting the Clinton Administration to consider a sharply different approach to the way the nation's environmental laws are written.
The study, conducted jointly by Amoco and the Environmental Protection Agency, found that Federal regulations forced the refinery to solve relatively minor pollution threats at major expense while far more important problems were overlooked.


Rabin Maneuvers to Woo Back an Orthodox Party
A divided Israeli Cabinet voted today to sponsor legislation that would prevent the importation of nonkosher meat into the Jewish state.
Whatever the move may say about future dining habits in Israel, it spoke volumes about the political headaches of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, who is trying to win back a religious party that walked out of his coalition a few weeks ago, leaving him in command of a minority Government.


2 Could Be Divided Into No. 1 by the Final Rankings Despite the Bowls
The bowl-game lineup for New Year's Day is coming into focus, but that does not mean the outcome of the college football season is becoming clear.
A difference of philosophy between the two groups of voters -- whether strength of schedule is more significant than a won-lost record -- could leave the coalition of bowl games with a shared national championship.
Nebraska (11-0) and Florida State (11-1) finished first and second in the point total of the two polls used by the coalition as a guide for its selection process.
The Cornhuskers, the Big Eight conference champion, held its lead over the Seminoles because of the support of the CNN/USA Today poll of coaches, a poll in which Florida State ended up third, behind West Virginia.


BRITAIN CONCEDES IT SECRETLY MADE CONTACT WITH I.R.A.
Prime Minister John Major found his credibility under attack today and faced a barrage of criticism after his Government acknowledged that it had engaged in secret contacts with the Irish Republican Army.
The issue will go before Parliament on Monday, when the Government has promised to lay bare the whole story of its secret communications with the guerrilla organization, which has waged a violent campaign to end British rule in Northern Ireland.


New Homes


Dance in Review
New York City Ballet  'Allegro Brillante' and 'Ash' New York State Theater  Although "Ash" received its premiere in 1991 and "Zakouski" dates from last year, both of these ballets by Peter Martins refer to older works.
The New York City Ballet made this clear on Saturday night when George Balanchine's "Allegro Brillante" of 1956 preceded "Ash."
Like "Allegro Brillante," Mr.
Martins's creation is a fast-moving piece in which 10 dancers fill the stage as imposingly as a cast of thousands.
"Ash," to music by Michael Torke, is less inventive and more repetitive than "Allegro Brillante." Yet Mr.
Martins does generate excitement by having dancers cut through space with their movements.


Why This Country Still Needs to Cut Spending; Life in the Old Agency
To the Editor:
In "A Dangerous Deficit Bill" (editorial, Nov. 22), you identified the Penny-Kasich deficit reduction plan that was rejected by the House as "superficially seductive," only to be taken in by its false appeal.


Rugen Island Journal; Treasured Isle of the Baltic in the Eye of a Boom
Fighting a brisk salt wind blowing off the Baltic Sea one recent afternoon, a retired farmer took his three granchildren to see a spit of land where he spent much of his life cultivating crops.
The foundations of a sprawling new hotel complex were sprouting up from the sandy soil.
"They've already made a such a mess out of Rugen," he sighed.
"Now they're messing up more of it."


Publishers Tap the Potential Of Latin American Markets
As the economies of Latin America have opened and grown in recent years, international media companies have stepped up their business there, with publishers of everything from financial news wires to fashion magazines looking south to satisfy renewed interest in the region.
Leading the way have been some of the world's largest financial news services, which have responded to increased investment in several countries, including Mexico, Argentina and Chile.
For consumer magazines, Latin America's economic growth means more readers, and some publishers are considering new titles to serve the region.


Princeton Advances to the Final Four for the First Time
Princeton reached the Final Four of the National Collegiate Athletic Association soccer tournament for the first time in its history yesterday with a 3-0 triumph over Hartwick College at the Tigers' field.
The Tigers (13-4-0), who had never before advanced past the second round, will face Virginia in the semifinals Friday afternoon at Davidson College in Davidson, N.C.


Ex-Political Prisoner Is Apparently Winner in Honduran Elections
Carlos Roberto Reina, who was arrested four times and spent six months in solitary confinement for political activity in the 1970's, appeared to win election as President of Honduras today, defeating Oswaldo Ramos Soto.
Late this evening, Mr.
Ramos conceded defeat.
However, official results were not expected until Tuesday. .


Sports of The Times; How Long Was Kick? Straight From Denver
ON a Giant team that never had to fix a flat, Brad Daluiso had been the spare tire.
Cut by the Broncos, he joined the Giants shortly before the season opened as the ultimate specialist: kick off deep and kick field goals from 50 yards and beyond.
David Treadwell was more reliable on shorter field goals but Daluiso had the stronger leg.
Strong enough to boom kickoffs about 90 yards into the stands when he was with the Bills.


Wave of Cuban Defections at Puerto Rican Games
A father and son on the archery team were among the first to depart.
They were followed by two champion weight lifters, Cuba's top female softball pitcher, and even a photographer who had apparently arrived in Puerto Rico, portfolio in hand, with defection in mind.
By yesterday evening, 34 of the 900 or so members of the Cuban delegation attending the 17th Central American and Caribbean Games in Puerto Rico had defected.
And though the mounting departures are hardly an exodus, they represent enough of a trickle to fuel speculation that a major walkout may occur before the athletic contests conclude on Tuesday.


Injury Keeps Hunter From Islanders
Tomorrow night's anticipated return of Dale Hunter to Nassau Coliseum will not include Dale Hunter.
The scrappy Washington Capitals center, just back from a 21-game suspension, suffered a second-degree sprain of the left knee last night in a game against the Rangers and will be out for 10 days.
Hunter was hurt late in the first period when skating by the Capital net with Aleksei Kovalev of the Rangers trailing him.
Kovalev hit the back of Hunter's right leg with his stick and then used his left skate to kick out the right skate of Hunter.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Reviews were upbeat for the traditional opening weekend of the holiday shopping season, but merchants refused to celebrate too soon.
Shopping during the Thanksgiving weekend is no longer considered a good barometer because consumers now make most of their purchases in the final week of the season.  [ Page A1. ]


Aidid's Attendance At Aid Talks Is Tied To Backers' Release
A spokesman for Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid said today that the powerful Somali faction leader would not attend a conference opening Monday on aid to Somalia and political reconciliation.
But members of General Aidid's party, the Somali National Alliance, would not rule out the general's participation if eight supporters detained by the United Nations, which is sponsoring the conference in Ethiopia, are released.
There were signs today that the eight would be freed.


Buffalo Can't Touch Montana
The Buffalo-Kansas City duel here this afternoon at Arrowhead Stadium was not only a matchup of marquee quarterbacks, but also a contest between two dominating defensive ends named Smith and a test to see which team could mount the best pass rush.
Kansas City's rush was tenacious, ferocious, steady. Buffalo's was a mild whimper.


Japanese, in a Painful Recession, Trim Industrial Research Outlays
After years of rapidly expanding their technology, Japanese companies are beginning to trim spending on research and development, an area that until recently had been considered sacred.
The cutbacks, if they continue, could threaten Japan's long-term competitiveness at a time when manufacturing of less advanced products is migrating to countries with lower wages and when this country's future depends more than ever on innovation.


Lincoln Center to Offer New Series of Concerts
Lincoln Center Productions has announced new instrumental and vocal series at the Walter Reade Theater (165 West 65th Street) this season; audiences are invited to meet the artists at receptions after the performances.
The series will comprise three string-quartet concerts, three song recitals, three piano recitals, a guitar recital and two performances by the Bang on a Can All-Stars.
The St.
Lawrence String Quartet is to give the first concert, playing works by Beethoven, Bartok and Franck tonight at 7:30.
The Orion Quartet is scheduled for Jan. 24 and the Carmina Quartet for March 28.


Abortion Foes No Kin Of Rights Activists
To the Editor:
I get very angry when anti-choice demonstrators try to claim kinship with civil rights activists of the 1950's and 60's.
According to your Nov. 17 report on the Senate's passage of the abortion clinic bill, foes of the bill are trying to do just that.


An Ever-Changing Landscape for the Homeless


CHRONICLE
One of Broadway's newest shows, "Cyrano: The Musical," has a nose for making money.
After Saturday night's performance at the Neil Simon Theatre, the leading man, BILL VAN DIJK, auctioned off his title character's five-inch latex nose for a tidy $400 as part of a special drive to raise money for Broadway Cares/Equity Fights AIDS.


Tokyo Stocks Slide Further, Then Apply Brakes
Panic briefly struck the Tokyo Stock Exchange Monday, with anxieties over the economy and the Government's apparent lack of action pushing share prices into one of their steepest declines ever.
But by mid-afternoon cooler heads prevailed, pulling the market out of its tailspin but leaving investors shaken and the market battered.


INSIDE
A Warm End to the Cold War
Congress acknowledged the end of the "Evil Empire," repealing laws and regulations that suggested an adversarial relationship with the former Soviet Union.
Page B7.
Making Faculty Stars Work
With students unhappy about the inaccessibility of Nobel Prize winners and authors, universities are finding ways to tempt celebrity professors out of their ivory towers.
Page A15. 34 Athletes Abandon Castro
Members of the Cuban delegation at the Central American and Caribbean Games in Puerto Rico have defected, fueling speculation that a major walkout may occur.
Page A12.
Trouble for Korean Groceries
New York City's economic downturn has hurt the city's Korean groceries, with declining sales forcing many of them out of business.
Page B1.
Japanese Stocks Plunge
The slide in Japanese stocks continued.
The Nikkei index dropped more than 1,000 points, or 6 percent, before rebounding somewhat.
Page D1.


Daly Says Nets Make Him Feel as if He Were 80
Kenny Anderson sat slouched at his locker.
Derrick Coleman was rubbing his eyes and yawning.
Coach Chuck Daly was shaking his head and running his hands through his hair, and saying things like "I don't know what's going on. I don't know what to expect anymore."
The Nets, last-minute losers in three of their previous four games, were hoping to reverse that trend with a victory over a young Denver Nuggets team Saturday night.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  GIULIANI JOINS CALL FOR TOUGH GUN LAWS
Insisting on the need for urban reform, Republican leaders of two of the nation's largest cities -- Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York City and Mayor Richard J. Riordan of Los Angeles -- said they support tough gun-control laws.
They also praised President Clinton, saying they would consider campaigning for Democrats in future elections if it would help their cities.
B3.


Market Place; Is Dell Computer's fall from grace about to be reversed?
SHORT-SELLERS have placed a huge bet against the Dell Computer Corporation, and most of Wall Street regards it as a company in trouble.
About 7.6 million shares of Dell, or roughly 30 percent of the shares in public hands, have been sold short in anticipation of further declines in the stock price.
And the analysts' opinions on Dell tracked by Zacks Investment Research Inc. are mainly "hold," which in Wall Street euphemism typically means sell.
But there are also several "strong sell" ratings, a rare expression of investment aversion.


As Its World View Narrows, Russia Seeks a New Mission
Here on the Russian steppes 650 miles southeast of Moscow, Maj.
Gen.
Anatoly Sidyakin is trying to teach his men a new military lesson.
For four decades, the 27th Division was stationed in East Germany as part of the Group Soviet Forces Germany, the cream of the Russian Army, standing eyeball-to-eyeball with the Americans.


John I. Dugan, Lawyer, 86
John I. Dugan, a Manhattan lawyer for 48 years who practiced admiralty and international law, died on Thursday at his home in New Rochelle.
He was 86.
He died of liver cancer, said his wife, Marie.


Why This Country Still Needs to Cut Spending
To the Editor:
"A Dangerous Deficit Bill" (editorial, Nov. 22) alleges that the spending cuts that were advocated in a bill by Representatives Timothy J. Penny, a Missouri Democrat, and John R. Kasich, an Ohio Republican, are dangerous because they would have thwarted the Administration's investment plans.
I disagree, though the bill was narrowly defeated by the House, 219 to 213 (news article, Nov. 23).


A Battle Among Jewish Weeklies
A battle for readers and revenues among five Jewish weekly newspapers in the New York City area has kicked off what some are calling a press war that has put the area's biggest Jewish philanthropy in the crossfire.
The fight among the English-language weeklies has recently escalated from private memorandums and meetings to editorials, boycott threats and name calling.
The board of the large and influential United Jewish Appeal-Federation of Jewish Philanthropies has scheduled an "open discussion" for Wednesday to try to calm the situation.


A Squatter's Colony Called Home; In Manhattan, the Homeless Wander to New Shantytowns
Moving days have a definite pattern for John C., who is homeless but more often than not has a makeshift home in a thrown-together encampment.
First, garbage, noise and drug use prompt complaints from neighbors and warnings from the police.
"Eventually, the cops come in and you're asked to move," he said.
"Then you don't move. Then they bring in the garbage trucks and take all your possessions."


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Alliance Semiconductor Corp., San Jose, Calif., an initial public offering of 2.5 million common shares.
Hambrecht &amp; Quist.


William Trent, 83, Director of Negro College Fund
William J. Trent Jr., the executive director of the United Negro College Fund for 20 years after its inception in 1944, died on Saturday in Moses Cone Hospital in Greensboro, N.C.
He was 83 and had lived in Greensboro since 1975.
The cause was cardiac arrest, said his daughter Judy Scales-Trent.
She said her father had been in declining health for years and had recently suffered from kidney trouble, pneumonia and other ailments.


Auto Sales May Spur Rise in Rates
Employment is what traders and investors will focus on this week.
But for the outlook on interest rates going into next year, automobile sales may be more important right now.
If auto and truck sales keep up their recent pace, the economy could grow faster in the first three months of 1994 than many forecasters are expecting.
That could undermine a widely held forecast on interest rates that growth will slow significantly early next year, opening the way for interest rates to decline from their current levels.


Abroad at Home; Law And Politics
This is a story about how politics can degrade the legal process.
The underlying subject is a nasty one: child pornography.
But the larger theme is too important to ignore for that reason.
Nine years ago Congress made it a crime to receive or possess pictures or videotapes of "a minor engaging in sexually explicit conduct." That was defined by Congress to mean actual sexual activity or "lascivious exhibition of the genitals or pubic area. . . ."


Essay; Carrot Or Stick?
In trying to inculcate a spirit of cooperation in a rambunctious child, a stubborn donkey or a rapacious nation, the parent, master or diplomat must ask: Which works best, the promise of reward or the fear of punishment?
The carrot or the stick?
In the Balkans, the Chamberlain for our time, Lord Owen, after blaming the U.S. for failing to supply the troops to force his surrender terms on the Bosnians, is among those Europeans now touting a get-tender-with-Serbia policy.
The notion is to relax economic sanctions in the hope of persuading Belgrade to respond to this kindness by giving back a little of the land seized from Bosnia by its agents.


World Trade Talks Underline French-German Differences
Despite repeated assertions of solidarity between France and Germany, the long conflict in world trade talks involving France, Germany and the United States has demonstrated stark differences of economic confidence and outlook between France and Germany, Europe's largest industrial powers.
As negotiations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade for a global trade accord gather momentum over the next two weeks, against a Dec. 15 deadline, it seems clear that Germany's differences with France will sharpen and lead to considerable pressure from Bonn on the French Government to accept an agreement.


Price Tag on National Health Plan's Going Up
To the Editor:
"The Health Debate," your supplement on health care delivery (Nov. 14), makes me wonder why the disparate systems of Canada, Germany, Britain and Israel -- all of which offer universal health care, supported by taxes -- are awash in red ink.
It is possible that the Clinton improvements to our uneven, more expensive system, if adopted, would also direct us toward bankruptcy.
Why are all the systems in financial difficulty?


Mission to Correct Hubble's Flawed Vision Faces Many Pitfalls
In a few weeks, the troubled Hubble Space Telescope, which has been orbiting for more than three years, could be casting its first really sharp-eyed gaze on the heavens.
The result may be the strongest evidence yet for the existence of black holes and how galaxies have evolved over time, the most precise measure of the expansion rate of the universe, the clearest picture of the mysterious bright objects called quasars and possible glimpses of the formation of planets around other stars.
Or the telescope could still be as fuzzy-sighted as ever, a disappointing underachiever and one more embarrassment to the disaster-plagued National Aeronautics and Space Administration.


New Wave of Drugs Expected to Improve Epilepsy Treatment
AFTER a 15-year lull in new medications to control seizures, the treatment of epilepsy is entering a possible renaissance with the imminent approval of a new wave of anticonvulsant drugs.
The new types of drugs, the first of which was approved in August, appear to control brain seizures through mechanisms different from those found in commonly used anticonvulsants and may pose less of a risk of adverse side effects, scientists say.


Court to Consider Allowing U.S. to Sue S.&amp; L. Advisers
The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, acting as manager of a failed savings institution, could recover some of its losses by suing the institution's outside lawyers and accountants for professional malpractice.
At stake is an important part of the Government's strategy for paying for the savings and loan bailout.
The F.D.I.C. is seeking hundreds of millions of dollars from the professional advisers to failed savings and loan associations, and two important Federal appeals courts have split over whether the legal theory behind these lawsuits is valid.


Hughes Gets Big Contract At BellSouth
Hughes Network Systems Inc. said today that it had won a major contract to provide the BellSouth Corporation with cellular-telephone equipment in a deal that executives close to the negotiations valued at $400 million in the next five years.
Industry analysts said the contract was a major victory for Hughes, a relative newcomer to the market for cellular-telephone switching equipment, which is expected to total about $2.6 billion in 1993.


Unfinished Works
Hundreds of art galleries, museums and theaters in America and abroad will mark tomorrow as "A Day Without Art," an annual event dedicated to the AIDS crisis and its victims.
The day started four years ago, when galleries removed paintings from their walls for a day, or draped them in black shrouds, to draw attention to the epidemic and its particular impact on the arts.
A reverse twist at the Pierpont Morgan Library in New York this week offers a vivid lesson in what is lost when an artist dies.
Instead of removing works from display, it is displaying works normally hidden in its vast collection of manuscripts -- works never completed because the writer or composer died before he was finished.


33.3% Plunge In Computer Maker Stock
Shares of the supercomputer maker Kendall Square Research plunged 33.33 percent percent yesterday after the company announced that its auditor, Price Waterhouse, could no longer vouch for its previous financial statements.
In recent weeks, the company's financial reports have come under scrutiny, and the Securities and Exchange Commission is reportedly investigating the accuracy of its bookkeeping.


Market Place; In video games, a couple of U.S. dark horses have risky appeal.
FOR investors willing to look beyond the Christmas season, a new generation of more powerful video games may present an intriguing high-stakes gamble.
The video game market today is thoroughly dominated by the Japanese consumer electronics companies Sega and Nintendo.
But two Silicon Valley computer makers, 3DO and the Atari Corporation, hope to use new technology to shake that stranglehold.
Of the two, the less-heralded Atari, a battle-scarred veteran of the video game wars, could prove the more attractive for those with sporting blood.


Suspect in Slaying Is Held in Rape of Park Jogger
A 17-year-old who is awaiting trial in the fatal shooting of a drama teacher in Prospect Park and the robbery of the teacher's bicycle last summer was arrested yesterday in the rape of a jogger in the park two weeks earlier.
The suspect, Jerome Nisbett, who has been held without bail at Rikers Island since the shooting of the teacher, Allyn Winslow, 42, of Bay Ridge, on June 1, was arrested in the rape of a 20-year-old on the night of May 18, said Detective Edward Davalos of the special victims squad in Brooklyn.


People
*
David Angelo was named vice president and associate creative director at Team One Advertising, El Segundo, Calif., succeeding Mike Mazza, who left.
Mr.
Angelo, who will work on accounts like Lexus and Adidas, previously served in a similar capacity at Chiat/Day, New York.


Homelessness Hitting Home: A Death on HUD's Doorstep
Inside the headquarters of the Department of Housing and Urban Development, Secretary Henry G. Cisneros was reminding a meeting of subordinates this morning that reducing homelessness was his agency's top goal.
Outside, 10 stories below, the police were carting away the corpse of a homeless woman who had died overnight at the bus stop across the street.


Simms Shows Up and So Do the Giants
When Phil Simms woke up on Sunday morning, his head pounding as if the Rockettes had been doing dance No. 5 on his forehead all night, he wondered whether he would even be able to play against the Phoenix Cardinals that afternoon.
He looked to his wife, Diana, for sympathy, but she told him, "You'd better suck it up, it's a big game today."
A day after the Giants narrowly escaped the Cardinals, thanks to Brad Daluiso's 54- yard field goal to win the game, 19-17, Simms can laugh when telling the story.
After all, the Giants are 8-3 and alone in first in the National Football Conference East.
But a nasty ear infection almost kept him out of the game.
Lucky for the Giants, it didn't.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
3.09
3.45
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.12
3.09
3.31
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.26
3.23
3.46
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.29
5.29
6.58
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.23
6.24
7.59
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.29
7.28
8.58
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.62
5.65
6.42
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Chronicle
A Beatles reunion at last?
PAUL MCCARTNEY said that he and the two other living Beatles are planning to regroup in January to work on a documentary, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
Speaking in Mexico City, where he was giving a concert on his New World Tour, Mr.
McCartney said that he, RINGO STARR and GEORGE HARRISON were planning to assemble in London to work on the documentary, to be called "The Long and Winding Road." It will include a performance by the three.
NADINE BROZAN


Ward Takes Camp Award
Two days after the most spectacular performance of his spectacular career, Florida State quarterback Charlie Ward won the 1993 Walter Camp award yesterday as the nation's outstanding collegiate football player.
Ward capped the regular season on Saturday by passing for 446 yards and 4 touchdowns as he led the Seminoles to a 33-21 victory over Florida.
It brought Ward's season totals to 264 completions of 380 passes for 3,032 yards and 27 touchdowns plus 339 rushing yards with 4 scores.


Kevorkian Is Charged Again With Aiding a Suicide
Dr.
Jack Kevorkian was charged today with assisting in a suicide, the third time he has faced such charges since June 4, 1990, when he began helping people to die.
The latest charge involves the death of Merian Ruth Frederick, a 72-year-old woman from Ann Arbor, who died in Dr.
Kevorkian's apartment on Oct. 22.
Last week Dr.
Kevorkian attended the suicide of another patient in his apartment, Dr.
Ali A. Khalili, a 61-year-old physician from suburban Chicago who had bone cancer.


Pact May Free Up Trade Faster Than the Traffic
Never mind the "Streets of Laredo." The main concerns in this border town are the highways to Laredo.
And the bridges.
Both are clearly overwhelmed.
Even as they celebrate passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement and the boom times they are sure the agreement will bring, officials in communities along both sides of the 2,000-mile United States-Mexico border warn that the roads, bridges and customs stations needed to handle expanded trade between the two countries are already overburdened.
And without major new construction, they say, the situation will only worsen.


After 2-4 Start, Coslet and Jets Are Enjoying New Standing
Since posting a 2-4 record, the Jets have gone through their own November sweeps period, winning five straight, and their playoff picture is coming into view.
At the time of that 2-4 record, Coach Bruce Coslet defended some of the Jets' players who said, with a straight face, that the team was pretty good.


War Rivals in Bosnia Agree To Reopen Their Peace Talks
Prodded by a slightly modified international peace plan and by the imminent threat of a human disaster this winter, the three warring parties in Bosnia agreed today to resume direct negotiations for a settlement of the Balkan war.
It was the first time since September, when talks broke down over what form the territorial division of Bosnia and Herzegovina should take, that the three sides -- the Muslim-led Government, the Serbs and the Croats -- had accepted renewed negotiations to resolve the 18-month-old conflict in the former Yugoslav republic.


The Couch Potato Has All the Answers: Yes. And No. Maybe.
Time for a few answers on hot sports TV issues from Dr. Couch Potato.
Q.
Dr.
P., what was with Hank Stram's toupee on Sunday's telecast of the Tampa Bay-Green Bay game?
Either it didn't fit or it was about to take off.


This Isn't the Way Riley Would Write It
After working his team hard for nearly three hours today, Pat Riley walked off the Knicks' practice court and was forced to play a little defense of his own.
Riley, expecting to answer questions about the Knicks' 112-85 blowout victory over the Detroit Pistons on Saturday, or their highly anticipated duel with the undefeated Houston Rockets Thursday night at Madison Square Garden, was asked instead about Saturday's benching of Anthony Bonner, and the disappearance of Tony Campbell's playing time.


A Torch Passes, but Not Very Far
In choosing Luis Donaldo Colosio Murrieta as the governing party's candidate to succeed him, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari has sought an achievement that has eluded many Mexican leaders before him: to insure the continuation of his policies long after he leaves office.
Among the four men whom Mr.
Salinas was believed to have considered seriously, the differences of economic orientation and political ideology were far more shallow than those weighed by most Mexican Presidents in the past.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Nov. 20 about Senator Bob Packwood included an erroneous attribution in some copies for a report that Mr.
Packwood was under criminal investigation.
It came from law-enforcement officials, not from Mr.
Packwood's lawyer, James F. Fitzpatrick.


Transactions
Basketball  National Basketball Association  INDIANA PACERS -- Activated Derrick McKey, forward, from the injured list.
Waived Gerald Paddio, forward.
UTAH JAZZ -- Signed Aaron Williams, forward, to a one-year contract.
Football  National Football League  GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Waived Bruce Pickens, defensive back.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Waived Karl Wilson, defensive end.
Activated Frankie Smith, cornerback, from the practice squad.
Hockey  National Hockey League  LOS ANGELES KINGS -- Recalled Keith Redmond, left wing, and Dominic Lavoie, defenseman, from Phoenix of the International Hockey League.
WASHINGTON CAPITALS -- Recalled Olaf Kolzig, goalie, from Portland of the American Hockey League.


Yanks Shift Sights to Martinez
Abandoning thoughts of Randy Johnson and Mark Langston, the Yankees yesterday began Phase II of their effort to secure a front-line starting pitcher.
A baseball person familiar with the Yankees' plans said the club has turned to the free-agent market.
The person said one of the first steps was a conversation General Manager Gene Michael had yesterday with Ron Shapiro, the agent for right-hander Dennis Martinez.


End of the Road  You win some. You lose some. You take a hike.   He worked wonders at Texas-El Paso, but when BOB STULL came to Missouri in 1989, the wonders ceased. After five losing seasons, including a 3-7-1 mark this year, Stull stepped down yesterday, to become an assistant athletic director.


Dinkins Campaign Outlay Topped That of Giuliani
In the last days of his failed campaign to keep the Mayor's office, David N. Dinkins raised and spent far more money than Rudolph W. Giuliani, according to reports with the Campaign Finance Board.
But he still ended the contest with more debts than the Republican victor and less cash in the bank.
Campaign reports filed yesterday show that Mr.
Dinkins raised $830,667 and spent about $744,000 between October 26 and November 25, the last day of the reporting period.
His aides said most of the spending was done before the election on November 2.


Personality May Decide Who Heads Police
With Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani's search for a police commissioner apparently narrowed down to two choices, the selection may reveal more about the Mayor-elect than it does about the direction of the Police Department.
The two men described by Giuliani aides as the finalists -- the current Commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly, and the Boston Police Commissioner, William J. Bratton -- do not appear to differ significantly on major police policies, several law-enforcement experts said yesterday.
And since Mr.
Giuliani, a former United States Attorney, has already clearly articulated the directions in which he wants to take the Police Department, the decision is not likely to have a profound impact on the department, the experts said.


Search Halted For Captain Of Tugboat
The Coast Guard suspended its search today for a tugboat captain whose boat capsized off the beach here on Sunday while trying to prevent a 300-foot dredge carrying 100,000 gallons of fuel oil from being blown ashore.
Heavy surf also forced a salvage tug to abandon efforts this afternoon to pull the dredge from the beach, where it ran around Sunday morning.


Corrections
A picture caption with the art listings in the Arts and Leisure section on Sunday referred incompletely to a "Day Without Art" event tomorrow at the Museum of Modern Art.
The museum will be closed during the day, as usual on Wednesdays.
But the ground floor will open at 6:30 P.M., when visitors may add names to "Projects: In Memory of . . . ," an exhibition commemorating people who have died of AIDS.


Price Tag on National Health Plan's Going Up; Malpractice Madness
To the Editor:
Contrary to Harvey F. Wachsman's contention in "Bad Medicine" (Op-Ed, Nov. 15), the preponderance of malpractice cases in the United States involve physicians who practice exemplary medicine.
I agree that "physicians who don't carry malpractice insurance are more likely to practice substandard medicine." But I wonder what percentage of the plaintiffs Mr.
Wachsman represents are in court suing substandard physicians.
The targets of most malpractice suits are physicians with malpractice insurance.
That is where the money is, not where the bulk of malpractice occurs.


Stray Bullet Kills Woman In E. Harlem
A 50-year-old woman was shot and killed by a stray bullet as she walked down a street in East Harlem with her 5-year-old granddaughter last night, the police said.
The woman, Nilma Rivas, was headed home from a grocery store at 7:45 P.M. when she was struck down at the corner of East 118th Street and Second Avenue, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.
She was pronounced dead at Harlem Hospital at 8:20 P.M., he said.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Beefeater moves to lighten its image in a new campaign aimed at younger gin drinkers.
WHEN people start fights, they often take off their coats.
That's exactly what executives at Hiram Walker &amp; Sons are doing in a new campaign that seeks to battle aggressively to regain sales and market share for troubled Beefeater gin.
The coat, or tunic, worn by the beefeaters who guard Britain's crown jewels in the Tower of London -- minus the stolid, daunting beefeaters themselves -- serves as the focus of the campaign, which begins appearing tomorrow.
It is the first work by FCB/Leber Katz Partners in New York since the agency was awarded the account in July after a review that also included Beefeater's previous agency, Eisaman, Johns &amp; Laws in Chicago.


Case Closed for Barkley
Authorities in Phoenix said yesterday they have ended their investigation into the latest accusation that Suns star CHARLES BARKLEY punched a man in a bar.
The man who said he was hit dropped his complaint.
A spokesman for the Phoenix police said that when investigators talked to Barkley on Saturday, he denied hitting KEITH STIMSON , of Hermosa Beach, Calif., in Stixx, the tavern, on Friday.


Mayor's Race Poll Abuse Is Charged
The New York Democratic chairman accused the Republican Party last night of using a series of tactics on Election Day to harass and intimidate voters in areas of New York City expected to favor Mayor David N. Dinkins.
The chairman, Al Gordon, said he had collected evidence that Republican poll watchers acted improperly at more than 75 polling places during the election on Nov. 2.
He said a pattern of harassment had emerged that led him to believe the actions had been orchestrated by the New York State Republican Party.


SOCCER
Help for the Uninitiated
The generous transfusion of United States corporate dollars into the World Cup is making FIFA receptive to the flow of some ideas for modernizing the event for its appearance in the United States next summer.
One such suggestion adopted by the 89-year-old organization is putting names on the back of players' jerseys and numbers on the front of their shorts for identification purposes.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
Crude oil prices plunged to their lowest levels in three years as OPEC's inability to agree on production cuts sent the oil market into turmoil.
Crude oil for January delivery fell $1.07, to $15.31 a barrel, in New York, the lowest since it traded at $15.06 in June 1990.
The prices of gasoline and heating oil also fell.  [ Page D1. ]


Q&amp;A
Cactus and Spiders
Q.
I heard that someone bought an ornamental cactus from the Southwest and that it suddenly released a lot of big spiders, tarantulas, I think.
Am I in danger?


Eddy Off the Coast
Using satellite images and measuring instruments in the sea, researchers have tracked a large eddy that carried an estimated 100,000 metric tons of sediment from the continental shelf into the ocean off the coast of California in two months.
Although eddies in the ocean are common, and it was known that they carried such sediment, this appears to be the first observation of a large eddy actually carrying the material off the continental shelf, the researchers said.
The sediment includes carbon from phytoplankton, microscopic plant life that falls to the the ocean floor.
Findings like this shed light on the way that carbon cycles through the ecosystem, an issue that is important to calculations of global climate.


Review/Theater: Abe Lincoln in Illinois; Lincoln as Metaphor For a Big Job Ahead, In 1939 and Today
If you're not too tuckered out by that point, "Abe Lincoln in Illinois" has a climax as spectacular as any now on a Broadway stage.
Lincoln, in the person of Sam Waterston, has just been elected President and is preparing to leave Springfield, Ill., for the nation's capital and the herculean task of holding together a Union deeply split over the issue of slavery.
Family at his side, he is standing on the back platform of a railroad car, gazing out at us and the crowd that has gathered to wish him well.


Sharpton Urges Nassau Board To Address Minority Concerns
In an appearance that may be a symbol of growing political dissatisfaction among blacks in Nassau County, the Rev.
Al Sharpton paid his first visit to the Board of Supervisors today and warned that the 1994 budget must better address the problems of minorities, specifically allocating $6 million for a youth center in Roosevelt and creating a Department of Minority Affairs.
It is unclear whether Mr.
Sharpton, the black minister from New York City who unsuccessfully sought the Democratic nomination for the United States Senate last year, will have any impact on the struggle of minority groups to win financing for these and other programs.
But there was little disagreement that his venture into Nassau politics was unusual, and many said it suggested that relations between the county government and some blacks were growing more contentious.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Comerica Inc., Detroit, the holding company for Comerica Bank, is selling $150 million of 7 1/8 percent subordinated bank notes due 2013 at a price of 99.388 to yield 7.183 percent through underwriters led by Lehman Brothers.
The 15-year callable notes are rated A-2 by Moody's and A- by S.&amp; P. and A+ by Duff &amp; Phelps.


An Added Bit of Sparkle for the Holiday Season


Officials' Strike Is Bettman's Folly
Perhaps Dale Hunter of Washington would have been injured just as badly with a regular referee in charge on Sunday night, instead of a replacement working during a strike.
Maybe Terry Gregson or Paul Stewart or one of the other regular officials would not have been paying attention -- the way the replacement referee wasn't -- when Aleksei Kovalev of the Rangers tripped Hunter with his skate, putting him out for at least four weeks with a knee injury.


Bridge
The American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals ended here Sunday night with a rarity: a second straight victory in major team play.
Nick Nickell of Raleigh, N.C., Dick Freeman of Atlanta, Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla., Eric Rodwell of Naperville, Fla., and Bob Hamman and Bob Wolff, both of Dallas, won the Reisinger Board-a-Match Team Championship by three and a half boards.
They had won the Spingold Knockout Team Championship in Washington in July.
This is an unusual double, and they have a chance for a unique triple by winning the Vanderbilt Knockout Teams in Cincinnati in March.
The runners-up were Jim Cayne of Manhattan, Chuck Burger of West Bloomfield, Mich., Mike Passell of Dallas, Mark Lair of Canyon, Tex., Bob Goldman of Highland Village, Tex., and Paul Soloway of Mill Creek, Wash.


Dinkins Names Civil Rights Lawyer to Fill Out Gotbaum Term on Board of Education
Mayor David N. Dinkins, vigorously defending his right to make lame-duck appointments, named a Brooklyn civil rights lawyer known for grass-roots activism to fill the remaining six months of a term on the New York City Board of Education.
The appointee, Esmeralda Simmons, the 42-year-old director of the Center for Law and Social Justice at Medgar Evers College, is due to take office on Dec. 15, two weeks before Mr.
Dinkins's own term ends, making it more difficult for the Mayor-elect, Rudolph W. Giuliani, to shift directions on the divided board.


How Arab States Can Save Iraqi Shiites
To the Editor:
Re "In a Remote Southern Marsh, Iraq Is Strangling the Shiites" (front page, Nov. 16): Iraqi genocide on a 1,000-year-old culture began after the Persian Gulf war ended, to virtually no notice, little rhetorical posturing and no military action by the United Nations.
President Saddam Hussein has concluded that this genocide, unlike that he wished to impose on Kuwait, will not draw the world's wrath.


Foreign Stock Funds Continue to Boom but Bonds Falter
Mutual fund investors continued to plow money into foreign stock funds this month, but the interest in American bonds waned as interest rates ticked up, fund managers said yesterday.
Some groups even reported net outflows from bond funds, an unusual occurrence in a year when investors have invested record amounts in such funds.
But others said that bond funds took in modest amounts of money despite the higher rates, which resulted in lower bond prices that produced losses for many funds.


SCIENTIST AT WORK: Francis S. Collins; Unlocking the Secrets of the Genome
DR.
FRANCIS S. COLLINS, the new director of the National Center for Human Genome Research, is a man of exuberant enthusiasm.
His parents are "wonderful, fascinating," people.
His scientific colleagues are "some of the most wonderful, smartest people in the world." The missionary doctors he worked with while doing charity work in Nigeria are "remarkable people," who have become his lifelong friends.
And the Human Genome Project itself?
Dr.
Collins says this international effort to map and identify every one of the 100,000 human genes, to determine the exact sequence of the three billion nucleotides that form the building blocks of human DNA, is "the most important and the most significant project that humankind has ever mounted."


A Re-usable Solution to Health Costs
Until recently, hospitals could mark up the price of disposable supplies like scrub gowns and certain instruments by 400 percent or so and bill the patient, paying little attention to the millions of dollars they spent a year on items used only once.
But that is no longer the case.
Under pressure from the Clinton Administration and private payers to reduce spending, a growing number of hospitals are questioning the economics of these throwaway supplies, which are estimated to account for 80 percent of the $1.2 billion hospitals will spend this year on operating room equipment.


Green Point Bank Sweetens Plan for Stock Ownership
The Green Point Savings Bank has sweetened its plan to convert to stock ownership, offering its depositors $50 million in extra interest over several years and a $25 million college scholarship fund.
The modifications in the plan for an initial public stock offering were included in a supplemental disclosure statement that Green Point mailed to its depositors yesterday.
The statement had been ordered by the New York State Banking Department.


Iraq Yields on Arms
The economic sanctions imposed on Iraq have finally forced Saddam Hussein to accept international monitoring designed to keep Iraq from producing weapons of mass destruction.
But it would be premature to lift the embargo on Iraqi exports until Iraq develops a better record of cooperating with arms inspectors and reveals all the foreign companies that supplied its nuclear, chemical, biological and missile programs.


U.S. and Japan Reach Accord on Rice
Japan and the United States have agreed to a plan to partly open Japan's rice market, clearing one of the remaining hurdles to reaching a new global trade agreement by mid-December, a United States official said today.
The proposal for the limited lifting of Japan's ban on rice imports is expected to be incorporated into the final draft of the trade treaty being forged under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.


On My Mind; Americans on Golan
For four excellent reasons this is the time for Americans and Israelis to start talking in their own countries about whether American troops should be stationed on the Golan Heights.
The first reason is that quiet understanding already exists within the American and Israeli Governments that if Syria and Israel reach a peace agreement U.S. troops are likely to be called upon to take up peacekeeping positions on the Golan.


Pollutants Traced in Groundwater
IN an effort to better understand the effects of industrial and agricultural pollution on groundwater, researchers are using contaminants from human activity as "environmental tracers" to map the inner workings of aquifers.
Adapting techniques used for more than a decade to study the circulation of the oceans, scientists at Columbia University and the United States Geological Survey are refining tools for determining the speed, direction and age of shallow groundwater.


Holyfield-Lewis a Go?
EVANDER HOLYFIELD's next heavyweight title fight could be a unification bout against the World Boxing Council champion, LENNOX LEWIS.
FRANK MALONEY, Lewis's manager, said in London yesterday that the matchup is contingent on whether Holyfield decides to fight again.
After beating RIDDICK BOWE for the World Boxing Association and International Boxing Federation titles Nov. 6 in Las Vegas, Nev., Holyfield said he might retire.


Bucharest Journal; A Suitably Opaque Talk With Romania's Top Spy
It was not unlike a scene from a spy novel: the head of a reshaped intelligence service in a country known for the criminality of its old one agreed to an interview.
A new, more pleasant headquarters, demitasses of coffee served before he entered, a friendly invitation to sit beside him on the sofa, an offer of exclusive documents.
Virgil Magureanu, former professor at the academy that trained Romania's Communist thinkers and for nearly four years head of the Romanian Intelligence Service, was trying hard to meet democratic standards.


Corrections
A headline yesterday about the wedding of Angela C. Willis misspelled the surname of the bridegroom in some editions.
He is Dr.
Douglas D. Altchek.


Corrections
An obituary on Friday about the British writer and composer Anthony Burgess misstated the year of his second marriage, to Liliana Macellari.
It was 1968, not 1948.


Dress Barn Looks At 2 Agencies
The Dress Barn, a discount retail chain based in Stamford, Conn., said yesterday that it was deciding between two New York-based agencies to handle its account, previously in-house.
Though billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at $3 million.


Veterans Seek Revival Of Agent Orange Suit
Vietnam veterans asked the United States Supreme Court yesterday to reopen litigation against the makers of Agent Orange, which became the most bitter legal dispute to stem from the Indochina war.
The veterans say they learned of health problems they believe to be associated with the chemical defoliant only after a $180 million settlement reached in 1984 by other veterans with manufacturers and distributors of Agent Orange.
Effectively, they are arguing that their rights were traded away to help others who simply had the misfortune of getting sick first.


Robert Davidson, 65, Presbyterians' Leader
The Rev.
Robert Miller Davidson, a former Moderator of the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) who recently retired as pastor of the West Park Presbyterian Church on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, died on Saturday at Roosevelt Hospital.
He was 65 and lived in Manhattan.
He had a rare blood disease, his church said.


Refusing to Be a Lame Duck, Dinkins Appoints New School Board Member


India Player Quits
RAMESH KRISHNAN, India's veteran Davis Cup player, quit the team yesterday, weakening his country's slim chance of defeating the United States squad in March.
Krishnan left because RAMESH DESAI, secretary of the All-India Tennis Association, blamed him for India's 5-0 loss to Australia in the Davis Cup semifinals in September.
Since the loss, Krishnan said, Desai has publicly accused him of playing in the semifinals without telling him he was injured in an earlier match.
Calling Desai's charge "most malicious," Krishnan said he was fit enough to play in the semis.
The India-United States match will be played on grass in New Delhi March 25-27. (AP)


JUSTICES WILL HEAR CHURCH-STATE CASE INVOLVING HASIDIM
Reopening its long-running debate over religion and the public schools, the Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether New York State breached the constitutional boundary between church and state when it set up a school district to serve a group of Hasidic Jews.
The Jewish group sought public education for its handicapped children but also wanted to shelter the children from the outside world.


State Aid and Whitman Tax Plan
In September, Christine Todd Whitman went to a Mercer County Chamber of Commerce luncheon to promote her campaign promise to cut income taxes for most New Jerseyans by nearly a third.
But the questions raised by the business group did not dwell on the prospect of lower taxes.
Instead, the audience at the speech in West Windsor asked how such a huge cut could fail to force a reduction in state aid to wealthy districts like theirs -- and a similar increase in property taxes.
Ultimately, Mrs.
Whitman conceded, some wealthy school districts like West Windsor could lose aid under her plan.


Nets End Road Trip With One Last Thud
The Nets tonight found another team they could not beat: the Clippers.
They thought the loss last week in Minnesota was embarrassing, but this four-game road trip got worse by the minute and unmercifully concluded this evening with a 118-94 drubbing.
Once again Derrick Coleman did not tune in.
Held to 4 points in Denver on Saturday, Coleman went 4 for 13 tonight, managed only 12 points, and for some reason found himself lobbing entry passes to Jayson Williams in this evening's fateful fourth quarter.
Coach Chuck Daly would prefer the opposite.


Review/Television; Why a Plane Crashed: A Detective Story
On June 6, 1992, a Panamanian airliner disappeared from air-traffic control radar on a routine 65-minute night flight from Panama City to Cali, Colombia.
The remains of the plane and the bodies of the 47 people on board were found in a remote jungle, over which the pilot had flown to avoid bad weather in the Gulf of Panama.
For weeks, investigators from Panama and the United States labored to figure out why the Boeing 737 had crashed, and their efforts constitute the story that "Nova" (which, incidentally, receives grants from Lockheed), tells tonight.
"Mysterious Crash of Flight 201" follows the investigators in their search for an explanation, through the rough terrain where bodies, personal belongings and wreckage were spread over two square miles of jungle floor and into the latest thing in a flight simulator in Houston.
Was it a bomb, a midair collision, the weather, some engine malfunction, pilot error?
The program is a steadily engrossing look into the techniques and thought processes of today's airplane sleuths.


Patterns
Aliens in Fashion  Multiculturalism is standard fare in fashion these days.
Start talking about multi-universal and UFO's and alien life forms, and Seventh Avenue stalwarts get a bit wary.
But they may need to expand their horizons, because what's new comes from a belief in other life forms in the universe.
And a desire to look a bit like them.
Space-age style, already mainstreamed in the silvery leather on runways, comes from rave clubs, where ambient music melds tribal culture with throbbing techno sounds.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Robinson Wakes Spurs  David Robinson scored 34 points, including 12 in a closely-fought fourth period, to help the San Antonio Spurs hold off the Milwaukee Bucks, 102-95, last night in San Antonio.
The Bucks rallied from a 15-point third-quarter deficit to pull within one, 86-85, but Robinson started an 8-0 run with consecutive jumpers.
"David refused to let us lose tonight down the stretch," said Spurs Coach John Lucas.
"We just fell asleep and let them back in the game." (AP) YACHTING  Mast Cracks; Lead Goes  Intrum Justitia, racing in the Whitbread 60 Class, took the overall lead yesterday on the second leg of the Whitbread Round the World yacht race after New Zealand's Endeavor broke part of its mast.
Skippered by Lawrie Smith, the European yacht held a 4-mile lead over Endeavor as the boats continued their journey from Punta del Este, Uruguay, to Fremantle, Australia.
The lead change came shortly after Endeavor, one of five entries in the Maxi Class, snapped the top 8 meters off its mizzen mast.
Endeavor retained its lead in the Maxi class with a 78-mile advantage over Merit Cup. (AP) N.H.L.
Sabres Top Leafs  Wayne Presley, Craig Simpson and Aleksandr Mogilny scored third-period goals and Dominik Hasek made 24 saves last night, leading the Buffalo Sabres to a 3-0 victory over the Maple Leafs in Toronto.
It was the first time this season that Toronto was shut out.
The Leafs, who have the best record in the league at 17-5-4, have lost only 2 games at home this season. (AP)
Whalers 4, Senators 2: Bryan Marchment scored the go-ahead goal early in the third period and the Hartford Whalers went on to beat the Senators in Ottawa.
The crowd of 10,075 in the Civic Centre chanted "We want a ref!" during the second period, a reference to the strike by officials.
Before the strike began two weeks ago, the fans shouted, "We want scabs!" (AP)
Stars 6, Oilers 5: Dave Gagner got control of a bouncing puck and sent a high shot past Bill Ranford at 2 minutes 26 seconds of overtime to give Dallas a road victory. (AP)


Canada Seizes U.S. Newspapers at Border
Police arrested Canadians bringing copies of the Buffalo News across the border after the newspaper printed an article containing details barred by a judge hearing a murder case.
Niagara Regional Police Detective Staff Sergeant Paul White said today that 187 newspapers were confiscated from 61 drivers.


At U.S. Urging, Ukraine Retreats on Nuclear Arms
After complaints from President Clinton, President Leonid Kravchuk of Ukraine said today that the Ukrainian Parliament would reconsider its refusal to eliminate all of the country's nuclear missiles in accordance with the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty.
The Ukrainian Parliament overwhelmingly ratified the 1991 treaty known as Start I this month, but declared that it applied to only about half of the roughly 1,600 long-range nuclear warheads of the former Soviet Union that are on its soil.


In a Rattling Opener, Only Karnishovas Rolls
In March, the type of basketball game Seton Hall and St.
Peter's played tonight at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena would be called a defensive struggle.
Tonight it was merely a struggle.


Corrections
A map on Friday with an article about the migration of western Germans to eastern Germany located the village of Lobnitz incorrectly.
It is in northern Germany, 10 miles south of the Baltic Sea, not in central Germany.


Price Tag on National Health Plan's Going Up; High Education Costs
To the Editor:
As a student completing medical school admissions, I was disconcerted that "The Health Debate" supplement omitted attention to the soaring costs of medical education.


'Big Guy' and Man With Pockmarks Are Focus of Blast Trial
There was what witnesses called "the big guy" who had strange reddish hair, and a man with a pockmarked face carrying mysterious bundles out of a modest house at 40 Pamrapo Avenue in Jersey City as testimony in the World Trade Center case resumed yesterday.
The prosecution called three witnesses whose purpose for the Government's case was clear: to give testimony suggesting that two of the defendants, Mohammed A. Salameh and Mahmud Abouhalima, were often together at the house on Pamrapo Avenue, where their behavior was consistent with that of men building a bomb.


Meaner Pastures
To the Editor:
Thank you for supporting the carriage horses of New York in "Spare the Horses" (editorial, Nov. 16), and for alerting readers to changes in laws that are meant to protect them.


Bronx Man, Wife and Child Found Dead in Apartment
A couple and their 3-year-old child were found shot to death yesterday in a Bronx apartment in what the police said was a double homicide and a suicide.
Matthew Sullivan, a 34-year-old Sanitation Department worker, shot and killed his wife, Ada, and their 3-year-old daughter, Lisa Marie, about 3 P.M.
Monday in their apartment at 2055 Cruger Avenue in the Pelham Parkway section, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.


Reeves Won the Game Before the Game Started
There are few times when you can point to one single personnel move and say it won a game.
But that is exactly what happened with the Giants when Coach Dan Reeves, feeling Sunday's game against the Cardinals might come down to a long field goal, deactivated Kanavis McGhee to keep Brad Daluiso on the roster.
Reeves said McGhee, a defensive lineman and linebacker, was angry that after working hard all week in practice he didn't get a chance to play, and the coach said he could sympathize with that.
The good of the team, however, is what's most important to Reeves.
His decision turned out to be the right one since Daluiso made a 54-yard field goal to win the game.


William H. Nuchow, Union Leader, 65
William H. Nuchow, the newly elected president of the New York Joint Council 16 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 65.
The cause was a heart attack, the union said.


Chronicle
Mayor-elect RUDOLPH W. GIULIANI announced yesterday that RON SILVER, the actor and president of the Actors' Equity Association, will serve as master of ceremonies at his public inauguration, to be conducted on the steps of City Hall on Sunday, Jan. 2.That does not mean that New York will be mayorless when David N. Dinkins's term expires, on New Year's Eve.
Mr.
Guiliani will be sworn in then in a private ceremony.
Mr.
Silver is a Democrat who was highly visible in the Giuliani campaign, appearing in television advertisements and even speaking to the crowd at Giuliani headquarters at the New York Hilton on election night.


Stocks in Retreat, With Dow Falling 6.15
Stock prices turned downward late yesterday, failing to respond to declining oil prices and an upturn in existing-home sales.
The early gain in the Dow Jones industrial average, which finished off 6.15 points, to 3,677.80, was prompted by a strong performance from the transportation index.
The drop in the price of crude oil to its lowest level in nearly five years, lifted transportation issues with the prospect of cheaper fuel, but also caused oil stocks to fade.


Tokyo Stocks a Victim Of Economic Malaise
The deepening malaise in Japan's economy, and concern that the Government does not have a plan for breathing new life into it, pushed the world's second-largest stock market into a steep plunge on Monday, reflecting the rock-bottom level of confidence the Japanese seem to have in their own system.
The market managed to rebound somewhat today, but analysts said the gain was only a pause in the prevailing downward move.


New Jersey Democrats Drop Effort To Overturn Whitman's Election
Democrats today abandoned their effort to keep Christine Todd Whitman from becoming governor of New Jersey, acknowledging that they had found no proof that she won the election because of efforts to suppress minority voting.
From the start the Democrats had acknowledged that their civil suit was a long shot with only the slimmest of chances of preventing the Jan. 18 inauguration of the first woman ever elected Governor of New Jersey.


Evelyn Venable, 80, Film Actress in 30's
Evelyn Venable, an actress whose films include "Death Takes a Holiday" with Fredric March, died on Nov. 16 in Post Falls, Idaho.
She was 80.
Miss Venable was born in Cincinnati.
After attending Vassar College and the University of Cincinnati, she played Shakespearean roles in a theater company headed by Walter Hampden.
She made her first film, "Cradle Song," for Paramount in 1933; others were "Mrs. Wiggs of the Cabbage Patch" (1934), "Alice Adams" (1935), "The Little Colonel" (1935) and "The Frontiersman" (1938).
She was also the voice of the Blue Fairy in Walt Disney's "Pinocchio" (1940).
She retired from the screen after making "He Hired the Boss" in 1943.


BRITAIN RELEASES NOTES EXPLORING PEACE WITH I.R.A.
Two days after acknowledging secret contacts with the Irish Republican Army, the British Government went before the House of Commons today to defend its policy.
It released scores of messages sent during the last 10 months that show two suspicious adversaries trying to pursue a settlement.
The often blunt messages include frequent repetition of the Government's insistence that an end to violence must precede face-to-face talks.
There was also an aborted cease-fire offer from the I.R.A., anger over leaks to the press and an apology for a fatal bomb attack.


Chargers Keep Hope Alive With Return of Humphries
The slumping San Diego Chargers needed a victory to keep their slim playoff hopes alive, and a healthy Stan Humphries gave it to them.
Making his first start since he bruised his right shoulder eight weeks ago, Humphries passed for 216 yards and two touchdowns tonight, sending the Chargers to a 31-0 romp over the Indianapolis Colts.


By Design; Through a Bodysuit, Sheerly
Many women may be reluctant to wear them, but sheer clothes show no signs of fading away.
Sheerness abounds in the resort and holiday duds coming into stores now and was rife on the runways for spring.
But not to worry.
There are many ways to wear see-through fashions without offending modesty -- or catching a chill.
Under sheer black dresses and tunics, Joan Kaner, the fashion director of Neiman Marcus, wears a black spandex exercise unitard that provides coverage but looks sleek.
Or she suggests a flesh-colored opaque bodysuit.


New Wing, New Hope at Brooklyn Museum
Two years ago the Brooklyn Museum confronted a budget crisis that required cutting both its staff and its hours.
But that was then.
Tonight, the 96-year-old institution is giving a party for 2,300 guests to show off not only the $1 million reinstallation of its Egyptian collection, but also the $31 million renovation of its once-dusty, little-used West Wing.
The new West Wing, which opens to the public on Friday, inhabits the oldest section of the museum.
The renovation, long anticipated, will provide 30,000 square feet of new gallery space on three floors, as well as a floor of office space.
With a few minor exceptions, the West Wing has not served as an exhibition space since the 1930's, and was reserved for office use and storage.


Josef Stroder, 81; He Defied Gestapo To Save Children
Josef Stroder, a pediatrician who saved the lives of Jewish and Polish children in World War II, died on Nov. 22 in Wurzburg, Germany.
He was 81 and lived in Wurzburg.
The cause was liver cancer, said Dr.
Heinz Eichenwald, who co-edited a textbook, "Pediatric Therapy," with Dr.
Stroder.


MICROSOFT AND DIGITAL TO SET A SOFTWARE STANDARD
The Microsoft Corporation and the Digital Equipment Corporation said yesterday that they had agreed to establish a common software standard intended to permit companies' object-oriented programming systems to work together.
Object-oriented programming lets programmers re-use prebuilt software building blocks for faster design and programming.
Until now, Microsoft has been one of very few significant computer companies that have not participated in an industry group called the Object Management Group, which is working to standardize object module interfaces between companies.
But yesterday William H. Gates, Microsoft's chairman, said Microsoft's agreement with Digital would lead to a "layer of commonality" between Microsoft's objects and those of other computer vendors like Hewlett Packard, Sun Microsystems, I.B.M. and Apple.


Review/Television: Psychoderelict; Beyond 'Tommy': Townshend Turns To Adult Questions
A 1960's rock star, now well beyond the once-arrogant age barrier of 30, discovers that the music business, not to mention his life, is corrupt.
As someone sums it up, "Prostitution, it's inevitable." In "Psychoderelict," his new and still evolving theater piece, Pete Townshend indulges himself in the middle-age exercise of wondering what happened to the truth, what happened to the dream?
His ruminations are available tonight on PBS in a performance taped for "Great Performances" before an enthusiastic Brooklyn Academy of Music audience.
The 90-minute broadcast opens with Mr.
Townshend doing solo versions of material from his days with the Who, including a medley from "Tommy." He then segues into "Psychoderelict," carefully explaining that its 11 songs are supplemented by actors and screen projections as "a way to get you across and into" the piece.
What are these songs about?
"Where our future is going to be, and how we go on from here," says Mr.
Townshend.


Panel Votes To Ease Law On Carriages
Trying to strike a balance between the needs of the horse carriage industry and the concerns of animal-rights advocates and business groups, a City Council committee voted yesterday to ease city rules slightly on where and when horse-drawn carriages can operate in Manhattan.
The transportation committee's action, the latest in a series of legislative skirmishes over how sharply to restrict the carriages' operations, would extend the hours the carriages could operate in Central Park and on parts of Fifth Avenue and the Avenue of the Americas.
Certain sections of midtown where the carriages are prohibited most of the day would also be made smaller.


No Headline
"You could describe me as a Secretary who's shamelessly describing the death of this woman while talking about budget increases, but I'm told there were homeless people outside who knelt in prayer at this woman's body. So when I raise my voice in search of funds, I know I'm not alone." -- HENRY G. CISNEROS, Housing Secretary, after a homeless woman was found dead near his office.  [ A1:5. ]


Court's Move Elates Village Of Jewish Sect
This could have been the last day of classes at the lone public school here, had the United States Supreme Court not agreed to review the constitutionality of the special school district in this Hasidic enclave of 12,000.
So after a sleepless night worrying about the fate of their school, and the 200 handicapped Hasidic children it serves, officials and parents here voiced relief as they gathered at the school to celebrate the Supreme Court's decision to review a July ruling by New York's highest court.
That ruling had deemed the district unconstitutional because it "inescapably conveys a message of governmental endorsement of religion."


Books of the Times; Gauging the Power of Nationalism
The Wrath of Nations  Civilization and the Fury of Nationalism  By William Pfaff  256 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.
In his last book, the eloquent "Barbarian Sentiments," the journalist William Pfaff suggested that America's efforts to remake the world in its own image have led to disasters like Vietnam, that American foreign policy has consistently failed to acknowledge the fierce and enduring power of nationalism around the world.
His new book, "The Wrath of Nations," more or less takes up where "Barbarian Sentiments" left off, providing the reader with a succinct history of nationalism and its consequences both in the past and in the years to come.


In Ex-Soviet Lands, Russian Army Can Be a Protector or an Occupier
Most of the Russian Army may be reeling from the collapse of the Soviet Union and the blow to its professional pride, but it is boom time for Russia's 201st Motorized Rifle Division, stationed abroad in nominally independent Tajikistan.
The 201st, as a rear-echelon force in what was the Soviet Union's poorest republic, had been under strength for years by as much as 40 percent.


Andrew Corporation
Shares of the Andrew Corporation, a telecommunications equipment maker, were sharply higher yesterday.
Traders said the stock was influenced by published reports that the company, based in Orland Park, Ill., would benefit from economic recovery overseas.
About 40 percent of Andrew's sales are generated overseas.
In reporting record results for 1993 two weeks ago, the company said its earnings, sales and orders could have been 3 percent to 6 percent higher if not for the strength of the dollar against foreign currencies.


To Latvians, a Single Russian Soldier Is Still One Too Many
In her cramped apartment outside the gates of the Russian military base on the outskirts of the Latvian capital, Lyubov Umanskaya is packed up and waiting to go.
"It is like living in a railway station," said the 38-year-old wife of a Russian major, sitting among the boxes and shipping crates that have filled the living room in her small three-room apartment for the better part of a year.


Detecting Patterns in Pounding Breakers
FOR decades, scientists worried about beach erosion have struggled to understand exactly what goes on in the surf zone, where breakers stir up sand and carry it away.
But the surf zone is hostile to researchers.
Taking measurements there can be cold, dangerous work.
Even anchoring instruments there is arduous, and the gauges often become waterlogged or break loose and disappear in the waves.


Joan Weidemann Harris, Community Worker, 63
Joan Weidemann Harris, a retired Brooklyn community worker and former board member and executive director of the Y.W.C.A. of Brooklyn, died on Thursday at her home in Warren, Conn.
She was 63 and also lived in Brooklyn Heights.
The cause was a brain tumor, her family said.


Chess
Nowadays anyone who competes in top international play has to keep up with the news.
This was the lesson that Li Wenliang relearned the hard way in the World Team Championship held in Lucerne from Oct. 23 to Nov. 2.
Li had Board 4 for China on Oct. 31 against Larry Christiansen of the gold medal United States team.
He was under the impression that the opening of the game was following a reliable course for White so that his task would be how to make something out of the slight advantage of the first move.
But he had missed the reports of Game 15 of the International Chess Federation's championship match between Anatoly Karpov and Jan Timman, contested on Oct. 20 in Jakarta, Indonesia.


Putnam Berkley to Grow In Hard and Soft Cover
Signaling its desire for an expanded role in the increasingly competitive publishing industry, the Putnam Berkley Group announced yesterday that it planned to establish a new line of hardcover and trade paperback books.
Susan J. Petersen, who a year ago left as president of Ballantine/Del Rey/Fawcett/Ivy Books, a division of Random House, has been named executive vice president of Putnam Berkley and will be in charge of the new operation, which is to begin in January, said Phyllis E. Grann, the company's chief executive.


Understand Female Genital Mutilation, Yes, but Don't Condone It
To the Editor:
In "How Africa Understands Female Circumcision" (letter, Nov. 24), Maynard Merwine puts female genital mutilation into a cultural context.
We have heard this argument before.


High-Scoring 49ers Taking Themselves Toward Top of N.F.L.
The best team in pro football?
Two weeks ago, before their stumbling losses to the Atlanta Falcons and the Miami Dolphins, it was certainly the Dallas Cowboys (then 7-2).
Now, rolling along on a five-game winning streak, it's the San Francisco 49ers (8-3).
If you must find a fault in the 49ers' 35-10 rout of the Los Angeles Rams Sunday, it was their measly output of five touchdowns.
After all, in their three previous games, they piled up 40 points against the Rams, 45 against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers and 42 against the New Orleans Saints.


Gift Games
For a moment there, it looked as though the House might actually cut back on the expensive free meals, entertainment and other nifty perks that lobbyists for special interests bestow on lawmakers as part of the Capitol Hill influence game.
After lots of fits and starts, a promising measure restricting these unseemly gifts seemed headed for the floor, and likely passage, just before the House adjourned last week.
The measure, proposed by Representative John Bryant, Democrat of Texas, could be tougher.
It doesn't end the free golf and tennis trips; and, while it bans gifts by registered lobbyists, it fails to restrict, or even require disclosure of, the same benefits' being doled out by the company executives who hire the lobbyists.


Guinea Pig's Ancestors
SCIENTISTS have found fossils of the earliest known rodents in South America.
The 34-million-year-old remains not only provide evidence that the ancestors of the guinea pig reached the continent 10 million years earlier than was previously estimated, but that they most likely traveled there from Africa.
The findings were published recently in the journal Nature.


U.S. Pays More Than Industry for Atomic Cleanup
The Energy Department is paying the contractors it hires to clean up pollution at nuclear weapons sites a third more on average than private industry spends on comparable environmental projects, officials said today.
In an effort to end the large cost overruns and long delays in the vast nuclear cleanup program, the department now plans to take back management of the programs from the private contractors that do most of the work, the officials said.


Tell the Truth About the I.R.A.
Judging from secret messages made public yesterday, the British Government has no reason to apologize for exploring a peace overture from the outlawed Irish Republican Army.
But Prime Minister John Major blundered gratuitously by denying that such contacts had taken place.
Now there is a cloud of confusion over what was apparently a sensible effort to end the violence in British-ruled Northern Ireland.
In recent years it has been the policy of British Governments to shun any contacts with the I.R.A. until it convincingly disavows violence.
A startled Parliament and public now learn that Mr.
Major's senior aides were secretly engaged in talks that conflicted with the declared policy.
However defensible the purpose, the past denials left the country unprepared for a 180-degree turn in British policy.


W. Virginia Goes for Sugar Bowl And Money
After an emotional but unsuccessful lobbying effort to be voted into a game against the No. 1 team in the nation, West Virginia University is prepared to decline an invitation to the Cotton Bowl in favor of a trip to the Sugar Bowl, a game against a lower-ranked opponent that delivers a check more than $1 million larger.
Mike Tranghese, the commissioner of the Big East Conference, said yesterday he was told that the West Virginia administration had informed Cotton Bowl officials that the school prefers to play in New Orleans against the winner of Saturday's Southeastern Conference championship game between Alabama and Florida, rather than meeting Southwest Conference champion Texas A&amp;M in Dallas.
Another person close to the situation, speaking on the condition of anonymity, confirmed that Cotton Bowl officials had been told of West Virginia's preference.


Haitian Army Chief and Prime Minister Meet Again


Ex-Chief Justice in Rhode Island Is Convicted on Ethics and Fined
A former Chief Justice of the Rhode Island Supreme Court was found guilty today of three misdemeanor counts of using his position to direct more than $45,000 in arbitration work to a partner in his real estate firm.
The former Chief Justice, Thomas F. Fay, was fined $3,000, the maximum under state law, and placed on one year's probation.
Under state law, he could have been sentenced to a three-year prison term.


The Best of Sculptors, the Worst of Sculptors
In a single day last week, 30-year-old Rachel Whiteread won two prizes, one for being the best British artist and one for being the worst.
The awards followed a month in which a sculpture by Miss Whiteread has generated a national debate about contemporary art.
Since opening on Oct. 25 in the East End of London, Miss Whiteread's temporary public sculpture "House" has caused a furor that some observers are comparing to the one that ensued in the mid-1970's when the Tate Gallery bought a sculpture by the American artist Carl Andre made of plain bricks.
Unlike Mr.
Andre's work, Miss Whiteread's is not abstract, but rather a mute and ghostly version of reality.


Review/Dance; Two Intricate Lessons in How to Change Mood
Jerome Robbins's "Other Dances" and George Balanchine's "Bourree Fantasque" certainly differ in scale.
The former is a pas de deux to Chopin piano music, the latter a romp for a large ensemble to orchestral pieces by Chabrier.
Yet they share a crucial characteristic: Each is crammed with varied moods that must be fitted harmoniously together.
Both works were offered by the New York City Ballet on Sunday afternoon at the New York State Theater.
With Darci Kistler as his partner and Jerry Zimmerman as the pianist, Nikolaj Hubbe gave his first performance in "Other Dances," which combines classical technique with folk-dance steps and hints of dramatic situations.
But the classical steps should not become merely academic, the folk dancing should not turn boisterous and the drama should never broaden into melodrama.


Baring Midriffs: A Little, a Lot or Not?
Sometimes there's only a hint of bare flesh above the waistline.
Sometimes a wide swath is uncovered from just below the bust to below the navel.
The design can be discreet and controlled, or gaping and sloppy.
No matter how it is achieved, the bared midriff is almost as obvious a part of spring fashion collections as the thigh-high skirt.
Though it is familiar through 1930's movies and Indian women wearing saris, the bare midriff is not likely to be widely accepted by Western women today.
"It is too difficult," Bill Blass said.
"Women will much more readily wear bare-back or plunging-neckline styles."


METRO DIGEST
DEMOCRATS DROP CHALLENGE OF WHITMAN
Democrats abandoned their effort to keep Christine Todd Whitman from becoming Governor of New Jersey, acknowledging that they had found no proof that she won the election because of efforts to suppress minority voting.
A1.
HIGH COURT TAKES UP SCHOOLS CASE
The Supreme Court agreed to decide if New York State breached the constitutional boundary between church and state when it set up a school district for a group of Hasidic Jews.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY
DINKINS FILLS SCHOOL BOARD POST
Mayor David N. Dinkins, vigorously defending his right to make lame-duck appointments, named a Brooklyn civil rights lawyer known for grass-roots activism to fill the remaining six months of a term on the New York City Board of Education.
B3.
BOMB TRIAL FOCUSES ON TWO MEN
There was what witnesses called "the big guy" who had strange reddish hair, and a man with a pockmarked face carrying mysterious bundles out of a modest house at 40 Pamrapo Avenue in Jersey City as testimony in the World Trade Center case resumed.
B3.
CHARGES OF HARASSMENT AT POLLS
The New York Democratic chairman accused the Republican Party of using a series of tactics on Election Day to harass and intimidate voters in areas of New York City.
B3.
DINKINS OUTSPENT OPPONENT
In the last days of his failed campaign to retain the Mayor's office, Mayor Dinkins raised and spent far more money than Rudolph W. Giuliani, according to campaign finance board reports.
He ended the contest with more debts than the Republican victor and less cash in the bank.
B3.
THREE FOUND DEAD IN BRONX APARTMENT
The bodies of a man, a woman and a 3-year-old were discovered in an apartment in the Pelham Parkway section of the Bronx, the police said.
B7.
East Harlem woman is killed by stray bullet.
B7.
REGION  SEARCH HALTED FOR CAPTAIN
The Coast Guard suspended its search for a tugboat captain whose boat capsized off the beach in Westhampton, L.I., while trying to prevent a dredge carrying 100,000 gallons of fuel oil from being blown ashore.
B6.
HIGH COURT REJECTS DISTRICT'S BID
The Englewood Cliffs school district, which has no high school, was turned down by the Supreme Court in its bid to end its alliance with a predominantly black high school and let its students go to another nearby, mostly white, school.
B6.
EXPRESSING MINORITY CONCERNS
In an appearance that may be a symbol of growing political dissatisfaction among black residents of Nassau County, the Rev.
Al Sharpton paid his first visit to the Board of Supervisors and warned that the 1994 budget must better address the problems of minorities.
B7.
WHITMAN TAX PLAN VS.
STATE AID
New Jersey school boards, teachers' unions, mayors and county executives are gearing up to defend their state financing from a Governor-elect who says all levels of government will have to tighten their belts.
B6.
Chronicle B7


INSIDE
Oil Market in Turmoil
Crude oil prices plunged to their lowest levels in three years as OPEC's inability to cut production sent the oil market into turmoil.
Page D1.
Talks on Bosnia to Resume
The three factions in Bosnia agreed to resume direct talks after being swayed by a modified peace plan and by the threat of winter.
Page A16.
Clogged Streets of Laredo
Along the Mexican-American border, enthusiasm for the new free-trade agreement is tempered by worries over traffic congestion.
Page A18.
Picking a Police Chief
The choice may reveal more about Mayor-elect Giuliani than about the department.
News analysis, page B1.


Chronicle
MARC SAWYER, the executive director of the Living With . . .
Group, a national AIDS-awareness organization based in Boston, didn't think people paid enough attention to World AIDS Day last year.
"The only thing I saw that told me it was World AIDS Day was that Joan Rivers had on a red ribbon," he said yesterday.
Mr.
Sawyer vowed to make this year's World AIDS Day, which occurs tomorrow, more visible in Boston and elsewhere by devising ways to motivate the public to become more involved with fighting the disease.


Oil-Inspired Rally Is Short-Lived Early Buyers Sell
The oil-inspired rally did not last long in the bond market yesterday.
After a surge in bond prices across the board early in the day, buyers seemed to disappear and those who bought early apparently sold later to lock in some quick profits.
The yield of the 30-year bond wound up only slightly down, at 6.23 percent, while yields on shorter Treasury securities closed unchanged or up slightly.


Mugger Is Allowed To Keep Jury Award
For Bernard McCummings, it is better late that never.
For Jerome Sandusky, it is simply too late.
Mr.
McCummings cannot take back the decision he made nine years ago to mug Mr.
Sandusky, then 72, in a Manhattan subway station.
Nor can he gain back the use of his legs, lost when he was shot in the back by a New York City transit police officer as he fled the crime scene.
But he can begin to spend a $4.8 million jury award after the United States Supreme Court yesterday refused to hear an appeal by the Transit Authority.


Webber Is Out Again, This Time With Sprain
CHRIS WEBBER, the star rookie of the Golden State Warriors who missed most of training camp because of an appendectomy, will be sidelined indefinitely with a sprained ankle.
"His status is day to day," the team's spokesman, DAVID HATFIELD, said.
Webber was examined yesterday by the team's doctors, who confirmed the initial diagnosis.
Webber sprained his left ankle during Sunday night's game in Detroit when he fell over BILL LAIMBEER of the Pistons.
X-rays showed no break.


New Honduran Leader Facing Entrenched Elites
The newly elected President of Honduras said today that he would challenge two of the country's most powerful forces: the military, and a system of corruption that diplomats here say has allowed officials and the business elite to act outside of the law.
Should the President-elect, Carlos Roberto Reina, of the Liberal Party, make a serious attack on either force, he could run into powerful opposition.


Want a Room With a View? Idea May Be in the Genes
CAN humans be truly human and truly fulfilled in a world of glass and concrete set apart from nature, surrounded by cultural artifacts and pursuits, enclosed in electronic cocoons where much of reality comes from the television screen and the computer display?
Not in a million years, according to a new hypothesis.
It holds that eons of evolution, during which humans constantly and intimately interacted with nature, have imbued Homo sapiens with a deep, genetically based emotional need to affiliate with the rest of the living world.
Meeting this need, according to what is called the biophilia hypothesis, may be as important to human well-being as forming close personal relationships.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 15 about voter turnout in the New Jersey election referred incorrectly to a position taken by the Speaker of the Assembly, Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian.
Mr.
Haytaian, a Republican, said he opposed sports betting because of concerns about how it would affect young people.
Other Republicans had feared that placing the issue on the ballot would encourage voter turnout in urban areas, aiding Democratic candidates.


Price Tag on National Health Plan's Going Up; Choices for Patients
To the Editor:
Health maintenance organizations, it appears, will be the major beneficiaries of the health care system proposed by the Clinton Administration.
Thus it is important to know what choices H.M.O. patients have today.


P.L.O. Militants Ready to Vent Anger in Violence
Shots in the air echoed this morning across the tumbledown refugee camp here, calling cards from young Palestinian militants known as the Fatah Hawks.
It was their way of announcing that they would renew armed attacks against Israelis after two of their own were killed by undercover soldiers on Sunday night in what the army described as a gun battle but Palestinians insisted was an unprovoked Israeli attack.


A Tentative Step Closer To Simpler Upgrading
DO you know what really IRQs me?
It is the IRQ (interrupt request) and DMA (direct memory access) conflicts and jumper switches and CONFIG.SYS changes and all the other technical annoyances that swarm, like vicious gnats, when a DOS or Windows PC user descends into the swamp of upgrading.
There is hope, however.
Several major computer companies have endorsed a new specification called Plug-and-Play, which promises to make it as easy to add devices to a Microsoft Windows-based PC as it always has been to add devices to an Apple Macintosh.


High-Rise Co-ops for Bargain-Basement Prices; New Development in Queens Plans to Use Unusual Financing Method to Lure Buyers
So what should it fetch: a new two-bedroom co-op, with a waterfront site and a knock-out view of Manhattan's skyline?
The developers of an ambitious, self-contained community in Queens are counting on attracting scads of buyers with a bargain-basement price of just over $15,000.
That's neither a misprint nor a down payment, but rather the expected asking price for an apartment that the developers hope will become a cornerstone of a sprawling residential and commercial city proposed for the Hunters Point neighborhood of western Queens.
The only catch is that the co-op will be born with a substantial debt that its owner-residents will have to pay down as part of their monthly maintenance charges.


The Victimization Trap
Until Sunday night, I was one of Oprah Winfrey's great admirers.
Her triumph over poverty, racism and child abuse makes her an inspiration for ordinary people everywhere.
Beyond that, she displays a truly extraordinary self-determination and honesty -- a defiant refusal to take on the role of victim.
Imagine my disappointment, then, on seeing the tendentious, dishonest dramatization of Alex Kotlowitz's book "There Are No Children Here," produced by Ms.
Winfrey's company for ABC television.
Mr.
Kotlowitz's story of the two Rivers brothers, 9-year-old Pharoah and 11-year-old Lafeyette, growing up in a black Chicago housing project, is one of the great sociological documents on the ghetto.
It moved me to tears and anger -- tears for children robbed of childhood, love and hope; anger at the system that allows such misery amid affluence.
And anger, especially, at the abysmal failure of the boys' parents to cherish and provide for them.


VERMONTERS SEEK LEEWAY ON HEALTH
Vermont is ready to revamp its health care system on its own and wants the Federal Government to get out of the way, or maybe help just a little, dozens of witnesses told two United States Senators today.
"We will need some help from the Federal Government," said Gov.
Howard Dean, who is a pediatrician.
For one thing, he wanted assurances that the state could require employers to pay health insurance premiums regardless of the fate of President Clinton's effort to require that nationally.


Observer; Why Credit Is Tight
Can President Clinton be serious when he complains to Rolling Stone magazine about never getting "one damn bit of credit" from the "knee-jerk liberal press"?
Surely he is being sly, hoping to fish a little applause from a quarter reluctant to applaud anyone, least of all a middle-of-the-road President.
As a Rhodes scholar, he knows enough history and political philosophy to understand the plight of the knee-jerk liberal, press or otherwise.


Sports of The Times; When Caps Meant Red's 15-0 Start
IN pro basketball's pioneer years, the Caps had nothing to do with salaries and everything to do with a 31-year-old coach named Red Auerbach.
When the Washington Capitols opened the 1948-49 schedule with 15 consecutive victories, Red Auerbach's team set a record for a winning streak at the start of a season.
As one of the oldest lines in the National Basketball Association ledger, that record has endured for 45 years.
But suddenly it's in jeopardy.


COMPANY BRIEFS
GENZYME CORP., Cambridge, Mass., said it would purchase the rights and technology relating to Neozyme Corp.'s Vianain enzyme and Fetal Cell Separation and Analysis programs for $49 million in cash.
INTERNATIONAL GAMING MANAGEMENT INC., Minneapolis, signed a definitive agreement to acquire the 50 percent stake the Schilling Casino Corporation, Cincinnati, holds in the Splash Casino in Tuninca County, Miss., for cash and stock totaling slightly less than $60 million.


Executive Changes
JENNY CRAIG INC., Del Mar, Calif., named Albert J. DiMarco, the former head of weight-loss rival Nutri/System Inc., as president and chief operating officer.


The Latest In Gadgets For Digital Tykes
DO not assume the gift software you buy will work on someone else's computer.
Play it safe and buy from a shop that will exchange the unopened package.
Children's software can be especially demanding -- on computers.
As the December issue of Compute magazine points out in its "Kids and Computers" section: "The days of simply handing down your old computer to the kids when you're ready to upgrade have come and gone. Children's software has moved into multimedia applications with sound, animation and video."
Sophisticated equipment is required for computer-aided design, even for Kid CAD, a clever 3-D building kit from Davidson of Torrance, Calif.: an 80386 processor at least, four megabytes of memory and nine megabytes of free hard-disk space, Windows 3.1 in enhanced mode and, to hear the program, a Sound Blaster-compatible card.


William Johnson, 46, Tax Lawyer, Is Dead
William L. Johnson, an international tax lawyer whose lawsuit led Trans World Airlines to open its frequent-flier program to gay and lesbian couples, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 46 and also lived in East Taghanic, N.Y.
The cause of death was complications from AIDS, said his companion, William J. Hibsher.


Ayer Withdraws From a Review
Ayer Inc. in New York said yesterday that it had withdrawn from the review on the $20 million National Car Rental account, citing its merger talks with Hal Riney &amp; Partners in San Francisco.
Kevin Tedesco, an Ayer spokesman, confirmed a report of the agency's withdrawal this week in Adweek, attributing the decision to the potential of a conflict with a Riney client, Alamo Rent-A-Car.
He added that the talks had also delayed Ayer's monthlong search for a new president and chief operating officer because "that decision has been postponed until our discussions with Hal Riney are completed one way or another."


Roger Pineau, 77, Author and Expert On History of Navy
Capt.
Roger Pineau, a naval historian and author, died on Nov. 22 at Suburban Hospital in Bethesda, Md.
He was 77 and lived in Bethesda.
Cardiovascular illness was the cause of death, his family said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-16  LONDON DEFENDS I.R.A.
CONTACTS  The British Government went before the House of Commons to defend contacts with the Irish Republican Army and release messages showing the efforts for an accord.
A1


New Races (Their Own) for 2 Bush Sons
At a campaign stop at Olin Ordnance, a weapons factory in St.
Petersburg, Fla., Jeb Bush talked to the employees about how he would like to abolish the Florida Department of Education and impose tougher penalties on teen-agers caught with guns.
Then the Republican candidate for governor asked if there were any questions.


Hearing Dispute on Landing Fees, Justices Wonder, Why Ask Us?
In a case closely watched by the struggling airline industry on the one hand and cash-starved American municipalities on the other, Justices of the Supreme Court asked during argument today why it was the Federal judiciary, rather than the Department of Transportation, that was given the task of resolving a dispute over landing fees.
Federal law on how much an airport can charge carriers to land their planes requires only that the fees be "reasonable." Neither Congress nor any Government agency has ever defined the term, and so far the courts have not developed any guidelines.


Rangers' Kovalev Could Be Banned For Hunter Injury
The National Hockey League is expected to rule today on possible disciplinary action for Ranger forward Aleksei Kovalev that could keep him out of tonight's game against the Devils at Byrne Meadowlands Arena and perhaps for even longer than that.
Kovalev, the Rangers' first-line right wing, tripped Washington's Dale Hunter in the first period of the Rangers' 3-1 victory over the Capitals Sunday night at Madison Square Garden, sending Hunter sprawling to the ice.
Hunter was originally believed to have a second-degree sprain of the left knee that would sideline him for 10 days, but the Capitals announced yesterday that Hunter had torn his anterior cruciate ligament and would miss four to six weeks.


'Mixed Emotions' Closes
"Mixed Emotions," a romantic comedy by Richard Baer, closed after the matinee on Sunday at the Golden Theater, 252 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
That matinee of the play, which was directed by Tony Giordano, was its 55th regular performance; it had 17 previews.


Oil Prices Reach 3-Year Low
Crude oil prices plunged to their lowest levels in three years yesterday, sending the prices of gasoline and heating oil down along with them.
The inability of OPEC to agree last week to cut production has sent the oil market into turmoil, with crude oil for January delivery dropping $1.07, to $15.31 a barrel, on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
That is the lowest price for domestic crude oil since June 1990, when it traded at $15.06.
The market had been closed Thursday and Friday for Thanksgiving.


